
















































Hansard: November 08, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 261 
 November 8, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a pleasure 
again today to begin the proceedings by presenting a petition on 
behalf of the good folks from the communities of Grenfell, 
Cowesses, and Broadview regarding a dialysis unit in the 
Broadview Union Hospital. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my duty and my 
privilege to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
Cypress Hills concerned about Highway No. 18. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again today the petition is signed by 
individuals from the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of a constituent from 
Carnduff. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the communities of Gainsborough, 
Oxbow, Carnduff, Glen Ewen, Regina, another small 
community, of Regina as well, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf of 
citizens who are convinced that things are not yet fine on 
Highway 49. The prayer of their petitions reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise on behalf of the petitioners 
today who are from the great community of Preeceville, 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who would like the government 
to know that things are not divine on Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
Everybody that has signed this petition is from Preeceville. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition from people who are behind improving Highway 49. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Preeceville, Yorkton, and Saskatoon. And I’m 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the lack of funding for the drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of Melville. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Carnduff and Alida. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very upset with this 
government’s move to turn a portion of Highway 22 back to 
gravel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
the Earl Grey and area families and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Regina, 
Earl Grey, Lumsden, and Silton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
several pages of a petition with citizens concerned of the safety 
of the Bruno access, which is on Highway No. 5, which is a 
very narrow highway. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
to Highway No. 5. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, Meacham, 
and Drake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the spaces for the Estevan 
Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from the citizens of Biggar concerned about their health 
care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Rosetown, Biggar, and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition from parents in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, urging the government to make public their 
2006 capital priority list so the much needed elementary schools 
can be built in the Arbor Creek and Willowgrove areas of 
Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build elementary schools in 
Arbor Creek and Willowgrove. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today live on Staigh Crescent, Kerr Road, and 
Wright Crescent in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Saskatoon, 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

Broadview, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Jansen, Lanigan, Guernsey, Drake, Humboldt, and Wynyard. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 
Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned with the government’s failure to fully fund the 
cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this petition is signed from the good 
citizens in the southeast of the province at Carievale and 
Carnduff. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
present a petition that this is the first time in the province’s 
history that the government has denied coverage of a cancer 
drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And 
the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Carnduff, Saskatchewan. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition to urge tougher sentences for 
sex offences against children. I will read the prayer for relief 

which is somewhat lengthy, but I’ll try and be as quick as I can. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
create a website that provides information about high-risk 
offenders who live in the province or are going to be 
released in the province, take all steps available to speed 
up the public disclosure process so the communities are 
alerted to the presence of known sex offenders in their 
community as soon as possible, and finally, lobby the 
federal government for tougher sentences for sexual 
offences against children, tougher measures to keep track 
of offenders once they are released from a correctional 
facility, and a review of the dangerous offender 
designation process. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition urging the government to fix Highway 36. And I’ll read 
part of the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people of Coronach; 
Thorsby, Alberta; and Big Beaver, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my honour to introduce to you and through you to 
the all members of the Assembly, 29 Roman Catholic priests 
who are seated in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. Together 
they make up the National Federation of Presbyterial Councils. 
And the presbyterial council is an important element in the 
function of the Catholic Church in our country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every single Roman Catholic bishop has a council to advise 
him, and the priests who are with us today, Mr. Speaker, are the 
heads of those councils from across Canada. They’re senior 
members of these councils of priests, and it’s their job to give 
advice and good counsel to their local bishops. They meet once 
a year somewhere in Canada, and I’m very, very pleased that 
this year they chose to meet in Western Canada and extra 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

pleased by the fact that this year the host is the Archdiocese of 
Regina. 
 
They’ll be with us for a short period of time this afternoon. 
They’ll be leaving at about 2 o’clock to take a tour of the 
Legislative Assembly building, and then they will be going 
from there to Moose Jaw for, among other things, a tour of 15 
Wing and the spa. And so, Mr. Speaker, I promised that I would 
not single out any individual and I will honour that promise. 
But suffice to say that when they are doing their tour over in 
Moose Jaw in 15 Wing, one among them will be in very, very 
familiar territory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to show welcome to 
these Fathers from across Canada who play an important 
leadership role. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, it gives me great pleasure 
to join with the Government House Leader in welcoming all of 
the Roman Catholic priests that are here from across Canada 
today. I certainly am a member of the Prince Albert diocese. 
Bishop Blaise Morand is my bishop. And it is a great pleasure 
that you would come to Saskatchewan, in particular to Regina. 
 
But I would inform you that the whole of Saskatchewan doesn’t 
sit south of the No. 1 Highway. A great and important and 
beautiful part of this province is north of the No. 1 Highway 
and on your next trip to Saskatchewan please include a trip to 
the beautiful northern part of our province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, Mr. Dale Backlin, 
sitting in your gallery. Mr. Backlin is an emergency medical 
technician in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and is the 
coordinator of the public access defibrillation program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dale is not the only EMT [emergency medical 
technician] in the family. His wife Christine is also a paramedic 
and together they have two children. Dale is the chairman of the 
Saskatchewan College of Paramedics and he is very excited 
about the pending adoption of The Paramedics Act which we 
will begin second reading on today, Mr. Speaker. He is very 
excited about this because it will provide the Saskatchewan 
College of Paramedics the right to govern the emergency 
medical service workers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents are proud of all the hard 
work that the emergency medical service workers provide, and I 

would like the Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. Backlin. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly a group seated in the western gallery. The group 
of course is the north central inner city youth employment 
program. It’s this year’s group. They were here for a visit and a 
meeting and a lunch with the Premier, the Minister of Northern 
Affairs, and myself today. We’re having a bit of a tour after the 
question period and it’s been great to see them here. 
 
This group, Mr. Speaker, has been on the job since spring. 
They’ve been working around north central and in through the 
inner city helping clean up, pitching in with the community 
association, and helping to do a great job putting that best foot 
forward in north central. 
 
I’d ask you, Mr. Speaker, to join me in welcoming Greg 
Bellegarde, Jonas Big Eagle, Kyland Bowman, Crystal 
Campeau, Nathan Campeau, Dustin Dubois, Lee Haberstock, 
Tasheena Keewatin, Tyler McKay, Greg Morin, Stuart 
Mosquito, Andrew Norton, Murray Quewezance, Daniel Runns, 
Lance Severight, Melissa Whitehawk. And they’re 
accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by the program coordinator, Murray 
Giesbrecht, program supervisor, Candace Olson, and with Carol 
Kaip from the Department of Community Resources. 
 
This is a group that’s been doing tremendous work in through 
north central and the inner city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
moving on to jobs. They’re moving on to education with 
construction careers. They’re working with places like Conexus 
and with the Regina Exhibition Association and we’re very 
proud of them and the work that they’re doing. So I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming to their Assembly, the north 
central inner city youth employment program. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Congratulations to the Town of St. Brieux 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
a special day for St. Brieux, Saskatchewan. Today, November 
8, 2006, St. Brieux becomes a town. Congratulations to the 
outgoing mayor, Paul Leray, for all that you’ve done not just for 
St. Brieux but for Saskatchewan. Congratulations to St. Brieux 
and the new mayor, Pauline Boyer. We wish you and St. Brieux 
all the best in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, St. Brieux is not just a town, it is a community 
working together to build a future. This community recently 
had another big day. On October 28 it was the grand opening of 
the St. Brieux daycare centre. It is a completely new building of 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

over 3,600 square feet that is licensed for age six months and 
up. Mr. Speaker, the new daycare is already full with 128 
children registered. 
 
St. Brieux has already had people moving to this thriving 
community because of the lifestyle and services it has to offer. 
Mr. Speaker, some say they are lucky because they have 
Bourgault Industries. The truth is it has been through the hard 
work of the people and of the community and that’s what has 
built St. Brieux. The harder they work, the luckier they get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask everyone here to join me in 
congratulating St. Brieux. Vive la St. Brieux. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Aboriginal Veterans Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today is a very special day for Aboriginal people and all 
Canadians, as today marks Aboriginal Veterans Day. This 
marks an occasion to recognize, to honour, and to celebrate the 
contribution and achievements of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
veterans of war and peacekeeping efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the contributions of Aboriginal veterans cannot be 
overstated. Most of the Saskatchewan contingent who served in 
the two world wars and Korea came from isolated areas of the 
province. In addition to the usual immense challenges of war, 
Aboriginal soldiers had to also overcome unique cultural 
challenges. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, they had to learn to 
speak English and to adjust to a foreign European culture. 
 
This did not deter them. They signed up in large numbers. 
Aboriginal soldiers served with pride and distinction. Many 
were highly praised for their skill, for their bravery, and 
decorated with honours and awards. Many paid the ultimate 
price for our freedom today. They lost their lives and never 
came home. 
 
We owe all Aboriginal soldiers, past and present, and their 
families and their communities a debt of gratitude. Mr. Speaker, 
their contributions — their courage, their sacrifices, and their 
accomplishments — will never be forgotten. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Addictions Conquered 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to recognize two young men who have changed their lives 
and the lives of their families. The first young man is Troy 
McLeod. He’s 27 years old. Troy is a First Nations young man 
who spent his life in the foster care system. He spent seven 
years addicted to drugs, including cocaine and crystal meth. He 
graduated the year-long program at Teen Challenge, went 
through the transitional program of intern and staff in training 

which allowed him to earn a living while giving back to others. 
He went on to university and got married. Troy has been 
accepted into the medical program at the University of 
Saskatchewan, having just passed his MCAT [medical college 
admission test]. 
 
The second young man is Stephen Safinuk who, a little over 
two and a half years ago, was in a Saskatoon hospital not 
expected to live from crystal meth and cocaine overdose. Steve 
was not expected to revive from a coma and then not expected 
to be little bit more than a vegetable if and when he did. He did 
come out of the coma and one month later entered Teen 
Challenge. Steve later graduated and after a year-long recovery 
program went into the year-long transition of intern and staff in 
training program. Steve is currently a member helping other 
young men overcome their addictions to cocaine and crystal 
meth. 
 
This young man, with nowhere else to turn, is now living a 
drug-free and successful life contributing back to society. His 
future is great. He’s just been accepted into Hillsong university 
in Australia for July — one of the most prestigious programs in 
the world. 
 
An example of young men with long-term care that can be 
cured. It would be nice if this NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government would help fund faith-based treatment centres 
instead of putting up roadblocks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Gary Tinker Federation Wins Spirit Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, last week in La Ronge the 
Gary Tinker Federation for the Disabled was presented with one 
of the Saskatchewan Spirit Awards for Community-Based 
Organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier, along with myself and the Minister of 
Community Resources, presented the award to Gary Tinker, the 
founder and chairperson of the federation, in recognition of the 
work it has done on behalf of people with disabilities in the 
North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Spirit Award was created as a way to honour 
and recognize the work done by human service 
community-based organizations throughout the province. The 
Gary Tinker Federation truly deserves this award. The 
federation provides education, training, and employment 
services to about 240 people with disabilities who live in the 
North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Gary Tinker, George Ward, Randy Stomp, and 
all the federation staff and board members on receiving this 
award and for all their good work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Weyburn-Big Muddy Youth Win Awards 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have more good news from the young people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. In September I had the great honour of attending the 
Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association annual Junior 
Citizen of the Year banquet. Mr. Speaker, of the five award 
recipients that night, two are from the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency. 
 
Christa Lynn Bruneau of Willow Bunch was recognized for her 
community and school involvement. This past year she was on 
the SRC [student representative council], the yearbook 
committee, and was her class valedictorian. And for three years 
Christa has helped her mother run a hot lunch program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, eight years ago Christa’s younger sister became 
very ill and had to travel to the Toronto sick children’s hospital. 
With her mother away for months at a time, it was up to Christa 
to keep the household running. A few years ago her mother 
contracted West Nile virus, leaving the then 15-year-old Christa 
Lynn as the primary caregiver for her little sister. Not 
surprisingly, Christa Lynn’s goal is to become a nurse. 
 
Mike Ehman is a name that the members of this Assembly may 
remember as I spoke about him last week. When Mike isn’t 
busy co-inventing a step-climbing wheelchair, he’s being 
recognized for his community involvement. Mike received the 
2006 SaskEnergy Community Spirit Award. 
 
The best word that describes Mike is leader. A recent graduate 
of the Weyburn Comprehensive, he was involved in team 
sports. He’s very musically inclined, starring in many school 
musical productions and in choir. He mentors for Big Brothers 
and Big Sisters and spoke on behalf the RCMP’s [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] D.A.R.E. [drug abuse resistance 
education] program to elementary school students, just to name 
a few of his contributions to our community. Congratulations to 
both of these deserving young people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Community Planning Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
November 8 is recognized as Community Planning Day here in 
Saskatchewan. Every year throughout Canada and in more than 
30 countries around the world, this day is set aside to celebrate 
the valuable contributions that sound planning has made to 
people’s quality of life. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Community Planning Day promotes the 
awareness and involvement of elected officials and the public in 
community and regional land use planning and highlights the 
valuable contributions that sound community and regional 
planning make to our communities and environment. 
 
It’s therefore fitting that later today my colleague, the Minister 

of Government Relations, will give second reading to a new 
planning and development Act to help provide the tools needed 
to advance Saskatchewan as a leader in environmental 
protection, the green economy, and ensure that today’s 
Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, setting aside a day to highlight the profession of 
community planners reinforces the contribution that they make 
to land use planning and multi-jurisdictional planning projects 
in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the Association of Professional Community 
Planners of Saskatchewan on their contribution to our province 
and in recognizing Community Planning Day. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we got a glimpse of the NDP government’s real 
agenda. We saw first-hand how they intend to handle the 
questions surrounding the Oyate Safe House. They refused to 
answer the questions and instead choose to run and hide. This 
government will pull out all stops to prevent the people of 
Saskatchewan from finding out the facts. They are clearly 
covering something up. 
 
The Minister of Community Resources says he welcomes 
scrutiny. What does the minister think scrutiny is? He refuses to 
answer the questions posed to him in this Assembly. He refuses 
to appear before the Public Accounts Committee. He fails to 
provide the briefing notes from the only two meetings he had 
with the Oyate board of directors. The NDP prevented the 
former deputy minister of the department from appearing as a 
witness before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Yesterday in the rotunda, the Government House Leader and 
former minister of Community Resources could not say the 
word witness. He deliberately avoided the word, even though it 
was right there in front of him. Maybe the Government House 
Leader needs a refresher on the word witness. A witness is not 
someone who sits at the back of the room and whispers 
occasional answer. If I dial up my Google, I find a witness is 
someone who speaks, who testifies verbally, who provides 
answers. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are demanding answers. What they 
get instead is a government that is more interested in protecting 
itself from public scrutiny. This government is obviously trying 
to run and hide. They are clearly more interested in their 
own. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Investigating the Delivery of Health Care Information 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier this 
year the Minister of Health for this government launched an 
investigation into the poor treatment that baby Paige received in 
the Saskatchewan health care system. Baby Paige is today 
receiving treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug Bonderud has passed away. And yet the 
minister refuses to launch any kind of investigation, even 
though it’s pretty clear that the information that could literally 
have helped save Doug’s life was not provided to him by that 
health care system. 
 
I remind this minister, in light of some of his answers yesterday, 
it’s not the role of the College of Physicians and Surgeons to 
investigate Department of Health officials who failed to provide 
the correct information on out-of-country coverage that may 
have been available to Doug Bonderud. Mr. Speaker, why 
won’t the minister launch an investigation into this terrible 
tragedy so the family can get some answers and so that it can be 
prevented from happening to anyone else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Over 
the years the Department of Health has recognized that from 
time to time citizens may need additional information with 
regards to the care, quality of care, or delivery of care 
throughout the province. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, the 
Department of Health over the years has ensured that citizens 
have access to investigation processes that go beyond the 
overall work that can be done from the minister’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for citizens of this province who have concerns 
about the delivery of care from a physician, a simple request to 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons will get some answers. 
Mr. Speaker, for citizens who have complaints or concerns 
about the quality of care, there are ways in which those can be 
addressed through the quality of care coordinators. Mr. Speaker, 
for those who are concerned about the overall nature of the 
delivery of programs from any department, Mr. Speaker, a 
simple request to the Ombudsman will help to fill those needs. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s consider that in this case a 
consultant, a medical consultant, a doctor with Sask Health was 
in contact with the family and with Doug. No information was 
provided about options, or certainly inadequate information was 
provided. The quality care coordinator was contacted in this 
case, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already been through this. We’ve 
already been through this. 

Yesterday the minister said, and I quote, “If there’s evidence 
where the system has failed a Saskatchewan family, then of 
course we want to be in a position to respond immediately to 
that.” When a reporter asked the minister if the system failed in 
this case, here’s what he said, “Again without an investigation, 
evidence, and conclusions, I can’t form an adequate opinion on 
that.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what he said yesterday. So by his own 
words, will he now commit in this Assembly today that he’s 
prepared to investigate this particular situation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated the avenues of investigation are available to any 
citizen in this province who feels that either an individual or the 
system has failed them. Mr. Speaker, the system has designed 
these programs and policies to ensure that citizens have access 
to information. 
 
On the basis of those independent investigations, whether it’s 
by the college or the provincial quality of care coordinators or 
the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, it’s through the 
recommendations or the review and later recommendations 
from those officials, Mr. Speaker, that we can properly address 
the situation from the department’s perspective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage this citizen and other citizens to 
consider all the options available to them to get the answers to 
the questions that they need and deserve. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this citizen’s name is Crystal 
Bonderud. She’s here again and she has done all of that. Her 
family has done that. It was Doug’s last wish that all of these 
things be done on behalf of him, frankly, and on behalf of 
others that might find themselves in this situation. She’s done 
all those things. Now it’s time for the minister to show some 
leadership, to take his responsibility and act based on the 
request that has come, based on his own words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. I know his schedule 
is busy, but will he, Mr. Speaker, take a few minutes today to 
meet with Crystal so she can outline for him this particular case 
because it’s one of a number that have been presented about a 
lack of information being provided by the system of health care 
he is responsible for, to patients who need that information. She 
wants to know if the government will reverse the decision not to 
provide compensation for Doug’s emergency surgery at the 
Mayo Clinic, as the government’s policy allows them to do. 
And she wants to know, as do we and do the citizens of the 
province, what is this Premier going to do to ensure that this 
does not happen to anyone else again, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
of the province of Saskatchewan I met with Mrs. Bonderud the 
other day. And, Mr. Speaker, I found the information that she 
presented does her case, her family, and her late husband proud. 
She is representing her case very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have advised Mrs. Bonderud that there are a 
number of ways in which she can access information 
independent from the Department of Health. Mr. Speaker, a 
request to either the College of Physicians and Surgeons, a 
quality of care coordinator investigation, or, Mr. Speaker, a 
request to the Ombudsman will yield information, independent 
information on which further direction may be taken by this 
government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, those citizen protections are in place. 
They’ve been in place for a number of years to address exactly 
this situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, apparently during the course of 
these discussions, the minister has indicated — and his motives 
are well placed if this is the case — that when he became aware 
of this situation in the newspaper on or about the September 23 
as others in the province were aware of what was happening to 
the Bonderud family, that he was moved by what he read and 
wanted to have his officials look into the matter. 
 
So I want to ask the minister if he did that. What investigation 
began at that point? And if there was some work that had begun 
then, why will he not now agree that there should be an 
investigation made public to find out what can be avoided here 
in the future and also to deal with the issue of the compensation 
that is owed to the family because this was an emergency 
surgery that was needed at the Mayo Clinic, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
have indicated before on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, around 30 to 35,000 procedures are done for 
Saskatchewan people every day within the health system. Mr. 
Speaker, there are times, there are times when there are 
difficulties within the system where citizens feel that they need 
additional information. Mr. Speaker, there are processes in 
place to ensure that these matters are addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I review the information based on that 
policy which I am directly responsible for, Mr. Speaker, I find 
that the policy has represented about 1,500 people who received 
out-of-country advice and support in the last year at a cost to 
the province of about $10 million. Mr. Speaker, the physicians 
know about this policy, and throughout the system, Mr. 
Speaker, people have access to this information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. We know now from questions, from the comments that 
Crystal has made publicly . . . We know in part because of the 
minister’s admissions that in this particular case the quality care 
coordinator did not provide the total information about options 
available to that family. Neither did the medical consultant 
employed by the Premier’s department, by Sask Health. Mr. 
Speaker, this information wasn’t provided. In this case it’s not 
rhetorical or hyperbole to suggest that the information could 
literally have saved a life. I think that’s pretty serious. 
 
Will the Premier commit to take a couple of minutes today to 
meet with Crystal; get her side of the story; commit to review 
the government’s decision not to compensate the family for the 
costs at the Mayo, number one; and number two, look at the 
overall issue of communication to families and patients so this 
can be avoided in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
have indicated publicly, Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated 
publicly, every case that comes before Sask Health, whether it’s 
made publicly in this Chamber or through the media or whether 
it comes through the mail or a telephone call, every case that 
comes before Saskatchewan Health or a regional health 
authority, Mr. Speaker, is looked at to ensure that whatever 
happened in a specific case will have an impact on the way in 
which future care is delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have developed a lot of processes within our 
hospitals, within our physicians’ community, within the 
department at large. Many systems have been put in place to 
ensure that we learn from information that comes to our 
attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in my mind that the 
information that has been gathered to date and that information 
that would be available to us in the future through 
investigations available to the family will ensure, will ensure, 
Mr. Speaker, that the quality of care in this province improves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Community Resources has now had 24 hours to 
reconsider. Will he now ask the former deputy minister to 
appear before the Public Accounts Committee as a witness 
which was agreed to by the whole committee, including the 
former minister of DCRE [Department of Community 
Resources and Employment]? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question, 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

Mr. Speaker. And I will point out that one of the things that has 
been very abundantly clear here is that questions were asked of 
the opposition and answers were provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the House Leader explained time and time 
again — and once again I’m sure he can explain to the 
opposition if they can’t get it — is that it has been a 
long-standing tradition that in committee work that the current 
deputy minister is responsible for answering questions when it 
comes to a specific department, Mr. Speaker. We have upheld 
that long-standing tradition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it should be pointed out, as minister, we are 
going to take the lead role. As deputy minister, we’re certainly 
going to encourage that individual to take the lead role and to 
be very forthright, open, honest, and accountable when it comes 
to answers, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what we’re trying 
to do. We’re trying to provide answers, solutions in a 
go-forward basis that’s going to really help with the issue of 
child exploitation on Saskatchewan streets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the minister that 
the former deputy minister was called because the deputy 
minister who was there couldn’t answer the questions. 
 
And you know, the cover-up continues. Yesterday members of 
the ministerial department staff told the Public Accounts 
Committee that there were minutes and notes at two meetings 
that the minister had with the Oyate board. Now all of a sudden, 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t get those notes. We can’t get them. Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister commit today to bring those minutes 
to this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to set the record straight, 
the former deputy minister of my department was there, Mr. 
Speaker. And the former minister was there providing answers 
to the current minister who has the responsibility to answer 
questions. It’s been a long-standing tradition. There is no 
cover-up, Mr. Speaker, as that member alleges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, when we had the discussions, Mr. Speaker, 
what we did — and I very publicly told the media — is that 
those discussions that we had, that the dates that he makes 
reference to, I primarily told both Chief Daywalker and I’m not 
sure the other individuals that were there, that, one, we told 
them the purpose of this meeting is to advise you that the 
advocate is now engaged and the auditor is now engaged. We 
asked them for their full co-operation. That was the extent of 
this unofficial meeting to let them know what is coming down 
the pipe, and that we required their full disclosure and full 
co-operation. End of story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the one person who could 
answer the questions didn’t say anything. Even the questions 
directed to the current deputy minister, he never even referred 
to the former deputy minister. 
 
This minister says he welcomes public scrutiny, but he won’t let 
the former deputy minister appear as a witness before this 
Public Accounts Committee. It’s a cover-up, Mr. Minister, just 
like Channel Lake, just like SPUDCO[Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company], except this one’s worse 
because it’s involving children at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this minister then agree to come before this 
committee and answer the questions correctly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this has got to be one of 
the most inept critics I’ve ever met in my entire political career. 
He knows that the Public Accounts Committee and the various 
committees that we have is an opportunity for opposition 
members to ask bureaucrats specific questions. That’s the venue 
in which they get to ask bureaucrats the questions. 
 
Now he wants me to become a bureaucrat to answer his 
question in a different venue. I’m here answering questions in 
this Assembly where he should be asking, Mr. Speaker. And I 
welcome the scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. And furthermore . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
point out to that member how it works in case he doesn’t know, 
is that in these public committees that we have, him as an 
opposition member can ask very specific questions of the 
bureaucrats. That’s how it’s set up, Mr. Speaker. That’s his 
venue that he can option. 
 
Now the other thing is I’m responsible for the Assembly here, 
and I’ll answer questions here, Mr. Speaker. Bottom line, if you 
have specific questions on the administration of programs or 
departments, you go to Public Accounts. If you want an answer 
from the minister, you come to the Assembly. So if that 
member can’t function on two fronts, he needs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t want him to be a bureaucrat. I want him to be a minister, 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

and I want him to do his job as the father of these children and 
the responsibility he has. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — And I beg to differ with this minister. He 
stands up in the House and he talks, but he doesn’t answer 
questions. Yesterday I asked him where were the notes and the 
minutes from his meeting with the safe house board. He never 
answered that question. Twice we asked it. Yesterday I asked 
him how it was possible to conduct an investigation into 
nepotism when there were no meetings with the board for 
almost a year. He didn’t answer that question. 
 
On Monday I asked what specific steps were taken to 
investigate allegations of financial impropriety. He didn’t 
answer that one either. I asked him about allegations that wages 
were made to staff. He didn’t answer that one. October 31, I 
asked about criminal record checks. No answers. On October 
27, I asked about his briefing on the safe house. No answers, 
just the same old garbage and personal incense. Mr. Speaker, 
when will he answer the questions in this House about those 
children’s safety? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll point out 
to the people of Saskatchewan, the all-party committee, when it 
talked about children being exploited on the street, 
recommended we have First Nations involvement. This 
government set up the office of the advocate, and we got the 
advocate involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re trying to do in Saskatchewan is provide some 
solutions. And yes, hard lessons were learned. We’ve never 
denied that. But you know what today, Mr. Speaker? All the 
questions were answered, Mr. Speaker. Oyate is closed. There 
is some very strict conditions that must be met before any 
money is moved again, Mr. Speaker. So we’re making good 
progress. And one mustn’t forget, Mr. Speaker, that this was not 
a secure facility, that this was a voluntary program where we’re 
trying to help reach out to the kids. 
 
And what is happening, Mr. Speaker? Once again that member 
is answering . . . questions that have been answered time and 
time again through the Provincial Auditor’s report, through the 
advocate’s report, through the committee work, and the list goes 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Shortage of Health Professionals 
Impacts Rural Hospitals 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday we received word of another rural hospital 
forced to shut its doors to patients because of a lack of doctors. 

The Preeceville hospital will be closed all next week to 
emergency, in-patient, and outpatient services. Mr. Speaker, the 
closure will also affect the medical clinic in the town . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Just a . . . Let’s 
carry on now. The member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, essentially what you have here is the entire shutdown 
of services for the hospital in Preeceville. Can the Minister of 
Health explain how this could have happened on his watch? 
Will the minister tell this Assembly and all the people in 
Preeceville and area what steps is he taking to ensure 
Preeceville hospital will not have to go through this type of 
shutdown again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
hope the member opposite is not suggesting we maintain 
hospital services without doctors or without health professionals 
operating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authorities have taken steps to 
ensure the safety and security of the patients and the people 
who are ill in the Preeceville area when there is a shortage of 
professionals. And, Mr. Speaker, we have indicated for months 
that there is a shortage of physicians and other health 
professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken action. We have taken very strong 
action this year, Mr. Speaker. We have just concluded 
negotiations of a new contract with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. Together we have $25 million worth of additional 
resources available for physician recruitment and retention 
initiatives. Mr. Speaker, the list of incentives available for 
physicians in rural Saskatchewan is too long to present today 
because you’ll cut me off. But, Mr. Speaker, we are taking 
action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The minister is on record, the minister is on 
record as saying that the suspension of hospital services in rural 
Saskatchewan is a fact of life. Well I have another fact of life 
for that minister. The people of Preeceville are supposed to go 
to other communities like Kamsack or Canora for health 
services, but they are already bursting at the seams. 
 
Kamsack is shut down right now because of a lack of health 
care professionals. Now both Canora and Yorkton are to handle 
a huge number of patients. And to top it all off, Mr. Speaker, no 
one can travel from these communities today because of a 
massive ice and snow storm. Now what are these people 
supposed to do? 
 
To the minister: how does the minister plan to handle this 
situation? We have a health care crisis that is causing a domino 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

effect, and he says it’s a fact of life. When will this minister do 
something meaningful to keep hospitals open and allow people 
of rural Saskatchewan to receive the health care that they 
deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I assume that those who pay attention to these matters are going 
to notice that he quotes me again saying it’s a fact of life. You 
read the Hansard from my answer a couple of minutes ago, Mr. 
Speaker. I didn’t use the word facts of life — another creation 
of the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the regional health authorities are 
taking steps to ensure the safety and security of patients in that 
area. And, Mr. Speaker, on a provincial basis the types of things 
that we’ve been doing to attract physicians to rural 
Saskatchewan include the rural practice establishment grant 
program, the rural practice establishment grant program for 
foreign-trained physicians, the regional practice establishment 
grant program, the undergraduate medical student bursary 
program for rural Saskatchewan, the rural practice enhancement 
training program, Mr. Speaker, the specialist re-entry program, 
the rural emergency care program, the locum service program, 
the rural travel assistance program, the rural extended leave 
program. Mr. Speaker, you will find . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister wants to talk about provincial initiatives. 
Well let’s take a look at how Preeceville, which has just 
become the latest of a long list of hospital shutdowns that this 
Minister of Health has presided over. There’s been Kamsack, 
Spiritwood, Arcola, Big River, Central Butte, and now 
Preeceville has the dubious distinction of being added to this 
list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to this minister is, is he going to 
provide the public with a hotline that they can call to tell them 
which hospital is shut down and when? Mr. Speaker, we 
already have a hotline for highways when they are shut down, 
so it’s not much of a stretch to extend that to something as 
equally important as health care. Mr. Speaker, will the minister 
do this, so people of Saskatchewan can know which hospital he 
plans to shut down and when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite is a Member of the Legislative Assembly, and 
he has constituents that rely on him on occasion to provide 
information to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is aware that we have the 

Saskatchewan HealthLine that provides 24-hour-a-day care 
information to the people in his community. Mr. Speaker, when 
regional health authorities have to take steps to provide secure 
and safe care to the people who live in the constituencies, the 
first thing they do, Mr. Speaker, is contact the ambulance 
services. Anyone who phones 911 in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, has immediate access to the most local health care 
emergency facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have taken every effort to provide for the care and safety of 
Saskatchewan people when emergencies like this take place. 
Mr. Speaker, the work of this province has seen, over the last 
four years, an increase of physicians in Saskatchewan; 9 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, over the last four years. We are not stopping. 
We are going for better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, this isn’t a new problem that this minister has been 
confronted with. Mr. Speaker, from the Canora Courier of May 
15, ’04, the headline reads, “Canora without resident doctor for 
two days. Acute care patients had to be transferred to Kamsack 
Hospital.” That’s May 5, 2004. 
 
From a headline of CBC News [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] dated Friday, October 13, it says, “Doctor, nurse 
shortages forcing rural hospitals to suspend services.” From that 
article, it says: 
 

Some hospitals in rural Saskatchewan are suspending 
services as they try to cope with the ongoing shortage of 
nurses and doctors. 
 
The town of Kamsack in east-central part of the province 
is the latest in a series of small communities that has been 
forced to restrict [its] hours . . . . 

 
Today I bring up the example of Preeceville. We have had 
Canora, Kamsack, and Preeceville — three hospitals in my 
constituency that have been forced to close. What is this 
minister doing to ensure that we do not have to have those 
hospitals closed ever again in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government, in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, have been working on position recruitment and 
retention issues for quite some time, Mr. Speaker. And the most 
recent agreement with the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
recognizes very clearly that we have situations that we have to 
address in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite could read any newspaper in the province of Alberta 
about rural hospitals in the province of Alberta facing similar 
situations regardless of the dollars that are available in that 
province to our west. 
 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, this is a challenge facing rural communities across 
Canada. We are facing it together with the people of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and the communities where 
these shortages exist. Mr. Speaker, this is a true partnership of 
communities, physicians, regional health authorities, and the 
province. We are determined to address this issue in a 
comprehensive manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Shift in Business Practices for 
Department of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan’s economy is booming. The headlines 
in Saturday’s Leader-Post says it all, “Jobs, Jobs, Jobs . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Members will 
come to order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. You mention the word, good economy, and the 
opposition goes wild. Last Friday’s employment figures show a 
huge increase in seven straight months of record levels over the 
previous year. Just about every economic indicator in this 
province is up: manufacturing, natural gas, urban housing, 
international exports. And our success, Mr. Speaker, is due to 
the hard work and ingenuity of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s also due to focus and deliberate action by this government. 
We’ve reformed personal taxes, restructured resource royalties, 
reformed business tax. We’ve cut the PST [provincial sales tax] 
and — foreign to them — a notion of balancing the books. 
More is coming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Transportation is the primary enabler of economic development 
in this province. Exports account for about 70 per cent of 
everything that we do. Our key industries are dependent on 
efficient access to global markets to survive. 
 
[14:30] 
 
In recognition of the key role transportation plays, this 
government will be bringing forward a bold and visionary new 
strategy before the end of this session. There will be challenges 
in implementing this strategy. For the last few years inflation, 
shortage of key inputs like oil, asphalt, concrete have been 
major challenges for all transportation agencies. On some of the 
major contract items, triple digit inflation rates have not been 
uncommon. Obviously this affects the amount of work the 
department can deliver in a given year. Another challenge is 
capacity of the road building and the heavy construction 
industry. 
 
We have been investing heavily in transportation. We’ve 
invested $1 billion over the last 10 years. This year’s original 
transportation budget of 345 million was the highest in the 
province’s history, and we added 25 million to that this spring. 

But we’re not alone in investing in infrastructure. Municipal 
governments, federal, and other provinces and industries are all 
competing for industry capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sheer scope of the strategy we will be bringing 
forward will put more pressure on industry capacity. We intend 
to deal with this challenge to give Saskatchewan the kind of 
transportation system it deserves. We’ve been working very 
closely with the Road Builders and Heavy Construction 
Association of Saskatchewan. And we’ve been looking for 
ways to help the industry ramp up its capacity, helping us deal 
with inflationary challenges at the same time. 
 
Our partners have told us that one thing the government can do 
is put as much work on the market early as possible. This does 
two things. It helps to secure industry capacity in advance of 
peak demand. And it helps the department secure more 
competitive bid prices. The department’s been working on the 
practice of publishing a winter tender schedule for many years, 
and it’s allowed the department’s contractors to mobilize early 
in the spring. 
 
Today I’m announcing a significant shift in business practices 
for the department. While details of our new transportation 
strategy will be released before the end of this session, we’re 
taking steps to ensure its goals will be met. We’re committing 
to the people of Saskatchewan and our partners in the road 
building industry that we will be more aggressive in terms of 
putting work on the market as early as possible. This will of 
course be subject to the resources appropriated to the 
department by the legislature. But the policy direction is already 
paying results. 
 
On November 1 a major resurfacing contract, Highway 1 East, 
closed. Today and tomorrow the remaining surface contracts on 
Highway 16 close. And with the final tenders for twinning the 
Yellowhead between Battleford, Lloydminster, and the 
Trans-Canada Highway, this whole Trans-Canada system from 
border to border will have been let. And it’s only the first full 
week in November. 
 
To further advance this policy direction, I’m pleased to 
announce this government is providing the department with an 
additional $8 million for winter crushing contracts — this in 
addition to the planned winter tender schedule. This ensures the 
department can deliver its 2007-08 preservation program. It 
reduces the amount required for crushing in ’07-08, effectively 
putting 8 million into next year’s fiscal plan, and it brings the 
amount that this government has invested in highways and 
transportation this year to nearly $380 million. 
 
We know what transportation means to this province. We’ve 
seen two investments in canola crushing plants in Yorkton 
worth $200 million and a $30 million ethanol plant for Melville 
announced recently, all because of access to highways and rail 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan needs a state-of-the-art 
transportation system to continue to grow. This government is 
committed to delivering that system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
reply to the minister’s announcement or his ministerial 
statement. It seems that he just likes to hear himself talk 
because this is an announcement about an announcement that’s 
coming towards the end of session. And it just makes me 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, that this is just another announcement 
before the NDP convention, coming up just to save the political 
hide and just put something out there to say that they’re doing 
something. 
 
Well we know, Mr. Speaker, particularly this minister and this 
government makes a lot of announcements, especially before 
elections. Then after the election they don’t follow through on 
these announcements. So once again we see this minister, who 
unfortunately has no credibility in this province whatsoever 
because of having to apologize to the people of Saskatchewan 
for misleading the legislature on the SPUDCO affair, now is 
making announcements about an announcement coming up so 
it’s timed around the NDP convention to make them look good 
for their base back home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, if 
this government had made these announcements five years ago, 
we’d already have the results of those announcements in place 
today. We wouldn’t be talking about announcements about to 
do future work. We’d have the work done. 
 
And you only have to look, Mr. Speaker, at places like St. 
Brieux, which my colleague from Batoche talked about 
becoming a town. Bourgault Industries there would not today 
have to move their finished product to export to the United 
States by driving north and then finding a half-decent highway 
to take it south. If this plan was in place now, they’d be 
exporting their product by driving south to the United States 
border, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again we see this government and this minister 
stealing Sask Party ideas, and we’re happy to give them some 
ideas because they obviously don’t have any of their own. 
 
We have talked about dedicating all of the fuel gas tax to road 
construction. Well, Mr. Speaker, we hear that they’re going to 
do something on that. That’s good if they do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talked about having a four-year rolling plan so industry and 
the public and citizens of Saskatchewan know what’s going to 
be happening in their area in the future. And these are the type 
of things that has to be done. And unfortunately, or again, we’re 
just hearing about announcements of maybe doing some of 
these projects in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talk about having early closing dates for tenders. This is 
something, Mr. Speaker, that the industry has been calling on 
for more than a decade. And now they’re saying they’re going 
to do that. Well let’s hope that they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party, we’ll be watching 
this government. We’ll see if they come through with the 
announcements and adequate transportation strategy by the end 
of session. We hope that they do, Mr. Speaker, not for any 
political benefit for any political party but for the good of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Imagine if this government had a plan five years ago and built 
highways and constructed highways and maintained highways 
to an adequate rate in this province. We would know that 
economic development in this province would have taken off 
many years ago because businesses and people in Saskatchewan 
would have already known where their highways were going to 
be. And they’d be able to work and build their facilities, like 
ethanol facilities and value-added facilities, like packing plants, 
in an area where they knew there was proper infrastructure. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank you. And we will 
certainly be watching the government to see if they follow 
through on their announcement of an announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member responsible 
for Liquor and Gaming . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Liquor and Gaming that Bill No. 24, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée legislative 
et le Conseil exécutif 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Leader that Bill No. 25, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 26, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
wish to table responses to written questions no. 13 to 22 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 13 to 22 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today in support of The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2006. I will move formally second reading of 
the legislation at the end of my remarks. 
 
This legislation introduces Saskatchewan’s 10th public holiday, 
Family Day, to be observed annually on the third Monday in 
February. It gives me great pleasure to submit Saskatchewan’s 
newest statutory holiday, a privilege not had by anyone in this 
legislature for more than 30 years. 
 
Family Day is one more way to ensure our families feel real 
benefits from Saskatchewan’s strong and prosperous economy. 
Mr. Speaker, as we all enjoy the benefits of that success, we 
cannot forget the Saskatchewan people who help make it a 
reality, nor ways to sustain that growth and productivity. We 
recognize both with the addition of Family Day, a reward for 
Saskatchewan people and a move towards work and family 
balance. Let us not forget that balance is essential for the 
productivity of this province. Creating a healthy work-family 
balance facilitates easier staff recruitment, higher retention 
rates, lower absenteeism, and a stronger commitment to 
employer organizations. 
 
Statistics Canada estimates that stress-related disorders due to 
overwork alone cost Canadian businesses $12 billion a year. 
Recent studies have shown that employees today have more 
home life demands placed on them than ever before. Working 
parents may be caregivers to both young children and elderly 
parents. Another public holiday reduces employee stress by 
helping them to balance those obligations to work and family. 
 
Saskatchewan people need that help now. A survey taken eight 
years ago by a specialist from Carleton University business 
school revealed that in a sample group of 5,400 of our 
province’s employees, almost all of them full-time workers, 57 
per cent reported elder care responsibilities. That data also 
showed that over one-fifth of employees spend half a day a 
week providing that care. Mr. Speaker, as the baby boomers 
retire, the importance of maintaining that work-family 
equilibrium will only continue to grow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, many European countries have recognized 
the benefits in offering a greater number of holidays. French 
and German workers enjoy 13 public holidays, Portugal has 15, 
and Sweden observes fifteen and one-half public holidays each 
year. Now we too are in a position to offer Saskatchewan 
people this wonderful reward in recognition of their hard work 
throughout the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy is thriving. In fact a September 7, 
2006 story in the Leader Post reported, and I quote, “. . . 
productivity (as measured by GDP per employed person) has 
increased 23 per cent in Saskatchewan from 2000 to 2005, 
compared with . . . 16 per cent nationally during the same 
period.” 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

This economic progress must bring with it social progress in 
order for our families and our youth to realize its benefits in a 
real and meaningful way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve it. We deserve it. 
And years from now the generations that come after us will 
benefit from this legacy — one that recognizes, values, and 
rewards a commitment to family, however individuals choose to 
define it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I invite all hon. members to support Family 
Day by passing this legislation. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure 
to move second reading of Bill No. 1, The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2006. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 1, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the minister for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure and 
a privilege to be able to respond to this particular Bill that the 
hon. minister has just made motion. This is probably a very 
welcome addition to what’s going on in particularly my area of 
the world. As you know, Alberta has a Family Day and they’ve 
had that Family Day for some time. In a community like 
Lloydminster, it’s very awkward to know exactly which time 
frame people are working on and so that the job allocation 
becomes very difficult. And that will clear up much of the 
confusion in my particular community. 
 
There’s benefits to this, but there’s also some problems that 
maybe has not been fully addressed. Maybe the consultation 
process might not have been in place for any length of time on 
this, other than it may be announced in the Throne Speech is 
probably a pretty good idea. 
 
There’s lots of activity that’s going on in our country, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of economic activity. And in my area again — 
I’ll refer to that — there’s a considerable amount of wealth 
being generated because of the oil industry particularly. The oil 
industry doesn’t work just on workdays and stop during the 
weekends. It doesn’t stop during statutory holidays. People are 
going to continue to keep working no matter if there’s a 
statutory holiday or not. All it does is create scheduling 
problems. It creates problems for future budgeting planning. 
 
And so that there’s lots of people working in this economy that 
in fact can’t take a particular statutory holiday other than maybe 
the employees that are working for, say, governments, teachers, 
and so on. 
 
But in the health field, health providers continue to work 
whether it’s considered a statutory holiday or not. The 
scheduling becomes critical, and in fact the budgeting, as I 
mentioned, becomes problematic because now you have people 
that are going to work that are in fact going to be considered 
being paid on overtime. And if they’re working on a statutory 
holiday, that’s exactly what they deserve. 

But there’s lots of wealth being generated in this province, and 
it’s being generated on a day-to-day basis and not just on days 
that are considered non-statutory. So statutory holidays I think 
have a real advantage. I don’t argue with that, but there’s lots of 
considerations. 
 
And I noticed in the Act that there’s reference to other Acts that 
this statutory holiday legislation affects. And it’s very 
interesting to note that for instance in the legislation that 
pertains and regulations that pertain to health boards . . . to 
education boards, there is a certain number of days that have to 
be . . . that students are in fact in school. With another statutory 
holiday, how does that work into the planning for the school 
boards and the attendance days? 
 
Maybe if it’s a family holiday, maybe it’s better to have the 
extra day in that case, if we’re talking about families, maybe the 
extra day is better during the spring or the summertime so that 
families can in fact enjoy the beautiful outdoor weather here 
that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that one of the other Acts that 
is affected is The Correctional Services Act. And it says here, 
and I quote that the “. . . Family Day must be included to allow 
offenders . . . [to be] scheduled for release on that day to be 
released on the preceding day.” Well in that particular case, 
here we have an offender that not only gets his sentence 
reduced by one day, but he gets a holiday right afterwards. It’s 
one of those anomalies that seem to be quite odd in applying it 
to all the different Acts that have to be considered. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, the Family Day has a lot of values. This 
Family Day of course has to be considered in terms of the costs 
to the economy and to make sure that the economy doesn’t 
suffer extensively because of maybe the non-planning or the 
non-consultation. It’s a situation where I think people will 
recognize that another statutory holiday does have value. But 
most people continue to be working, and that has to be 
calculated into whether it actually costs more or not. I know 
there’s going to be revenue generated for the government 
because working on those days results in overtime or extra 
wages and therefore higher tax return to the government. 
 
So these are all considerations that I think we have to consider, 
and other people are going to wish to be able to address this 
particular issue. And I adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill No. 1 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased today to rise to move 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

second reading of Bill No. 2, The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
In the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, you heard our commitment 
to making life better for Saskatchewan families. A key part of 
that plan is ensuring that Saskatchewan families today can 
enjoy the benefit of our strong and prosperous economy that has 
resulted because of the changes that this administration has 
made. 
 
As I announced late last month, we believe that one of the best 
ways that we could do this immediately was to have a 
significant reduction in the PST, from 7 per cent to 5 per cent. 
That two-point sales tax reduction, Mr. Speaker, will put $325 
million back in the hands of Saskatchewan families and 
businesses on an annual basis. These benefits are far-reaching 
of this tax cut. A lower PST means lower costs for consumers, 
lower costs for families, lower costs for municipalities, lower 
costs for public institutions. It means more business for 
retailers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to say that despite the cut that 
we made to the PST, we have maintained the tax credit at its 
previous levels. This tax credit provides lower-income families 
with a sales tax rebate of up to $364 a year for families that earn 
less than $37,579 — less than $38,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our 5 per cent PST rate is now the lowest of any 
province in this country outside of Alberta. And I would say 
this. That while Alberta has no sales tax, as we know, they have 
a health care premium of over $1,000 on average families. Their 
health care premium accounts for more to an average family in 
costs than what our sales tax does here in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s an important difference between our provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tax reduction builds on the other initiatives of 
this administration. It builds on the decisions that we’ve made 
to help make Saskatchewan a more affordable place to live, to 
work, and raise a family. This include the business tax reforms 
that I announced in April of this year that are eliminating the 
general corporate capital tax, that are reducing the corporate 
income tax rate, that are increasing the small-business income 
threshold from 300,000 to 500,000 to recognize that small 
businesses are growing in this province. And it deals also with 
. . . builds also on the strength of the changes we made for 
manufacturing and processing sector. 
 
More recently in this Assembly, I’ve announced more changes 
to help this economy grow by cutting the small-business tax 
rate and by making changes to the dividend tax credit. This year 
alone, Mr. Speaker, with this Bill being passed, we will have 
cut taxes for businesses and families in this year by more than 
half a billion dollars. That is a significant cut. That is a 
significant benefit, and that is a real benefit because of a 
growing economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When combined with the royalty 
restructuring that we undertook for potash, for uranium, for oil, 
for gas, when combined with the changes that were introduced 
to the personal income tax structure, when combined with our 
record of growing the provincial economy that has seen our 

GDP [gross domestic product] boom forward, that has seen 
more jobs created, that sees more people working, we have a 
plan before this Assembly and before Saskatchewan people that 
speaks to the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy, the strength 
of Saskatchewan’s people and provides real benefits to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Our record of tax relief demonstrates 
that we are making life better for Saskatchewan’s families and 
businesses today. And we are building a better future for our 
young people right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments that will 
implement a reduction of the sales tax from 7 per cent to 5 per 
cent. I look forward to answering questions and entering into 
the debate further as we deal with this in committee review. Mr. 
Speaker, with that I move second reading of The Provincial 
Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 2, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act 2006 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and respond to this particular motion on the Act 
to amend the PST. Actually it’s a very welcome Act. It’s 
something that we have recommended to this government ever 
since I was first elected in 1999, and I’m glad that this 
government is finally listening to some sense about reducing the 
tax in this province and reducing the burden that is placed on 
the average person and the average business in this particular 
province. 
 
I think that is admirable. I’m glad that you took the advice that 
we supplied to you and through to the Vicq commission that 
other taxes be reduced as well. I would hope that this 
government would continue to take that advice and look at 
something to do with the reduction of the burden on property 
tax. Because that is a burden in this province that the people are 
finding a real burden and it’s becoming to be a real bind on the 
people that are forced to pay, particularly the education portion 
of that property tax. 
 
The minister, Madam Deputy Speaker, talked about how this is 
going to affect the young people in this province and I would 
have to relay an experience that I had very recently, in fact just 
last weekend when I was travelling from a meeting in 
Vermilion. We stopped to have a coffee at a restaurant and in 
this restaurant there was a young lady that was serving us 
coffee. I asked her if she was a resident of Vermilion and trying 
to lead her into a conversation why she was enjoying the 
labours in Vermilion. She told me that she had just arrived in 
Vermilion from LeRoy as a matter of fact and this arrival was 
very recent and she began working in this restaurant, I think it 
was only about six or seven days ago. 
 
And I asked her why she was moving through from LeRoy from 
Saskatchewan into Alberta. And she said there was several 
reasons. One of them was that there was an opportunity to 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

actually go to school in Alberta. She was looking for the 
reduced waiting time to get into the Alberta colleges as opposed 
to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] here in Saskatchewan and so she was on her way 
through stopped. And I said is it because of opportunity, or why 
did you stop here in Vermilion? And her response was that she 
could make . . . She started at $18 an hour and that is why she 
stopped in Vermilion. I said, would it be advisable to think 
about coming back to Saskatchewan? And her response was, 
only if there’s opportunity. Only if there’s opportunity. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now do you think that the reduction in the PST will be a factor 
in people coming back to Saskatchewan? Maybe I’m not the 
one to comment on it because again, in my community, the PST 
for those people that live in the Saskatchewan side of 
Lloydminster, under The Lloydminster Charter, do not pay PST 
on those items that are exempted for their personal use. So the 
PST is not a particular item, but there is still considerable 
growth advantage on one side of the border as to the other. And 
I think that’s an important concept. PST, I don’t think, is a 
major factor. 
 
But I’ll tell you, one of the things that is a factor is people’s 
memory about the implementation of PST. We’ve always had a 
PST in this province certainly as long as I can remember, but 
it’s funny how that cycle goes with PST. It’s always 
implemented, it seems like, after an election and reduced just 
before an election. Even though there is an election promise, as 
in 2003, there would be no tax increase — that was the words, 
no tax increase — the PST in fact was increased by 1 per cent. 
 
Now let’s just talk about this. The Minister of Finance talked 
about the nearly half-a-billion dollars that was going to be an 
advantage to the people of Saskatchewan. Now if you calculate 
this a little more in depth I believe that the 1 per cent PST was 
put on probably back in 2004, late 2003 — after the election — 
maybe the budget in 2004. It was in place for all of the rest of 
2004, 2005, and up to this point in 2006 and by calculation 
that’s just over about 30 months. When you calculate the 
months that the 1 per cent is in place at about $160 million per 
year collectively, that’s something over $400 million. 
 
That is about the same as the minister says now he’s going to be 
giving an advantage to Saskatchewan. They’ve already 
collected that. They’ve been using it for the last 31 months, and 
now they’re generously giving it back to us in a PST cut. And 
the PST cut is probably, by his calculation, about $325 million. 
That is NDP economics. And returning the benefit back to the 
people, apparently that’s one of the pillars that they were 
wanting to sell the Throne Speech on. Anyway on that 
particular pillar, how is that going for the people of 
Saskatchewan in particular? 
 
The PST cut is in fact the right direction. We believe tax cuts do 
give an incentive for additional economic activity. There is a 
leap of faith involved. That is one of the recommendations that 
we offered to both the Vicq commission and to this 
government, and I am very pleased to see that they are now 
acting on it. 
 
A little bit surprised, Madam Speaker, that the announcement 

would be done with little fanfare with just a ministerial 
statement rather than some kind of a press release. And in fact 
that information didn’t circulate very well. 
 
I was at a meeting just at the end of last week with a realtor in 
my hometown and she asked me — she had heard that the PST 
was going to be dropped by 2 per cent — when was that going 
to take effect, she asked? I said in fact it has. It was taken effect 
at midnight the night of the announcement. And she said she’s 
never heard of it. There’s been no information sent to her, and 
she does sell a lot of real estate into the Saskatchewan province. 
No indication. And she now has to redo her books to find out 
just what is still owed based on lack of information that went to 
that business as an example. 
 
It is a good idea. I am glad they took our advice and I would 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I rise today to move second reading of The Paramedics Act. In 
developing this legislation the government has consulted 
closely with the Saskatchewan College of Paramedics, 
organizations that represent the firefighter sector members, and 
regional health authorities to develop an Act that will regulate 
approximately 1,800 emergency medical service personnel in 
our province. 
 
Emergency medical responders, emergency medical 
technicians, advanced EMTs, and paramedics work throughout 
the province offering rapid and reliable emergency services to 
the citizens in our cities and rural and northern communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people depend on the 
quality services provided by these emergency professionals. I 
want to express the government’s gratitude to the Saskatchewan 
College of Paramedics and its members for the contributions 
they make to health care every day. 
 
Dale Backlin, chairman of the College of Paramedics, was with 
us today here, Madam Deputy Speaker, in the gallery for 
question period. Mr. Backlin deserves the thanks of the people 
of this province and this government and his colleagues for the 
hard work that he engaged in, in order to bring about the Act as 
it appears today. Our thanks to Mr. Backlin. 
 
The vital role these individuals play in our health care system 
makes the passage of The Paramedics Act all the more 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

important. Self-regulation will give the Saskatchewan College 
of Paramedics the legal authority to register, license, and 
discipline emergency medical responders and all levels of 
emergency medical technicians. The registration of volunteer 
first responders will continue to be the responsibility of 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
For 20 years paramedics have been licensed by the department 
under The Ambulance Act. In this arrangement the 
department’s emphasis has been solely on registration, focused 
on whether the practitioner has the necessary qualifications to 
be licensed to work in the profession. 
 
The Paramedics Act contains all the newer features of 
professional legislation and is more responsive to our changing 
health care system. 
 
Public accountability provisions have been incorporated into the 
new Act. For example, public representatives will now be 
included on the association’s council and discipline committee. 
Discipline hearings will now be open to the public, and the 
college will file an annual report on its activities with the 
Minister of Health. As is the case with other health professions, 
bylaws that potentially affect the public will require the 
minister’s approval. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the legislation reflects the 
government’s broader goal to improve the quality of health 
services and access to care while ensuring that our health 
system is sustainable into the future. By working with health 
partners such as the Saskatchewan College of Paramedics we 
will continue to provide strong emergency services throughout 
our province, recognizing that these services will continue to 
evolve to reflect changing service needs. 
 
As part of our government’s commitment to quality, accessible 
health services, The Paramedics Act will serve the profession 
and the province well into the future. The Saskatchewan 
College of Paramedics fully supports the new statute and is 
willing to assume the responsibilities that it entails. With that, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Question? I recognize the member 
from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to rise in the Assembly 
today and to address a few points regarding The Paramedics 
Act, Bill No. 8, that we have before us this afternoon. 
 
As we look at health care across the province of Saskatchewan 
— and I’m sure many members in this Assembly are certainly 
aware of the work that paramedics, EMTs, emergency service 
workers across this province have done for years and the quality 
of that work — in many cases we have, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we have community-based organizations, we have 
ambulances that run under these organizations. And over the 
years, certainly in the area I represent, our hats go off to the 
work and the tremendous care that has been provided by these 
caregivers. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, when we talk about The Paramedics 
Act, and the minister talked about health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan and it . . . Certainly from what we heard even in 
question period today, it’s paramount that we do have 
individuals across this province with training that will be 
available to the men and women across this province should 
they at any time find themselves with a medical need, and find 
that they happen to be living close to or in a community where 
they may have just found out just a few moments earlier that 
their hospital is not available to them as we heard this 
afternoon. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that certainly is a concern to the 
people living in many rural communities. The fact that we have 
had over the past number of years or the past few years 
situations where individuals were informed about a day or two 
prior to, say, a long weekend that their hospital, the emergency 
services, were not available — that they would have to go to 
another community to receive those services. In some cases, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s not just easy for an individual, for 
a family member, or for a business person, should someone face 
an emergency, to transport or meet the emergency needs of that 
individual. And yet, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that this is 
where paramedics certainly come in and provide an adequate — 
not just an adequate but an excellent service to their 
communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as we look at the Act as well — and I 
believe from what the minister had indicated it allows the 
College of Paramedics to become the regulators and the register 
of paramedics, the licence and discipline — it gives the College 
of Paramedics and places responsibilities on their shoulders in 
regards to emergency services across the province of 
Saskatchewan to individuals that are involved. 
 
One thing we have in the past and will continue to do into the 
future and certainly in regards to this piece of legislation as well 
is to talk to interested parties that may be affected by the 
legislation. And we certainly . . . My colleagues and I would 
certainly be willing as well to talk to the College of Paramedics 
in regards to this piece of legislation and the impact it will have 
on each and every one of us across the province — not just the 
individuals providing the services to the communities and to the 
province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the things I’ve seen over the 
years in regards to emergency services we have — whether 
we’ve got community-based organizations and we’ve got 
privately run services — we’ve seen at times where there have 
been some conflict in regards to some of the community-based 
organizations or some of the privately funded organizations as 
to who should get the call if an emergency arrives. 
 
And I know a number of years ago, in a community not that far 
from my hometown, that there was certainly indeed some very 
important issues that were, that were faced by the community as 
an issue arose about . . . Actually it was a traffic accident on 
No. 8 Highway north of Rocanville. And the Rocanville 
community has a very good volunteer EMT organization that 
takes pride in the work and the time and effort they put into 
ensuring that they’ve got the training, and adequate training. 
And of course they were the closest service and they were 
automatically called out. 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

Unfortunately the private provider, who happened to be another 
15 minutes away, felt that that was an area that they were 
responsible for. And I’m pleased to say that after a fair period 
of discussion, the two . . . the ability of both organizations was 
recognized and that there was a working agreement put in place 
so that there weren’t the animosities that had been created at the 
time. They were overcome. And they learned how to work 
together and provide the services to meet the emergency needs 
of people in the area. 
 
And of course, Madam Deputy Speaker, that many of my 
colleagues represent areas where we have major industry 
moving forward such as potash mines or such as mining 
organizations, Madam Deputy Speaker. Or even as I mentioned 
yesterday, we’ve got manufacturing taking place in rural 
communities. And many of these manufacturing plants as they 
look at a place to establish look at what emergency services are 
available should they ever need to call on them. 
 
And Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to . . . I’m proud to 
say that we have, in the area I represent and certainly across this 
province, many individuals who have dedicated themselves to 
train and train themselves to provide the emergency services 
that are so desperately needed. And we want to say thank you to 
each and every one of them for the work they’ve done. 
 
[15:15] 
 
As in regards to this piece of legislation, we would want to 
ensure that this legislation will recognize the ability of all 
emergency service workers to provide the excellent care and to 
be available to provide that training. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact that we believe 
it’s important that we ensure that everyone has had a voice or 
has been able to explain to us whether they have concerns, what 
those concerns are, and make sure that we’ve addressed them 
appropriately, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 
(No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur l’éducation (no 2) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 4, The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2). And I’m pleased to 
outline today for all members the background and substance of 
the series of amendments to The Education Act, 1995 that are 
included in this amending Bill. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to speak briefly about the two 
primary changes to the Act. First, there are a series of 
amendments to enhance the process for the formation of 

minority faith school divisions. Secondly, there are a small 
number of changes related to implementing school community 
councils. 
 
Members will appreciate that in view of the broad range of 
matters covered by the Act, and as part of the ongoing renewal 
of our education system, there is a constant need to update its 
provisions to reflect changes in the system, to remove outdated 
provisions, and to address issues of law, policy, and 
administration as those issues arise. 
 
In a moment I will outline each of the specific amendments 
involved. First, however, I want to emphasize that these 
amendments have been prepared in consultation with the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association and are fully 
supported by the association, including the Catholic section and 
the public boards caucus, both of which are key components of 
the association. 
 
The first series of amendments are proposed in the spirit of 
strengthening the process for the formation of minority faith 
school divisions. Madam Deputy Speaker, these amendments 
will provide enhanced support for minority faith communities 
in establishing a separate school division. Informed minority 
faith community discussion and input is an important part of the 
process. In the interest of students, the proposed amendments 
will provide an enhanced process of notice and consultation. 
 
They will allow minority faith electors and the minister more 
time to consider a proposal to establish a separate school 
division and to obtain the necessary information to make an 
informed choice. And they are consistent with other provisions 
in the Act. 
 
The changes include: increasing the number of electors required 
to petition the minister from three to six to ensure increased 
participation; requiring petitions be submitted to the minister by 
November 1 for the school year prior to that in which the 
separate school division is to be established, and this will ensure 
enough time for the establishment process to occur and for both 
the existing public board of education and the new separate 
board of education to plan and budget for the upcoming year; 
and increasing the public notice period from 8 to 30 days prior 
to submission of a petition to the minister to allow additional 
time for public notification. 
 
Amendments to clarify and strengthen the democratic process 
include further changes to the public notification and 
consultation process, specifically, requiring petitioners to notify 
the public 10 days prior to the public meeting, 
 to publish and provide copies of the notification to electors 
upon request to ensure that electors have access to the complete 
petition in advance of the meeting. 
 
Extending the period of time between the public meeting and 
the poll being taken of minority faith electors for or against the 
petition for at least 3 days to 21 days. And this provides electors 
with more time to consider the proposal and obtain additional 
information. And requiring that notification of the poll be 
published in at least one local newspaper and posted in at least 
six public places in the proposed separate school division at 
least 10 days before the day of the polls. 
 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, the governance and operation of a school is a very 
serious responsibility. Before a school is established, it is 
important that communities understand the implications of what 
they are undertaking. And the proposed amendments will 
ultimately strengthen the process for the formation of minority 
faith school divisions by enhancing consultation and increasing 
participation of the electors in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also includes amendments that can be 
described as housekeeping amendments with regards to 
legislative changes passed in the spring 2006 for the 
establishment of school community councils. I would like to 
remind you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that school community 
councils are a new entity in our pre-K to 12 schools. The 
councils will ensure that parents and community members, in 
both urban and rural areas, will have access to the same 
opportunities for involvement in their children’s learning and 
the same framework for local governance. 
 
As such, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s important that our intent 
in the legislation of school community councils be as clear as 
possible to guarantee their successful implementation for the 
2007-08 school year. 
 
Very briefly, the changes are and the proposed amendments 
will outline the process to allow school community councils 
representing more than one school to separate into more than 
one council if it is in the interest of the community and outline 
the process by which to do so; clarify the membership of school 
community councils and their terms of appointment and remove 
reference to the board of trustees from the Act, as boards of 
trustees no longer exist due to the creation of the school 
community councils. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, all of the amendments that I have 
outlined can contribute to ensuring that The Education Act, 
1995 remains up to date and that it continues to serve the 
various needs and interests of all those involved in the delivery 
of pre-K to 12 education services to Saskatchewan students, 
families, and communities. 
 
As I have previously indicated, the Bill has been prepared in 
consultation with our education partners, the Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association. And I am pleased to move therefore 
that Bill No. 4, The Education Amendment Act, 2006 now be 
read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to rise in the House to make comments with regard to 
The Education Act and the amendments that are being proposed 
to this. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of serving on 
the Saskatoon Public School Board for a period of time and was 
its Chair for a time as well. I’m watching this particular Bill 
with some considerable interest. 
 
As you’re likely aware, the Saskatoon Public School Board had 

a companion separate school division, St. Paul’s separate school 
division, and we enjoyed a good working relationship with that 
school division. And I think this type of legislation deals with 
the relationship of how a new separate school division will 
come into play and what the process should be to ensure that 
the reasons are valid and that they support a minority faith. 
 
I think most citizens of the province are aware that the right to 
create a separate school board or school division goes back to 
when the province came into being in the Constitution Act 
which created the province, allowed for — and it becomes 
actually part of our constitution — allows for the establishment 
of a separate school division for the minority faith. It’s 
interesting to note that it’s not always a Catholic school division 
that becomes the minority faith. In some school divisions, it is a 
protestant faith that becomes the minority faith. 
 
So we have some interesting balances that go back and forth. 
And there is . . . questions often arise as to whether the school 
divisions were established to promote and protect and preserve 
a minority faith or whether they’re being used for another 
purpose. 
 
And I think there is concern being raised now whether this is 
something that’s being used to prevent the closure of schools. 
And we have to recognize, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this 
right exists as part of our constitution. And as legislators, if we 
are going to in any way limit or fetter that right, we want to do 
so with due cause and appropriate deliberation. 
 
What this Bill does is outline timelines. It outlines procedure, 
how notice is to be given. So at first blush it appears to have 
had some considerable scrutiny given to it by the draftspeople 
of the legislation. 
 
We will of course want to engage in some consultation with 
both separate and public school boards and with the School 
Boards Association. We’ve had some initial consultation and 
found support for the Bill, but we would not be doing our role 
as an opposition party if we did not proceed with some care and 
go through a more extensive consultation process over the next 
while. We’ll want to be making sure that there is a comfort 
level and that people have appropriately and carefully looked at 
the ramifications that may flow from this. 
 
Something else I would like to comment on is, you know, 
frequently the comment is made, the devil is in the details. So in 
this case because it does deal with timelines, with notifications, 
and the publicity of it, we are limiting what was until now an 
absolutely unfettered right in this province and we’re now 
outlining a process for exercising that right. We want to make 
sure that we comply with principles of fairness, with principles 
of natural justice, and that we don’t do anything that would in 
any way limit or abrogate the rights that are there. So this is 
something that we will want to deal with carefully. 
 
We note that a lot of the issues that have arisen are because of 
the heavy-handed and ham-handed administration that the 
former Education minister, now the Finance minister, whom I 
can hear beaking from his seat for no good reason . . . Because 
of his ham-handedness in school board consolidation and 
school board amalgamation, this side of the House approaches 
this type of thing with some trepidation and some need for care 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

because we would not want to see that same individual be put in 
charge of this process. He created no end of animosity. 
 
This is an individual that had approached school boards in the 
past when we had 120 school divisions in this province, told the 
school boards, we think you should amalgamate and limit your 
numbers. The school boards agreed and said how many do you 
think we need. And they amalgamated and voluntarily 
amalgamated, reduced their numbers to 90, which was the 
target that was set by that very minister, whom I can hear loudly 
agitating from his side of the House, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
That minister had the commitment from the school boards that 
they would, through amendments to The Education Act, 
through consultation, voluntarily agree to that kind of 
consolidation. And after they had fulfilled their end of the 
bargain that man, who has the power to legislate and control 
them, decided not good enough and decided he was going to do 
something else. 
 
I find it frightening that we have now put that very same 
individual in care of the province’s finances. The Education Act 
is something, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s very important to 
all of us, as is the finances of this province. And to have that 
former Education minister now as the Finance minister is 
somewhat troubling and somewhat distressing, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This side of the House will, as it always does, handle these 
things with care, caution, and due respect for the ratepayers and 
the taxpayers of this province. We will ensure that there is 
adequate and appropriate consultation and that a good process is 
developed with the people that will have to live under and work 
under this Act. 
 
I know that that minister is not capable of doing that. He’s 
demonstrated in the past when he was the Education minister 
and it’s certainly clear that that’s . . . His attitude today in the 
House certainly indicates he has not learned anything from the 
difficulty he had when he was Education minister. I question 
the wisdom of the Premier from changing him from Education 
to Finance minister. The Education Act was something that was 
probably beyond his capability at that time. And to put him in 
charge of the treasury of the province is certainly somewhat, 
somewhat distressing at this point in time. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular Bill has got other 
aspects of it that require consultation and some care as well. It 
deals with school councils. And these are the groups that have 
not been recognized appropriately or adequately in legislation 
in the past, so it’s referred to by the Learning minister as part of 
housekeeping amendments. To those people that work and 
those people that are parents, these things are . . . some that 
have some significance to them. And to many of the people, it’s 
a lot of significance, and it’s things that are very important 
because it’s the care and upbringing of their children. It’s how 
their children relate to the education system and how the 
parents and community members are treated by the boards of 
education, by the administration. 
 
So the makeup of those groups to be brought into legislation is 

probably a very appropriate thing. But we would want to ensure 
that there is once again consultation with boards of education, 
with parents’ groups, with parents and individuals. Consultation 
is not, is not a bad thing. 
 
And once again we will want to proceed very carefully and very 
appropriately to ensure that the timelines that are outlined in 
there are appropriate, that they’re workable, that the other 
routine amendments are things that we can as an opposition 
party live with. And that as we go into the next election, we will 
want to be able to say either that we did or did not support this 
piece of legislation, and that we made that decision, whether we 
will support it or not, based on good, careful consultation and 
deliberation with the ratepayers and with the taxpayers of this 
province and, more importantly, with the parents and with the 
children that are going to be affected by this legislation. 
 
We are dealing with a piece of legislation that has significant 
long-term ramifications, deals with a constitutional right. And it 
also deals with a fundamental religious right. One of the 
fundamentals of us, of our citizenship as Canadians is the right 
to religion and the right to select a religion, participate in a 
religion. This is one of the situations where our constitution and 
our laws allow that religious program to be woven and 
interwoven into a school program. It is a right of the minority 
faith in this province to have that right. And we want to ensure 
that that right is given appropriate and due credit in the 
legislation, and don’t wish to abrogate that right unnecessarily, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We appreciate the input that we have received already. But 
given the pressure that the government opposite, members 
opposite of the NDP are putting on by closure of schools, this is 
something that’s symptomatic of the pressure that an 
incompetent, tired, aged government may well have. And we as 
an opposition find it somewhat difficult with Bills like The 
Education Act. We’re sort of effectively . . . and I use the 
analogy, it’s like trying to drive the car from the back seat when 
you’re not really having your hands on the steering wheel. 
We’re doing it, and we’re doing it fairly effectively because that 
government is not capable of doing it any more. 
 
They’ve lost the ability to govern. They’ve lost the ability to 
relate to the citizens of this province. And albeit we’re in 
opposition, we will continue to put forward ideas. We will let 
them steal those ideas and try and call them their own. 
 
The people of the province know that those ideas came from the 
Saskatchewan Party, and they accept and respect that a lot of 
the ideas that are being put forward are really Saskatchewan 
Party ideas. And I think most of the people in the province look 
at the things like The Education Act, look at like things like the 
changes to the PST, look at many of the things that are coming 
forward, and they recognize that those ideas are actually 
Saskatchewan Party ideas. 
 
And those people, Madam Deputy Speaker, are waiting, and 
waiting impatiently for the next election so that they can 
actually say, you guys don’t have to go through the trouble of 
driving from the back seat. We’re going to put you in the front 
seat where you belong, and we’re not even going to let those 
people in the car next time. We’re going to put them right 
outside completely. Madam Deputy Speaker, I would move 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
After that incoherent bafflegab from that incompetent Sask 
Party member opposite, I’m sure that all members here will 
appreciate the opportunity to discuss this very exciting 
municipal financing corporation Act amendment that I’m 
proposing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The Municipal Financing Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, believe it or not, was not invented by the 
Saskatchewan Party. It was not even, I think, ever referenced in 
any of their material. Nevertheless I’m sure in a few minutes 
they’ll claim credit for all the work that’s done. 
 
The truth however, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that the 
Municipal Financing Corporation was established in 1969. Its 
mandate is to provide an attractive long-term financing 
alternative for municipalities, school divisions, and regional 
health authorities. Well I’m sure that members opposite will 
somehow claim that they created the school divisions and the 
health authorities and the municipalities. This Act however does 
provide useful tools for those members should they ever get 
their hands on the public treasury to be able to make sure that 
we still have a sound financial regime in this province. 
 
Let me say this, Madam Deputy Speaker. Other provinces have 
similar organizations to this one in Saskatchewan. British 
Columbia, Alberta, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador 
all have similar arrangements. 
 
The Municipal Financing Corporation has a Crown corporation 
governance structure; however its operations are administered 
by employees of the treasury and debt management division of 
the Department of Finance. As of December 31, 2005, the 
corporation had debenture investments of approximately 23.8 
million, and these debentures had been purchased from some 49 
different users. 
 
The corporation is governed by this particular Act, The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Act. I should note that the 
Act has not actually been updated, except for some 
consequential amendments, since 1978. The Act currently states 
that the corporation can only lend money by purchasing 
debentures. This reflects conventional lending practices from 
the 1970s; however it is rarely used today. Debentures are 

costly to print and administer, and financial institutions have 
difficulty processing them. As such they virtually disappeared 
from the banking system. 
 
Other provinces with similar organizations do not issue 
debentures in the same manner as this corporation. 
 
As such we are proposing to amend the legislation to create 
greater flexibility in the manner in which the corporation lends 
money. The relevant legislation — in this case the corporation’s 
deals with their potential clients — are covered through The 
Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, The Education Act, The 
Regional Health Services Act. This however permits the 
corporation to allow them to borrow money in other ways. The 
proposed change to this legislation would mirror those other 
pieces of legislation and will enable the Municipal Financing 
Corporation to lend money in any form. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am indeed pleased to move second 
reading of The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment 
Act, 2006. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege 
once again to rise, and I heard from the Finance minister saying 
that we were going to take credit for this. And actually, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we’re not. 
 
This type of vehicle is part of the financial shell game that that 
government plays with the people’s money in this province. 
And I’ll tell you exactly how that shell game works. It’s 
something like the same type of ruse that they play with the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. They create a separate Crown 
corporation, and they create that Crown corporation solely for 
the purpose of having money sitting in there so that they can 
lend it back to themselves and finance things over a period of 
time. 
 
During my period of time at the school board, they created the 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation which sole 
purpose was so that the school boards could finance new 
schools. And the government’s share, usually roughly 50 per 
cent, would be paid for by the school board borrowing money 
from the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation and 
paying the province back after the province had decided 
whether they were apt to pay its proportionate share in each 
successive year that the commitment had been made. 
 
Why they wouldn’t have showed it on their books and why they 
wouldn’t have said this is going to be a five-year commitment 
on our part to pay it out is (a) so that they didn’t have to make a 
long-term commitment and (b) so that they didn’t have to show 
the real liability. And the ones that showed the liability were 
these school divisions throughout the province, in some 
jurisdictions referred to as economic off-loading and 
downloading onto a lower level of government. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, they did away with the 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation because people 
in school divisions had staff and were reasonably sophisticated 
and looked at it and said this is nothing but a shell game. It’s 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

not acceptable. It’s the government playing games when it 
should be nothing more than a line on a financial report saying 
this is a five-year commitment or a three-year commitment or 
whatever it is. This is what the school board share is; this is 
what the government share. No, no. We’ll create a separate 
corporation. We’ll hide it. We’ll get it off our books. 
 
And frankly, at the time, there was a number of newspaper 
commentators referred to it as Enron type of accounting, where 
these off balance sheet entities were created. And that frankly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is what the Municipal Financing 
Corporation does. It moves things off of the balance sheet of the 
municipality or off of the school board, as this amendment 
that’s in here is intended to deal with. 
 
And for that government to stand there and sort of stand up and 
say oh what a wonderful idea we’ve had, it’s nothing more than 
a matter of taking a line off a balance sheet and creating a 
Crown corporation for it. No wonder the people of this province 
have lost faith and lost confidence in that government when 
they’re not sophisticated enough or capable of standing up and 
saying yes, we’re financing this over a period of time. This is a 
road; this is a bridge; this is whatever it is. This is how we’re 
going to structure that. 
 
People in this province are used to financing their homes with a 
mortgage. Why we have to play this kind of game and rather 
just show it that we’re borrowing over a period of time . . . 
There shouldn’t be an issue in doing that. But obviously that 
Finance minister — whom I heard from at some length during 
the last presentation — clearly is doing the same thing here and 
is wanting to stand up and take credit as if this is some new 
idea. Well in 1969, he wasn’t old enough to vote, and so it was 
an idea that it came about certainly before he was active in 
governance of any kind, and he’s continued along with this kind 
of a game. And fair enough, that’s the process that’s there. 
 
But for him to stand up today and stand up in this House and 
say this is something clever, that he should be given any kind of 
credit for, it’s not appropriate. This is a minister, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that’s not capable of handling education 
issues. 
 
He’s certainly demonstrated that his role with the Department 
of Finance is his own personal ambitions to become the leader 
of the New Democratic Party or maybe as they now say, the 
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party or the New Democratic 
Party of Saskatchewan. And the Municipal Financing 
Corporation is just one more bridge that he sees to his 
leadership aspirations. And, well, I don’t know what goes on in 
their caucus. In our caucus we don’t have issues; we don’t have 
people that have that kind of untrammelled ambition. We work 
as a team. We want to build this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. We believe in this province and we’re willing to have 
our careers as being part of that. 
 
And we certainly don’t want to . . . I don’t want to be 
campaigning for the Finance minister or campaigning against 
him. I leave him to raise his own money. I take some issue 
when that Finance minister put out a report last year that spent 
massive amounts of money, millions of dollars — hundreds of 
thousands at any event if not millions — circulating information 
as to how great it was, with his picture on it and advertising on 

television which certainly looked like a leadership campaign to 
me, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re here; we deal with the everyday things in government 
like the Municipal Financing Corporation. We’re not off 
playing the kind of game that the Finance minister wants to play 
and frankly, Madam Deputy Speaker, I leave it to him to plan 
his political career. The citizens of this province I think have 
had enough of that Finance minister. They will focus on things 
like the day-to-day things that this government from this side of 
the House will look at, not like the NDP will look at. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to move adjournment 
of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Let me begin by saying that if the members opposite 
think that the strength of The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Act is going to propel me to the premiership, I can assure you 
The SaskEnergy Amendment Act will put me right into 24 
Sussex. 
 
I am very pleased to rise today to move this important second 
reading Bill of The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006. This 
Act is the governing legislation for SaskEnergy, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and its subsidiaries. Madam Speaker, the proposed 
amendments are meant to improve the operations of 
SaskEnergy and in particular the proposed amendments include 
increasing the maximum number of board members. It will 
permit SaskEnergy to pursue the transportation of 
energy-related products other than natural gas, clarify the power 
SaskEnergy has in dealing with safety hazards proposed by 
encroachments over or near pipelines and related facilities, and 
it undertakes some housekeeping matters. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Madam Speaker, the amendment in this Bill increase the 
maximum number of board members that may be appointed 
from 10 to 12. SaskEnergy is seeking a greater number of board 
members to deal with some of the growing demands that are 
placed on the board in terms of corporate accountability — 
particularly those duties carried out by board committees like 
the audit committee. In addition to increasing the number of 
board members that can be appointed, we will make sure that 
this corporation, SaskEnergy, is in line with those being 
appointed to SaskPower and SaskTel in terms of number. 
 
Madam Speaker, the amendments to expand section 15 of the 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Act to permit SaskEnergy to transport energy-related products 
and by-products other than gas on a non-exclusive basis, I 
think, are positive ones. SaskEnergy wishes to have the ability 
to pursue opportunities to utilize its assets and expertise in new 
but related ventures. These opportunities might well include the 
transportation of such items as carbon dioxide, hydrogen, or 
ethanol. Currently the Act only contemplates the transportation 
of natural or manufactured gas. 
 
Two other proposed amendments arise due to the anticipated 
ability to transport energy products other than gas. The section 
of the Act will be amended to allow for the leasing of 
equipment that’s not used in relation to the distribution of gas. 
And similarly, an additional proposed amendment would make 
it an offence to interfere with the distribution or measurement 
of any substance other than gas by the corporation. 
 
A further amendment modifies section 36 of the Act to give 
SaskEnergy and TransGas the ability to reroute a pipeline 
where there’s an encroachment by a building or a structure. 
Currently the only specific authority in the Act rectify this 
safety hazard is for SaskEnergy or TransGas to remove that 
building or structure. Obviously it’s preferable that SaskEnergy 
or TransGas could have the additional option of simply 
rerouting the pipeline and/or moving the related facility. 
 
Madam Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the proposed amendments 
delete certain subsections in the Act that are no longer 
applicable, which I trust will meet with the favour of the 
members opposite. With these changes, I am very pleased to 
move second reading of The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 
2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to stand in the Assembly and to speak to Bill No. 13, 
The SaskEnergy Amendment Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, over the past number of months we’ve 
seen that there have been some dramatic changes in the price of 
oil and natural gas across the province, certainly around the 
world. For a lot of Saskatchewan residents who rely on natural 
gas for their heating fuel, one of the positive sides in regards to 
the SaskEnergy was the fact that natural gas actually did 
decrease, and we have seen some minor increases in the past 
few months. And I’m certain for the members opposite and 
particularly the Minister of Finance, they wouldn’t want to see a 
major hike in natural gas prices because I believe it was last 
spring they offered a support mechanism or a subsidy to people 
that were relying on natural gas for their services. 
 
However I might add, Madam Deputy Speaker, that as I look at 
the legislation before us, the minister has indicated that this new 
legislation will allow for SaskEnergy to expand its business 
offerings, such as transportation of carbon dioxide, hydrogen, 
and ethanol. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I’ve indicated, as people have 
been faced with the crunch — the higher costs of heating oils 

and the higher costs of gasoline — we have seen a major 
expansion and debate taking place into alternative fuel sources 
which I believe, Madam Deputy Speaker, will certainly not only 
be a benefit to consumers but will also be a benefit to producers 
in the province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s individual 
companies that are doing research or exploration for natural gas 
or the agriculture community as we look at the expansion of the 
ethanol and the biodiesel industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve also seen expansion of carbon dioxide and its use in the 
recovery of heavy oil in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this piece of legislation, while it 
allows for some changes to SaskEnergy, also raises some 
questions as to whether or not it will impact, say, some of the 
private development that we would like to see in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan in the Throne Speech has 
talked about building a more progressive community, a 
community that is open to welcoming people back to the 
province of Saskatchewan, enhancing the ability of people, and 
making the province of Saskatchewan a better place to live. 
And certainly the legislation, I believe, is opening the door for 
SaskEnergy to possibly meet some of those needs. 
 
But also we would certainly like to encourage the government 
to look at avenues whereby we can encourage the private sector 
and their involvement in the area of energy distribution in the 
province of Saskatchewan and in that way, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, encouraging economic activity and involvement in and 
around Saskatchewan by suppliers outside of SaskEnergy. 
 
It’s certainly, I believe, important, Madam Deputy Speaker, as 
we look at building the province of Saskatchewan, as we look at 
expanding the opportunities in Saskatchewan as a place where 
people can come and not only live and grow but to invest in, we 
need to ensure that as we change legislation, as we expand 
legislation, or as we bring legislation more up to date in regards 
to the needs of Saskatchewan people and companies like 
SaskEnergy that we are not only — in meeting the needs of one 
company — that we are not limiting the ability of other 
companies and specifically private companies to meet the needs 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as I look at energy needs across the 
province, as we look at the needs of men and women and 
individuals when it comes to heating their homes across this 
province, or whether it is fuel needs in regards to transportation, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have seen a greater enhancement 
over the past number of years. We have seen the use of natural 
gas and hydrogen fuels as well in public vehicles. And certainly 
I think the city of Regina in a number of their buses is now 
using natural gas. 
 
So what we have seen in the past number of years, we have 
witnessed the move from just relying on one fuel source to the 
other many fuel sources that we have available to us in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and new sources of fuel that 
certainly will be available in the future as we move forward and 
as we look at alternative sources of fuel as well. 
 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

So the piece of legislation before us, while we look at the 
expanding role of Crown corporations we would also want to 
ensure that this role does not infringe on the ability of allowing 
other companies of coming in and providing a service to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when I talk about expanded roles of 
moving gas and we talk about hydrogen and ethanol, we are 
quite well aware of the debate that is taking place across this 
province in regards to ethanol production. And as an agriculture 
producer, and I know producers across this province, while we 
have seen some positive upward movements when it comes to 
our commodities in the past number of months, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that doesn’t necessarily mean we will continue to see 
those price increases. Because of the fact the price increases 
have come as a result of other areas of the world and namely, 
Australia, where they had environmental conditions that have 
impacted their crop production. And as a result of the shortages 
and the shorter crop that they’re seeing and the demand that 
around the world for these commodities, the Canadian farmers 
are able to benefit from these commodities. 
 
And so at this time what we certainly are seeing some positive 
movement in regards to the prices for our grains, we also note 
that in general over the long term we’re going to have to look at 
alternative sources of energy, and ethanol is one of those 
commodities. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, pipelining may be 
the way as well to move some of these commodities into the 
marketplace, move them to the consumer rather than . . . 
through a pipeline rather than always by truck transportation. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill before us certainly, as the 
minister’s indicated, is creating new and different ways and 
ensuring that as we expand the pipeline system or the 
distribution, that we are also not impacting other avenues of 
pipeline movement of natural products to the source. 
 
And so it’s imperative that we have indeed regulations and 
guidelines in place to ensure that we are indeed meeting, not 
only meeting the needs of consumers but meeting the needs of 
corporations and of companies like SaskEnergy. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, my colleagues and I will be looking very 
closely at this piece of legislation to ensure that while it is 
meeting the needs of one particular company, that it is also . . . 
the changes will not impact potential customers down the road 
and companies down the road who would like to do business in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore at this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Deputy Speaker, at the 
conclusion of my remarks I will be moving second reading of 
Bill No. 12, The Planning and Development Act, 2006. 
 
This Act, The Planning and Development Act, 2006, replaces 
The Planning and Development Act, 1983, continuing a long 
tradition of planning in this province. This Act builds upon the 
principles and concepts of the existing legislation and provides 
municipalities with the authority and flexibility to effectively 
manage land use and promote community development. 
 
Today is officially Community Planning Day in Saskatchewan, 
which coincides with World Town Planning Day. Community 
planning is about building communities that make 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures; building communities that provide strong 
services, attractive and safe environments, and livable 
neighbourhoods — communities with quality and adequate 
health care and human services, diverse arts and culture, 
adequate and affordable housing, and efficient transportation. 
Planning is an essential cornerstone of good governance. 
Community planning is a prerequisite to making Saskatchewan, 
again, the best place for people to raise families, work, and 
build strong futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 2005, Government Relations initiated 
extensive stakeholder and public consultations in response to 
requests from municipal, business, and community stakeholders 
for legislation that was responsive to local and emerging land 
use planning needs. These consultations were undertaken with 
municipal governments, associations, industry sector groups, 
academic institutions, environmental agencies, the heritage 
sector, planning districts, the transportation sector, professional 
associations, First Nations and Métis communities, and 
provincial departments. 
 
Subsequent to the consultation, a review committee 
representing over 50 stakeholder organizations was established. 
This committee made an invaluable contribution to the 
development of this new legislation. Madam Speaker, 
stakeholders brought forward a wide range of planning issues 
including matters of municipal planning capacity and authority, 
provincial planning policy, clarity and consistency in municipal 
planning documents, timeliness and predictability of local 
development decisions, regional planning inclusive of First 
Nations participation, planning needs in the North, and support 
for economic development that recognizes and maintains 
environmental integrity. 
 
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to report that, in addition to 
collaborating with stakeholders, public consultations were 
undertaken in developing this Act. In May and June, 16 public 
open house meetings were held throughout the province 
including four northern meetings. The input from these 
consultations has been instrumental in developing this new Act 
and will make a substantial contribution to building a 
sustainable future for Saskatchewan communities. 
 
The information gathered is detailed within a report called 
Building a Sustainable Future, The Planning And Development 
Act Review: A Summary Of Stakeholder Discussions. 
 
[16:00] 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

Madam Speaker, this new legislation addresses stakeholders’ 
requests for more local autonomy, more flexibility, additional 
planning tools, greater clarity and streamlining of community 
planning processes, and enhanced interjurisdictional 
opportunities for communities to plan. I will take just a few 
minutes to elaborate on the key provisions of the Act. 
 
Broadly stated, the purpose of the Act strongly supports the 
vision established for this province as one of the have 
provinces, a place with strong communities, 21st-century 
infrastructure, creative economies, reflective of provincial 
priorities yet respectful of their environment. 
 
The new Act maintains a voluntary community planning system 
that encourages municipalities to undertake planning to meet 
the economic, social, environmental, and cultural goals of their 
communities. This legislation continues to support municipal 
land-use authority to further the development of sustainable 
communities. This Act provides subdivision-approving 
authorities with greater autonomy, planning tools, and 
flexibility consistent with their capacity to be responsible for 
local planning decisions independent of the province. 
 
Madam Speaker, the legislative provisions provide additional 
flexibility for approving authorities in several ways. For 
example, approving authorities can set their own public notice 
requirements and delegate development decision for site plan 
control, discretionary uses, and direct control districts to the 
development officer. These mechanisms streamline the review 
time for development and as such will be advantageous to both 
industry and the municipality. 
 
This new Act also responds to stakeholders’ requests for one 
type of statutory policy plan for managing community 
development by replacing the development plan and the basic 
planning statement with an official community plan. This plan 
provides policy direction for orderly growth and development 
consistent with municipal and provincial interests. In order to 
achieve planning documents consistent with the purposes of the 
Act, Madam Speaker, stakeholders identified the importance for 
the official community plan to be prepared under the direction 
of a professional community planner. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Act contains a number of provisions 
applicable to all municipalities that streamline and expedite 
review processes. This is important for sharpening the 
province’s competitive edge for economic development. The 
new Act contributes to an environment that allows for more 
flexibility and predictability with respect to subdivision, 
development appeals, decision making, and site planning. In 
addition subdivision provisions have been updated and clarified 
for consistency with Information Services Corporation, land 
titles, and planned registration processes. 
 
Madam Speaker, the existing planning district framework is 
being enhanced by creating more interjurisdictional or regional 
opportunities for municipalities to plan together. Provisions 
encourage the participation of First Nations and other 
organizations such as regional economic development 
authorities in district planning commissions. Our history of 
co-operation in this province bodes well for joint planning 
ventures where communities can address both opportunities and 
challenges. 

District planning is an important mechanism for intermunicipal 
planning, coordination of planning bylaws between 
jurisdictions, sharing of resources, and improving municipal 
planning capacity. District planning processes support the 
municipal associations, clearing a path initiative for sector 
specific planning. 
 
Provisions in the Act also provide municipalities with the 
option to establish a corporate district planning authority. This 
provides an opportunity for municipal councils to delegate 
planning responsibilities to the authority in order to collaborate 
on the delivery of planning services and other appropriate 
services determined by the municipalities. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Act enhances northern planning 
opportunities by providing authority comparable to southern 
planning districts to include participation by other government 
agencies, First Nations, and northern communities. The North is 
positioned for substantial economic growth, and it is essential 
that tools are provided for the coordination of municipal 
planning and zoning. The participation of Aboriginal peoples 
and communities are integral to this process. 
 
Madam Speaker, transparency and public participation and 
community planning processes continues to be viewed as 
essential to good planning and as such has been maintained. 
The provisions for development appeals and subdivision 
appeals have been combined. More flexibility is provided in the 
organization and operation of development appeal boards, 
including the opportunity for municipalities to establish district 
development appeal boards. Also the requirements for 
determining appeals have been clarified and are now consistent 
for both the local development appeal board and the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Act, in addition to expanded options for 
development appeals, provides for voluntary dispute resolution 
for planning or subdivision disputes which reduce the length 
and complexity of appeals. 
 
In closing, this Act responds to requests from municipal, 
business, and community stakeholders for legislation that is 
responsive to both local and global challenges. This new Act 
underscores our confidence in the ability of local governments 
to use their authority to plan and facilitate development. Madam 
Speaker, this new legislation fosters co-operation and 
partnerships among municipalities, governments, Aboriginal 
people, and all citizens to engage in planning, investing, and 
building the future of our communities. 
 
This new Act is a planning foundation for a strong, prosperous 
economy. I would urge each and every member of the House to 
review and to support this Bill. And therefore, Madam Speaker, 
I move second reading of Bill No. 12, The Planning and 
Development Act, 2006. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, it’s certainly an honour to be able to stand and speak 
to Bill No. 12, The Planning and Development Act, 2006. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as we look across the province of 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

Saskatchewan, we note there have been and will continue to be 
ongoing changes as we move into the next century and even just 
moving forward the next few number of years. 
 
And we look at changes that have been taking place that 
certainly have been impacting rural governments, municipal 
governments, and both rural and urban. When it comes to the 
changes that we see, whether it’s with the infrastructure in the 
province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s with infrastructure 
within communities and rural municipalities, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we certainly note that there have been some radical 
changes. 
 
We note over the past number of years when it comes to 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, we have moved 
quite dramatically from the smaller family farm units to the 
larger, if you will, corporate or larger farm units where parents 
working together with sons and son-in-laws, or brothers 
working together are now actually working around farm units 
where they used to be about 1,000 acres per family unit, now in 
the 5 to 10,000 acres, and in some cases farm sizes that are in 
the 15 to 25,000 acres, Madam Deputy Speaker. And with that 
comes some challenges. And we’ve seen that when it comes to 
changes as we’ve moved from total grain involvement to larger 
livestock operations. 
 
And I note specifically the intensive livestock operations. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what we have seen, the intensive 
livestock operations have really created some significant debate 
in rural Saskatchewan as communities determine, and people 
even, local farm families may say, no I don’t want an intensive 
livestock operation in my area. And so then they go to their 
local RMs [rural municipality] or local towns and are asking, 
asking their administrators and asking their councils, what can 
we do as individuals make plans and submissions to the 
province in regards to these intensive livestock operations. 
 
Now whether this piece of legislation is going to impact those 
ILOs [intensive livestock operations] significantly, whether 
there’s going to be demands that are going to be made available 
to people in regards to how they approach council as to a 
proposal to move forward with an intensive livestock operation 
. . . and then subsequently the availability of people who may be 
somewhat opposed or have some questions . . . to ensure that at 
the end of the day, when municipal governments are planning 
for their development of land and projects in their area, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I believe the long-term goal is to ensure that 
individuals not only have the ability to move forward with the 
economic plans that would enhance their ability to survive on 
the family farm, but as well to recognize the fact that people 
who may not have the same views when it comes to, say, 
intensive livestock operations or feedlot operations or — as we 
see in my area of the world — the Natural Valley Farms and 
packing plant they’ve put in place in their slaughter facilities. 
 
Challenges have now come to the forefront that haven’t been 
there before. And as the minister’s indicated, what I have noted 
it’s certainly imperative that we bring all of the stakeholders 
together, that we give them the tools as they look to plan their 
communities, to plan when it comes to land use in creating — 
certainly what the minister’s indicated — that Saskatchewan’s a 
place for young people to live, work, and build strong futures. 
And I couldn’t agree more with the minister in that regard. 

I believe that we all want to see this province to move forward. 
We all want to see economic development. But we want to see 
development done in a way that doesn’t, doesn’t infringe on the 
rights of individuals to live a life of quality and without 
interference from the effects of services that may be provided 
by other individuals in the communities. 
 
The minister talked about building communities with quality 
and adequate health care and human services, diverse in the arts 
and culture. And while not all small communities may be able 
to provide those services, I do know, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that across this province we have communities that are very 
diverse in the culture, in the arts, and in thinking of affordable 
housing and also thinking of transportation. 
 
And as I think of manufacturing plants such as Seed Hawk in 
the province in my area, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the 
issues that manufacturers deal with when they start to expand 
their facilities and are looking for employees, they recognize 
that families that would like to come and work in these facilities 
are also looking for the ability to enjoy and have access to 
affordable housing. But they will only come to the community 
as well if they recognize that there is quality and adequate 
health care available in those communities. 
 
So when it comes to community planning and development, 
there’s a number of needs that need to be looked into. And we 
need to ensure that these needs not only are being met but 
we’ve got adequate regulations in place that allow communities 
and community planning committees to recognize what 
responsibilities they have so that they will not be held 
responsible or liable should they make a decision and somebody 
down the road — say 10 or 15 years — comes back and says, 
well we don’t believe you made the right decision at that time. 
 
And the legislation we have before us today, certainly there’s a 
fair bit of information in this piece of legislation as it tries to 
address a number of the issues. And I’m sure that the 50 
stakeholder organizations who were consulted with and came 
forward with ideas, no doubt, Madam Deputy Speaker, there 
were differences of opinion in the stakeholder group as they 
came forward with recommendations to government. And we 
certainly would be pleased to take the time to go over some of 
the recommendations to get a better handle and try to 
understand them. 
 
And Lord knows, I don’t understand everything that’s in the 
legislation that we’ve just had brought before us. But the intent 
is to try to get a better understanding of what is in this 
legislation before we would move it forward into committee. 
 
The minister talked about regional planning and one of the 
things that I believe, and I agree with the minister on, is the 
regional planning inclusive of First Nations participation. And 
we recognize in this province, we do have a fairly large First 
Nations population. We have a growing First Nations 
population. And I am pleased to say that, even in the 
constituency of Moosomin that I represent, there are a number 
of First Nations leaders that are moving forward with economic 
development, with plans, because they realize as well we need 
to include First Nations peoples. We need to include First 
Nations youth as we move forward to build the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I note from the minister’s comments that 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

there was inclusion of First Nations peoples in the development 
of this plan and of this piece of legislation. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this certainly is a piece of legislation 
that I think needs to be looked at very carefully. We need to 
look at it very closely. We need to ensure that a number of the 
questions that have been raised in the past — that maybe they 
will be raised in the future — that there is adequate provisions 
in the legislation to ensure that everyone’s voice has been 
heard. And that as communities move forward under this piece 
of legislation that they can feel comfortable that the decisions 
they make at the end of the day will be decisions that will be 
made, that they will make, that will enhance and build the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the minister made a comment about the Act supporting the 
vision established for the province as one of the have provinces. 
And over the past few years as a result of oil activity this 
province of Saskatchewan certainly finds itself in a positive 
financial position because of oil activity. And I believe, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we will continue to see strong activity in the 
field of oil as the demand around the world for oil increases and 
as populations grow. 
 
One of the problems we do have, while we are a province with 
a stronger economic performance because of the activities of 
the oil community, we continue to have a province that we have 
continued to see population loss in sound economic times. And 
I trust that with this piece of legislation, with some of the 
proposals that are coming forward, that we will indeed begin to 
see some population growth in the province of Saskatchewan as 
communities and municipalities begin to plan building for their 
futures — and with the anticipation that people will begin to 
look at moving back into the province of Saskatchewan because 
of the economic activity, because of the resource opportunities 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister mentioned that the Act maintains a voluntary 
community planning system that will encourage municipalities 
to undertake planning to meet the economic, social, 
environmental, and cultural goals of their communities. And 
there again, Madam Speaker, I believe those are certainly issues 
that we need to continue to work with. 
 
We need to recognize that municipalities have goals and 
aspirations as well as to how they are going to build their local 
government, build their community, work with communities. 
And when I say work with communities, one of the most recent 
elections, there was a situation where there were some 
differences of opinion with the local RM and the community in 
the election of a new reeve, that one of the comments I read in 
the paper was the reeve commenting on the fact that they want 
to build some of the relationships between their RM and the 
local community that may have been under stress for the past 
number of years. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, as we talk about planning and 
development in local governments across the province, whether 
they’re municipal governments or whether they’re First Nations 
governing authorities, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s 
imperative that we indeed offer them a piece of legislation that 

will give them the ability to move forward and to ensure that 
there are guidelines and there are avenues that they can follow 
that they can work with to build their communities. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think as we look at the Act 
and the number of issues that are involved in this planning and 
development Act, 2006, I think it would be imperative that we 
adjourn debate and do further review before we move forward 
with this piece of legislation. So therefore I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Youth Drug 
Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some young people in our 
province who need our help. They are addicted to drugs or 
alcohol and are sometimes resistant to treatment. We must 
remember they could be our children or those of our relatives, 
our friends, or our neighbours. These children have an 
important place in the future of this province. We as a society 
have a responsibility to ensure that we have viable options to 
enable young people to get healthy and secure their futures. 
 
The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act supports a 
strategy to help these children. It serves as a last resort measure 
for parents, legal guardians, and judges, when a young person’s 
substance use has damaged their decision-making ability to the 
point they present a risk of their own safety or to the safety of 
others. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act allows for involuntary detoxification and 
stabilization of youth through an order by two physicians for a 
period of up to five days. There’s also the possibility of an 
extension for a maximum of two additional five-day periods. As 
well the physicians may issue a community order for a young 
person to receive detoxification and stabilization services in his 
or her own home community for up to 30 days. 
 
Since its proclamation in April of this year, more than 60 young 
people have received detoxification and stabilization at our 
interim secure care facility in Regina. They have also been 
connected to resources and supports in their home communities 
to assist them in remaining substance-free. 
 
We recognize that involuntary care of any kind is a sensitive 
issue. We have therefore been monitoring the implementation 
of the Act and continue to consult with groups and individuals 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

such as the Children’s Advocate, the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, police, physicians, parents, and others to ensure 
the Act supports the needs of those who are most vulnerable in 
our society. 
 
Through these consultations, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
determined that three amendments could strengthen the 
legislation. We believe it’s important to provide a care plan for 
youth upon their release from the secure care facility if possible. 
This will ensure youth admitted into the secure youth detox 
centre will be assigned a caseworker within his or her home 
community. It will also strengthen expectations that regional 
health authorities will prioritize and provide appropriate 
services to youth under this Act. This amendment will help 
young people to continue their journey of healing. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we also believe it is important to be 
clear about the roles and responsibilities of those who are 
involved with the care and transport of the youth. Amendments 
regarding police transportation will clarify that police have the 
authority to transport youth from the first physician assessment 
to the second physician assessment. 
 
Finally, privacy and access to personal information are sensitive 
issues. We must strike a delicate balance between access for 
those who are providing care and ensuring the maximum 
privacy for young people and their families. Therefore we will 
clarify who can have access to a youth’s personal health 
information file and will provide regulating power regarding the 
retention and destruction of personal health information files. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act is just one aspect of our 
government’s plan to combat addictions. Project Hope is a 
three-year plan that is providing additional treatment spaces, 
more training for professionals, more education and prevention 
efforts, and a practical continuum of care for people with 
substance abuse issues. 
 
This Act is the final piece in the care continuum. The end result, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is a province in which every child has 
the best possible chance of growing up free from addiction. Our 
focus is on making life better for Saskatchewan children and 
families. 
 
With that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to rise today and to speak on Bill 
No. 6, An Act to amend the Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, certainly this is an important topic for 
our Assembly to consider and to pay a great deal of attention to. 
When we speak about youth, we speak about our children. We 
speak about the children of this province, the children of 
families that are having difficulties dealing with drug abuse. 

And they need every bit of help and support that this province 
and this Assembly can lend to these young people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I certainly do not detect in this piece 
of legislation anything that is particularly offensive and 
troubling insofar as this legislation goes. It’s pretty clear in my 
opinion that if there were some ambiguities about the original 
piece of legislation, that this amendment and the amendments in 
this Act will clarify in terms of who can access young people 
and who can potentially transport them from facility to facility 
or facility to physician, examination, or help. That is very 
valuable and useful insofar as it goes. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that I would be remiss if I 
didn’t take one comment that the minister mentioned — and I 
wrote it down quickly, and I hope I’m quoting accurately — 
when he said that this piece of legislation is the final piece in 
the continual care continuum in regard to Project Hope, or 
something to that effect. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m disappointed that the 
government would admit that because I don’t think that we’re 
anywhere near finished in terms of the quest or the challenge 
that we have in order to meet the needs of young people. This 
government has not provided any support in a meaningful way 
to long-term detoxification. And certainly I’m no expert on this, 
but I am led to believe, and I understand that certain drug abuse 
problems are not solved in the short term. They need long-term 
care facilities to help these young people break the tremendous 
hold that these drugs have on these young people. I haven’t 
heard the minister say that they’re willing to support and help in 
a meaningful way the efforts of faith-based organizations in 
terms of providing of long-term care for the youth of our 
province. 
 
I think that this government is barely scratching the surface in 
terms of what is needed to help young people put a new 
challenge to their lives and to get a hold of their lives and get a 
hold of the demons that they’re facing in terms of drugs and 
find meaningful and long-term peace in their lives and value in 
their existence. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is indeed a useful piece of 
legislation insofar as it goes, but I think that it certainly is 
important that we understand and commit ourselves as a 
legislature to making sure that we’re doing everything possible 
to help these young people. 
 
We talk about the fact that we give lip service in some instances 
to the fact that the youth are the future of this province and of 
this country. I think that’s true, and I don’t think that we should 
be willing — because we haven’t turned over every stone and 
explored every opportunity on how we can help those youths 
that need our special help and support — that we should rest 
easy and indicate that this is a final piece in the process. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know that we’re looking very 
much forward to talking to people who are attempting to work 
in this field and attempting to provide long-term treatment for 
youths with substance abuse and who are working in the field. 
And I know that they are going to want to comment on the 
pieces of this legislation — not only insofar as what’s in this 
legislation; it’s what more needs to be done in terms of 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

providing those long-term solutions that our youth in this 
province very much need. In order for that to happen and to be 
facilitated, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It is with pleasure that I rise today to move second 
reading of an amendment to The Public Health Act, 1994. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this amendment is an important step to 
authorize the creation of regulations that will allow restaurant 
information to be released to the public. The amendment 
provides the authority to regional health authorities to make 
restaurant inspection information public and is the first step to 
changing the way this issue is handled within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Saskatchewan Health, along with our health system partners, 
has been working to make the changes needed to ensure the 
public has access to this information. We know that food safety 
is an important health issue for Saskatchewan residents and we 
want to ensure that they have access to credible, reliable 
inspection information. Officials are already working on 
drafting new food safety regulations which will outline the 
details of the restaurant inspection information to be made 
public. 
 
As soon as the amendment to The Public Health Act is passed 
by this legislature, we will circulate a draft of the proposed 
regulations to industry, regional health authorities, and other 
stakeholders for their review and comments. We have also 
consulted with representatives of the Consumers’ Association 
of Canada and the Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices 
Association regarding the disclosure of restaurant inspection 
information. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Health and public 
health officials from the health regions have already established 
a working group to develop a framework for disclosing this 
restaurant inspection information. Consultations with our health 
partners will determine the exact nature of the information to be 
made public and the most appropriate way to do that. They will 
look at the best method for getting this information into the 
hands of people who want it. 
 
We know that the local and city health departments in other 
provinces that provide this type of information employ a variety 
of measures to share it with the public. We want to use the 
method that best suits our Saskatchewan residents. We know 
that there has been considerable public interest in making this 

kind of information widely available, and we are proud to say 
that today we are laying the legislative groundwork to make 
that happen. 
 
This legislative amendment now authorized work to go forward 
on the making of these regulations that will govern how the 
restaurant inspection information is disclosed. Once the safety 
regulations are passed, the amendment also grants regional 
health authorities the ability to disclose the information to the 
public. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, because of all the initial work that 
has been done by officials from Saskatchewan Health and the 
health regions, we are confident we can achieve our goal of 
having these food safety regulations in place by the end of 
March 2007. So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move 
second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to . . . I recognize the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak on Bill No. 7, An Act to amend The 
Public Health Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I have the pleasure to have been in the 
restaurant industry for 25 years and so I am very well familiar 
with the important work that the health inspection safety 
officers do in regard to making sure that the procedures and 
protocols that are established in restaurants are appropriate to 
protecting the health and the well-being of their clientele or the 
public at large. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I always felt and I know it’s true in the 
case of the vast, vast majority of restaurant owners that they 
regard the public health inspectors as a great asset to make sure 
that the procedures that they have in place are appropriate to 
safeguard the safety of the products that they’re serving to their 
clients because there is nothing that’s worse for business than to 
have some sort of a problem occur in regard to the safe use of 
the food that they serve. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that it is important as well that 
the public has a right to know what the result of this inspection 
work and this consultation work that occurs between the public 
health inspectors and restaurant owners results in. And it is a 
consultative process. I know in our case over the years we 
would have inspectors that would come in and go over our 
premises and look over the procedures and practices that we had 
in place to make sure that they were appropriate. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, there were improvements that 
we were suggesting that could be made. There were things that 
we learned by way of the industry that could be improvements 
to have a higher standard of health safety in our restaurants. 
And we would share them with the health inspectors as well. 
And so it was very much a dialogue and a communication. But 
there was a formal report at the end of the day and I think that 
the public has a right to know what’s in those reports in order to 
make sure that the highest level of safety is maintained. 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I also would like to say on the record I 
truly do hope that there is a great deal of common sense that is 
applied in these instances as well so that we don’t end up with 
coming up with standards and ideas and procedures that are 
simply completely impractical and unnecessary because we 
don’t take the time to communicate between the public health 
inspectors and the restaurant industry as to how this stuff might 
be implemented. I’m encouraged by the minister’s comments to 
say that there is going to be consultation on a pretty broad basis 
with the stakeholders in the industry, and I think that will serve 
the public very, very well. 
 
I know the restaurant industry and members in it and perhaps 
even public health inspectors look forward to commenting on 
this Bill. And in order for that, for that to be facilitated, I would 
move to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
This legislation recognizes that our older citizens can continue 
to make contributions in the labour market. Mr. Speaker, many 
people do not understand why reaching an arbitrary age should 
be sufficient to require them to leave the labour force. This 
government agrees that people should not have to retire simply 
because they have reached a specific age. But currently 
collective agreements and employers’ policies are not violating 
the Code by requiring the employees retire at age 65. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill will change the definition of age in 
the Code to include persons over 65 years. This removes from 
the Code the protection for mandatory retirement policies. 
Employers will no longer be able to require employees to quit 
working because they have reached a certain age. And 
collective agreements cannot specify retirement age, as this 
would now be considered to be contrary to the Code in the 
absence of special circumstances. 
 
The bona fide occupational qualification exception currently in 
the Code recognizes that in certain occupations such as 
firefighters and police, advancing age relates to the ability to 
perform the duties required for the job. 
 
This Bill responds to concerns from members of the public who 
object to being forced to retire before they are ready. This 
change also responds to the concerns of those who have taken 
time out of work to raise their children. As a result, they may 
have spent fewer years in the workforce and had less 
opportunity to accrue pension benefits. 

This Bill recognizes that immigrants to our province have 
sometimes joined the workforce here later in their lives. Madam 
Speaker, the amendments also address concerns about 
anticipated labour shortages as a consequence of an aging 
population by removing a barrier for individuals who wish to 
remain in the workplace. 
 
The Code currently includes an exception that permits 
distinctions based on age in Acts and regulations in relation to 
services to the public. As a result of this exception, the 
requirement that a person must be 19 years old to purchase 
alcohol is not discriminatory. 
 
There’s also an exception in the Code for a regulation or law 
that allows age distinctions in the purchase of property. It is 
proposed to repeal these provisions and include a general 
statement that age distinctions in any Act or regulation are not 
discriminatory with respect to any area covered by the Code — 
that is with respect to employment accommodation and services 
to the public. 
 
A few statutes include provisions that set a mandatory 
retirement age. The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act and 
The Public Employees Pension Plan Act are being amended to 
include a provision prohibiting mandatory retirement. 
 
The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act is also 
being amended to provide that no employee shall be required to 
retire at a specific age. This new provision will apply to 
invalidate the mandatory requirement provisions in The Liquor 
Board Superannuation Act, The Power Corporation 
Superannuation Act, and The Public Service Superannuation 
Act. 
 
The regulations under The Public Service Act, 1998, provide 
for mandatory retirement in public sector at age 65. The 
regulations are being amended to ensure consistency with the 
Code. 
 
Finally, Madam Speaker, the amendments provide some time, a 
year from Royal Assent, for phase-in to allow for renegotiation 
of collective agreements that have a mandatory retirement 
clause and revision of human resource policies that mandate 
retirement at a particular age. 
 
Almost every jurisdiction allows age distinctions in 
employment for the operation of a bona fide retirement 
superannuation or pension plan, or to a bona fide group or 
employee insurance plan. Saskatchewan’s Code already 
includes such a provision. 
 
The exception for employee pension plans and disability plans 
allows plans to include actuarial-based criteria for the purposes 
of contributions and payouts. These provisions will not be 
changed by this Bill. 
 
Likewise employee pension and benefit plans are not changed 
by these amendments. What is being changed, is removal of the 
protection for mandatory retirement policies from The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
 
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code and to 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

make consequential amendments to other Acts and to the public 
service regulations, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak to a Bill that we suggested. It’s 
almost as if there’s a bad echo in this building because I would 
swear that it sounded very much as if it was being directly lifted 
from our policy and being entered into the debate on the 
Assembly. So I’m glad that the Justice minister was able to at 
least read our policy and even, even better, to actually do a 
pretty fair job of drafting it up into meaningful legislation. 
 
So I would certainly commend him on getting it largely right, 
because usually, usually when the members opposite plagiarize 
our ideas, they usually don’t understand it well enough to 
actually make a decent job of the drafting of the legislation. So 
they did at least get it right in this instance, so I thank you for 
reading very carefully our policy. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it really is strange for me to be 
speaking about the idea that someone who at 65 years of age is 
being recognized as still having something very valuable and 
meaningful to potentially commit and to provide for their place 
of work. I know it seems like only yesterday. When I was 15, I 
thought that my father, who would have been about 40 years of 
age at that time, must be ready for retirement at any moment. 
But now that I’m much closer to the magic age myself, it seems 
like people have a great deal more to contribute than I would 
have thought all those many years ago. And so I think it’s very, 
very important that we grab the opportunity for people to 
continue to contribute as is appropriate in their workplaces and 
in the places where they are doing so much good work. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am very sure that we will 
find a great deal to support in this piece of legislation. We’re 
looking forward to hear from people who are directly affected 
by this — employees, employers, and people in the trade 
unions. And in order for that to be facilitated, I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate on the Bill. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Limitations Act was passed in 2004 and came into force on 
May 1, 2005. That Act reformed what had been an archaic and 
complex limitation system by instituting a completely new 

limitations regime. 
 
The Act provides for a basic two-year limitation period for civil 
legal actions. The two-year period starts to run from when the 
claimant first knew or ought to have known that the injury had 
occurred, that the injury appears to be attributable to the 
defendant’s act or omission, and that a legal proceeding would 
be an appropriate means to seek to remedy it. 
 
In addition the new Act includes an ultimate limitation period 
which bars all actions after 15 years in the events giving rise to 
the claim. The amendments being proposed at this time change 
provisions so that they more clearly reflect the original intent of 
those provisions. 
 
The first change relates to the provision respecting 
acknowledgment of a debt. An acknowledgment restarts the 
running of the limitation period from the date of the 
acknowledgment. The Act provides that the acknowledgment 
must be in writing and must be made to a claimant. 
 
Prior to the coming into force of The Limitations Act, The 
Contributory Negligence Act provided that if any one of two or 
more persons responsible for damage to a plaintiff satisfied a 
judgment, he or she could sue any of the others for 
reimbursement of that person’s fair share of the damages. This 
concept was included in The Limitations Act which provides 
that, for claims when contribution indemnity is sought, the 
two-year limitation period starts to run from the day the first 
alleged wrongdoer is served with notice of the claim. 
 
It is not clear what constitutes notice for the purposes of this 
provision. The amendment will provide that the period starts to 
run when the first alleged wrongdoer is served with a claim. 
This provides for more certainty and is consistent with the 
intent that the period should start to run from when the first 
person becomes a defendant. 
 
[16:45] 
 
An amendment deals with claims based on court judgments or 
orders for payment of money. This provision maintains the 
long-standing limitation period of 10 years from the date of the 
judgment or order. The current placement of this provision in 
the section respecting the ultimate limitation period creates an 
uncertainty as to whether discoverability and the basic two-year 
limitation period applies to those actions. Discoverability is not 
relevant for these claims and the two-year period is too short for 
renewal of a court judgment for the purposes of enforcement. 
 
The 10-year period is also consistent with the 10-year limitation 
period for these claims in other provinces. This Act creates a 
separate section for these claims with a specified 10-year 
limitation period applicable to these claims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that the current provisions do 
not appear to have resulted in problems. However it is desirable 
to make the changes to ensure clear interpretation and to 
prevent future problems for persons using this legislation. Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Limitations Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

that Bill No. 10, The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Irrespective of the 
fact that I am not a lawyer, I will attempt to comment on this 
Bill which I am sure, I’m sure, I’m sure is widely debated and 
much loved in the legal circles, but for the rest of us lay people, 
it is rather confusing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do understand that what this will do is provide 
limitations on the period of time when changes can be made on 
property claims. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is an 
appropriate piece of legislation to have drafted. 
 
I know that the subsections in the amendments that are on the 
actual Bill are very brief and very technical. You know, such 
things as in: 
 

5 Subsection 11(2) is amended by striking out “or” 
after clause (a) and substituting “and” 
 

And I know that’s scintillating stuff for many people, but I am 
trusting those people who are very much conversant and 
interested in the details, in what is being implied in this to make 
sure that this is done carefully. I know that our research 
department has looked at this and are saying that there are 
stakeholders that they wish to consult in order to facilitate 
making sure that all of these technical amendments are 
appropriate. And in order for that to be facilitated, I would 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 10 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft 
Equipment Act/Loi sur les garanties internationales portant 

sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The International Interests in Mobile 
Aircraft Equipment. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want to hear lots about this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — When I have the opportunity to 
continue, Mr. Speaker . . . The International Interests in Mobile 
Aircraft Equipment Act provides for implementation of the 
convention on international interests in mobile equipment and 
its protocol on matters specific to aircraft equipment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The convention and protocol create an international, central 
registry that will enable the registration and search of 
convention-based interests in aircraft equipment. Mr. Speaker, 

the convention and protocol are founded on the principle that a 
sound legal framework that facilitates the creation, perfection, 
and enforcement of security interests in aircraft equipment will 
provide confidence to lenders and institutional investors. This 
will in turn make it easier to attract domestic and foreign capital 
in the purchase and sale of aircraft equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation’s based on an Act prepared by the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada which has been 
recommended to all provincial jurisdictions for implementation. 
The Act has been identified by the federal government as a 
priority for provincial and territorial implementation. Once a 
majority of provinces and territories have passed implementing 
legislation, Canada would then be in a position to ratify the 
convention and its protocol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that the aircraft protocol applies 
to used aircraft as well as to smaller aircraft. Accordingly 
smaller Saskatchewan operators seeking to buy or sell 
internationally will have better access to credit and protection 
for their security in these transactions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this House to join me in 
supporting the implementation of this convention and protocol 
to increase certainty and therefore efficiency in the financing of 
mobile aircraft equipment. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading 
of An Act respecting International Interests In Mobile Aircraft 
Equipment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 11, The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft 
Equipment Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
and speak briefly on Bill No. 11, An Act respecting 
International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment. Mr. 
Speaker, you know I think that this actually is a fairly important 
piece of legislation given the fact and the reality that aircraft 
and airline companies have equipment that is located in our 
province. And if they do, they’re going to want to make sure 
that those assets are protected and are appropriately treated so 
that there cannot be unilateral action taken against this 
equipment. And if we’re going to have aircraft companies based 
in Saskatchewan, we have to ensure that the treatment of their 
equipment is also of a standard and a par with other 
jurisdictions in Canada and around the world. 
 
And so I understand that, on first blush, it sounds as if this is 
legislation that doesn’t make a whole lot of sense. But I do 
understand that this is a fairly important piece of legislation — 
particularly if our province wants to be competitive in the 
aircraft and airline industry — in order to make sure that the 
standards and protection of assets are similar in our province as 
they are in other jurisdictions. 
 
And certainly this legislation is fairly comprehensive. The Act 
is 91 pages in length. And it is a new Act; it’s not an 
amendment to existing legislation. And so that I think it’s 
important that this is properly reviewed and scrutinized by the 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2006 

people that are going to be affected by it. My understanding — 
and briefly looking at this information — is that it does meet 
the challenge of the standards and protection that we are 
looking for. And I look forward to hearing from the industry. 
And in order to make that possible, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 11 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to the House for second reading, legislative 
amendments to The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. These 
amendments update and make the new orphan well and facility 
liability management program more equitable and sustainable. 
 
This legislature provided approval in the 2001 session for Bill 
10, amending The Oil and Gas Conservation Act in order to 
eliminate the Oil and Gas Environmental Fund and replace it 
with the Oil and Gas Orphan Fund. Bill 10 has not yet been 
fully proclaimed. 
 
Over the last years, our Department of Industry and Resources 
has been working with the oil and gas industry, other provincial 
departments, and stakeholders to amend the current regulations 
to create a new orphan well and facility liability management 
program. During that consultation it was determined that 
changes and corrections were needed in Bill 10 to address 
issues which arose in developing the new program as well as 
some related housekeeping amendments. 
 
As we make these changes I want to remind the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that the oil and gas industry contributes a great deal to 
the Saskatchewan economy. It creates jobs, builds capital 
investment, and creates opportunities for businesses and 
communities across our province. It is the key economic driver 
for prosperity in Saskatchewan, ranking above agriculture in 
provincial gross domestic product. 
 
Since March 2002 our government has provided improvements 
to the sector, including enhanced taxation and royalty changes, 
to help Saskatchewan continue to be competitive with other 
jurisdictions. This sector and the tax and royalty changes we 
have made will continue to bring more investment to our 
province, and jobs and opportunities to Saskatchewan people. 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 contains 
the necessary changes to make the program fair and equitable. It 
will come into force along with the proclamation of the balance 
of Bill 10 and the regulatory changes to implement the new 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the one policy change, it was 

originally intended that the orphan fund levy would be imposed 
only on inactive wells and inactive upstream facilities. The 
industry stakeholders are concerned that the current wording 
attempts to marry two different concepts, one concept being the 
prevention of inactive wells, and the other an industry funding 
mechanism to pay for orphan wells and facilities. This union 
creates an unsustainable and inequitable funding mechanism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a company could simply walk away from its 
inactive wells since there is little or no economic value. As the 
number of levy contributors shrinks, a smaller number of 
companies bear a greater economic burden. At some point there 
would be no more contributors left and the taxpayers would be 
required to absorb the cost of dealing with orphan wells and 
facilities. The amendments under this legislation regarding this 
policy change will remove references to inactive from the 
regulations in order for the orphan fund to apply to all wells and 
upstream facilities. 
 
Other minor housekeeping changes will change the definition of 
an upstream facility, add a provision to require a first-time 
applicant under the oil and gas orphan well fund to submit a fee, 
remove the requirement for forms to be prescribed in the 
regulations, and fix inconsistent language and a typing error. 
Mr. Speaker, I now present The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 for second reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 5, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to quickly comment on this particular amendment as 
proposed by the minister. One of the things that is so essential 
in any industry or in any business is the ability of that business 
to have confidence, confidence both in the legislation — in how 
it’s interpreted, in how it’s going to be changed — and also 
confidence that there is a transparent route to do that, and also 
come confidence in the future. 
 
Some of the things that are bothersome is that even though 
amendments have been made to this Act before, as the minister 
alluded to, they have not been fully proclaimed to this point. 
And now we’re changing some of the conditions again, so that 
that level of confidence from the oil industry is, I think, not 
there, and needs to be more consultative with the oil industry. 
And there’s a lot of things that need to be addressed here from 
both the stakeholder point of view, their assessment of what this 
is all about. 
 
I do notice that they are moving closer and closer to what the 
Alberta industry is very much like. First of all there was 
royalties and tax rates, and now we’re into the environmental. I 
wonder if that’s the NDP version of Alberta envy. I would at 
this time move, Mr. Speaker, debate adjourn on this 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill No. 5 be 



November 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Environmental Management and Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
These minor housekeeping changes are made in response to 
concerns expressed by operators of waterworks and sewage 
works about duplication of effort and unnecessary costs 
associated with the sections of the Act that required them to in 
some cases triple register an interest for the same project on the 
same parcel of land. 
 
[17:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, some municipalities and pipeline associations 
must register the same project when a permit to construct is 
issued, when a permit to operate is issued, and when an 
easement is required. The proposed amendments remove the 
requirement for governments to oversee multiple registrations 
of interests on properties, thereby eliminating provincial 
government involvement that had created unintentional and 
unnecessary bureaucracy in the land control process. 
 
While the amendment may reduce revenue to the Information 
Services Corporation on the order of $10,000 per year, the 
owners of the new systems will be encouraged to continue 
voluntarily registering easements to protect their investment and 
infrastructure, offsetting some of the loss of income to ISC 
[Information Services Corporation]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of these amendments will impact public 
health or the environment and they will save the owners of 
affected water and sewage works considerable time and money. 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Environmental 
Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 14, The Environmental Management 
and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again quickly 
I would like to respond to this particular amendment as 
proposed by the minister. I was pleased to hear the minister 
refer to less government involvement in making these things 
work a little bit better, putting the onus on the people that have 
an invested interest and an interest in terms of making it work. 
And I think that’s certainly the right direction. 

I realize that it’s housekeeping and these issues need to have 
further consultation. We want to get a feedback from SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], from SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], from the 
chambers, and I would therefore . . . I would adjourn debate on 
this amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill 14 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:02.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................263 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................263 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................264 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Congratulations to the Town of St. Brieux 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................264 
 Aboriginal Veterans Day 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Addictions Conquered 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Gary Tinker Federation Wins Spirit Award 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Weyburn-Big Muddy Youth Win Awards 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................266 
 Community Planning Day 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................266 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................266 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Investigating the Delivery of Health Care Information 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................267 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................268 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................268 
 Shortage of Health Professionals Impacts Rural Hospitals 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................270 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................270 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Shift in Business Practices for Department of Highways and Transportation 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................272 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................273 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................273 
 
 



 

 Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................273 
 Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................274 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................274 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................275 
 Bill No. 2 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................275 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................276 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................278 
 Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................280 
 Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................282 
 Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................284 
 Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................286 
 Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................288 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................289 
 Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................290 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................290 
 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................291 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................292 
 Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................292 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................293 
 Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act/Loi sur les garanties internationales 
 portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................293 
 Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................294 
 Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................295 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




