






















































Hansard: April 04, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 34A  TUESDAY, APRIL 4, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 969 
 April 4, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand in this Assembly today and present a petition to 
the Assembly from individuals concerned regarding the cancer 
drug Avastin, and I read the prayer into the record: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
number of folks from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
petition I present today relates to the condition of Highway 32 
from Cabri to Leader. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns of the people of that area are growing 
because these three pages of petitions are signed by individuals 
from the communities of Sceptre, Lancer, Prelate, Leader, 
Liebenthal, Swift Current, Maple Creek, and as far away as 
Yorkton, Saskatoon, and Medicine Hat. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are concerned about one of the very many 
highways in this province that are in terrible disrepair. This is 
Highway No. 55: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway No. 55 so it can return to being a 
safe and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Arborfield, 
Tisdale, Carrot River, and Weekes. I so present. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
also to fund Avastin. And the signatures on this petition are 
concerned that this is the first time in the province’s history that 
the government has denied coverage of a cancer drug 
recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. The prayer 
of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition come from 
the communities of Saskatoon, Humboldt, and also Yorkton. 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again today have 
a number of pages of a petition of citizens concerned with the 
safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Lake 
Lenore, LeRoy, Yellow Quill, Sturgis, Middle Lake, Battleford, 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this 
province who are very concerned about the government’s 
refusal to fund the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Saskatoon, 
Melfort, and Prince Albert. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present another 
petition from citizens of Biggar constituency who are opposed 
to the closure of Biggar’s rural service centre and Environment 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2006 

office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Rosetown. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of families across Saskatchewan 
concerned that Saskatchewan is the only province besides PEI 
[Prince Edward Island] that does not have a children’s hospital. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners live in northeast Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures in this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
with a petition from our people concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of 
Humboldt, Lake Lenore, Watson, and Lloydminster. I so 
present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling the government to maintain Department of Highways 
section shop: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closures. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by the good citizens from Watrous and Simpson. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorder. I will read a small portion 
of it: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the 
recommendations made to the Government of 
Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services. One 
of those recommendations is coordinate among the 
departments of Health, Learning, and Community 
Resources and Employment, with input from stakeholders, 
to formulate a provincial comprehensive autism spectrum 
disorder treatment program. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens who are concerned with the condition of 
Highway 55, especially the citizens of Red Earth and Shoal 
Lake. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 55 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Tisdale, Porcupine Plain, 
Bjorkdale, and Carrot River. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 



April 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

and received: 
 

A petition concerning children’s hospital in Saskatoon, 
sessional paper 644; 
 
A petition concerning repair and maintenance of Highway 
55, sessional paper 645; 
 

And addendums to a number of previously tabled petitions 
being sessional papers nos. 7, 64, 67, 638, 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: is the management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2000-2001 such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? And also if so, what is the nature of 
the activity? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: what did the management 
of the department find as a result of his monitoring of any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 
Also to the Minister of Immigration: does the management 
of the department have any knowledge of any actual or 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2000-2001? If so, what is the nature of this 
activity? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: how did the management 
of the department monitor any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect 
fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: did the management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud in the 
year 2000-2001? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: is the management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2001-2002 such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 

Also to the Minister of Immigration: what did the 
management of the department find as a result of his 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2001-2002? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: does the management of 
the department have any knowledge of any actual or 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2001-2002? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 
Also to the Minister of Immigration: how did the 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001-2002? 
 
Also to the Minister of Immigration: did the management 
of the department have established programs and controls 
to mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2001-2002? 
 
Also to the Minister of Immigration: is the management of 
the department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2002-2003, such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 
Also to the Minister of Immigration: what did the 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 
Also to the Minister of Immigration: does the management 
of the department have any knowledge of any actual, 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2002-2003? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 
To the Minister of Immigration: how did the management 
of the department monitor established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risk or help prevent or detect 
fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 
To the Minister of Immigration: did management of the 
department have any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud in the 
year 2002-2003? 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also like to give 
notice I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: did 
management of the department have established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2006 

detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 
Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
did management of the department monitor any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 
Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2000-2001? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 
 
Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: 
what did management of the department find as a result of 
its monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: is 
management of the department aware of any allegations of 
fraud or any other illegal activity within the department or 
its agencies in the year 2000-2001, such as information 
received from employees, former employees, clients, 
customers, suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of 
the activity? 
 
Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: did 
the management of the department have established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 

 
Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
did the management of the department monitor any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 

 
[13:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: does the 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2002-2003? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 

 
Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: is 
the management of the department aware of any 
allegations of fraud or any other illegal activity within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2002-2003, such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? If so, what is the 
nature of the activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: 
what did the management of the department find as a 
result of its monitoring of any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risks or detect fraud in the year 
2002-2003? 

Also to the Minister of Highways and Transportation: did 
the management of the department have established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001-2002? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how did 
management of the department monitor established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in 2001-2002? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will try to be somewhat less 
wordy than my colleague. I give notice that I shall on day no. 
39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice and Attorney General: how 
many applications have been made to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench under The Mandatory Testing and 
Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act by emergency service 
workers or their representatives, and what have been the 
outcomes of each of those applications? 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what are the names of 
the two ski hills that applied for funding in the year 
2005-06, and what criteria does the department have for 
approving an application for funding from a ski hill? 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Association for Community Living 
Holds Spring Fling Fundraiser 

 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina and 
District Association for Community Living held its annual 
spring fling fundraising event on Saturday. About 300 people 
attended — actually, Mr. Speaker, about 308, counting the table 
that my colleagues and I shared. 
 
For 54 years the association has provided support, advocacy, 
and education that continues to improve our society, the lives of 
families, and persons with intellectual disabilities. Funds raised 
help support services and programs. The association is all about 
making dreams of people with intellectual disabilities come true 
and ensuring all can participate fully as valued citizens in the 



April 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

community. 
 
One such participant is a young, incredibly talented singer, 
Colby Nargang, who wowed us through two sets of songs. 
Watch for him, Mr. Speaker, and hear him when you get the 
chance. 
 
The fundraising live auction was conducted by my zany friend, 
CC, of Z99. With his usual enthusiasm, CC provided much 
good humour, and he coaxed more money and more money out 
of the giggling bidders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations go to the spring fling 2006, 
chaired by Voula Danakas; committee members Lill Lareau, 
Ken McDougall — who also was the MC [master of 
ceremonies] of the evening — Susan Zwarych, Sue Myers, 
AnnaMae McCashin who is also president of the Regina and 
District Association for Community Living. Congratulations to 
them for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Midget Mustangs Win Provincial 
Hockey Championship 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and members. I 
am proud to announce that the 2005-2006 Midget A Tier II 
provincial hockey champions are from the Melfort 
constituency. The Melfort Midget Mustangs made their victory 
lap with the provincial championship banner on their home ice, 
Sunday, March 26. 
 
The Mustangs’ first opponents for the provincial title were the 
Martensville Marauders and the Kindersley Elks. The Melfort 
team successfully met these teams and went on to outscore 
Weyburn 6 to 4 in a two-game final series. 
 
Wally Garchinski, the head coach of the Melfort Mustangs is 
quoted to say: 
 

The kids gave about 110 per cent. You couldn’t ask any 
more from the older players, the 17-year-olds are in their 
last year and they all performed like we needed them to. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, an extraordinary 
team effort is required from the entire hockey organization in 
order to achieve this level of success. For this reason I ask you 
to join me in congratulating the players, coaches, staff, family, 
volunteers, and fans of the Melfort Midget Mustang 
organization. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Equipment Donated to Cochrane’s 
Practical and Applied Arts Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently visited 
Cochrane High School in my constituency. I was pleased to 

announce a very special donation on behalf of SaskEnergy and 
the energy share program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the energy share program has met an increased 
demand for skilled trades people in the area of plumbing and 
heating in this province. A shortage of skilled labour highlights 
the importance of Cochrane High School’s practical and applied 
arts program, the only one of its kind in Saskatchewan. The 
program offers training in as many as 14 different trades and is 
crucial in meeting the needs of our growing economy. 
 
It gave me great pleasure to announce that SaskEnergy and 
Lennox Industries have presented Cochrane High School with 
10 Energy Star-qualified programmable thermostats, one 
high-efficiency Lennox furnace, and 42 industrial hard hats. Mr. 
Speaker, the donation ensures that students at the practical and 
applied arts program will be trained to work with the very latest 
equipment in the industry. 
 
I’d like to thank the students of Cochrane High School — 
Russell Belliveau, Mike Fink, Jason Clemmensen, Leon 
Manhaf, Tiffany Martens, Dakoda Nofield, Kristin Sinch, and 
Jonathan Tallowin — for taking the time to demonstrate for me 
and other guests at Cochrane that day some of the intricacies of 
plumbing and heating. 
 
I would also like to invite the members to join me in thanking 
SaskEngery and Lennox for their donations to the future skills 
of these young people and to join me in congratulating the 
students and staff at the Cochrane High School for the good 
work they have done and are continuing to do for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

Eatonia Student Wins Provincial Poster Contest 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to congratulate Kirsten Theaker, a grade 10 student 
at Eatonia’s Eaton High, who is the provincial winner of the 
Royal Canadian Legion’s essay, poem, and poster contest for 
the senior black and white poster. Kirsten Theaker’s poster will 
go up against the top poster in each province for the national 
competition. 
 
It was a very proud day for Eatonia and Eaton School to have a 
very small school of 137 students represented nationally. It also 
makes us very proud of a town of only 500 citizens. President 
of the Royal Canadian Legion branch — Eatonia branch — 
Larry Richie, said Kirsten’s win is a bittersweet victory for the 
branch which will dismantle this spring due to lack of members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve known Kirsten Theaker for a good many 
years of my life, and she’s a lover of animals and a very 
talented young woman. And I happened to be over at her farm 
yesterday, and I know that her mother, Lori, and her father, 
Ron, are also very proud of her. And I would just ask the entire 
Assembly to please join me in congratulating Kirsten Theaker 
and wish her the best of luck at our national competition. 
 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Campaign to Raise Public Awareness 
of Current Farm Crisis 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan, or APAS, will be here 
at the legislature as part of a national campaign to raise public 
awareness about the current farm crisis. 
 
The campaign has three themes, Mr. Speaker: (1) that the 
primary producers are not receiving a fair price for what they 
produce; (2) that the campaign will draw particular attention to 
the levels of support of their national government to provide to 
their producers; and (3), Mr. Speaker, APAS will reaffirm the 
need to transform the industry so that producers receive a fair 
and equitable return for their investment of time, capital, and 
labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
has continuously made the point that our farmers receive far 
less support from the federal government than the farmers in the 
US [United States] and the EU [European Union]. And until 
this subsidy imbalance is addressed by Ottawa, our farmers will 
continue to struggle to compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will work with the farmers to not only make 
the strongest case to the federal government that additional 
assistance is necessary, but also to identify and to take actions 
needed to transform agriculture and ensure that it becomes once 
again an economically viable and profitable industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can have the greatest impact on the federal 
government and the most positive impact for the agriculture 
industry if we work together. We support the efforts of APAS 
in its national awareness campaign, and we will continue to 
work for and with farmers in this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology’s Waiting List Management Fees 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, two days in a row 
we’ve had the NDP ministers give inaccurate statements to the 
Legislative Assembly. On Friday the member from Yorkton 
went on a diversionary tirade, flinging allegations against the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest which of course were 
unfounded. In fact the Foster Families Association had to set 
the record straight. 
 
Then we had the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment state, and I quote, “ . . . I understand that SIAST is 
reconsidering their fee for wait-lists in the province.” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member will carry on. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’ll quote, “ . . . I understand that SIAST 
is reconsidering their fee for wait-lists in the province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, an official from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] is quoted in today’s Leader 
Post, and this is what she has to say, quote: 
 

. . . the $20 annual waitlist management fee will be 
charged to those on waiting lists hoping to enrol in SIAST 
programs for combined lab/X-ray technologist, 
cytotechnology, dental hygiene, medical laboratory 
technology or medical radiological technology . . . 
 

That’s what the communications director for SIAST said. The 
plan right now is to go with the fee for those on waiting lists for 
five programs where SIAST is no longer taking applications. 
 
So once again we have two statements that are incongruent. The 
minister says the wait fees are being reconsidered; SIAST says 
they are not being reconsidered. The NDP government says it 
has a plan to keep young people in this province. How do 
policies like this help keep young people here? Saskatchewan 
people are not fooled by this government’s angry tirades and 
unfounded allegations to try to divert attention from the real 
issues of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Community and Corporate Initiative Raises 
$10,000 for the Northwest Health Facility 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 
15 of last year, the staff of the Esso agent, Marsollier 
Petroleum, presented a cheque for $10,000 to the Northwest 
Health Facility for the purchase of ophthalmology equipment. 
 
In a community initiative, customers and staff raised funds from 
April to November of 2005. Esso contributed up to a cent per 
litre of fuel sold to the Esso farm community growth fund. To 
the farming community that Marsollier Petroleum services, Mr. 
Speaker, ophthalmology equipment will be of great use and the 
$10,000 donation will directly assist that purchase. 
 
The communities of Meadow Lake, Goodsoil, Makwa, and 
Loon Lake will benefit most noticeably. It is expected, Mr. 
Speaker, that patients will be saved 20 to 30 trips collectively 
per month to equipped centres representing some 80 to 120 
hours of travel time alone. Debbie Carey, the director of acute 
care at the Northwest Health Facility, expresses her gratitude to 
Marsollier Petroleum and especially to their patrons. After all, 
as John Marsollier has said, the program really depends on the 
goodwill of the customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite the members of this 
Assembly to join with Debbie Carey and to join with me in 
commending Esso and its patrons for their generosity. I would 
also like to invite the members to join in congratulating the 
communities surrounding the Northwest Health Facility for 
their efforts in achieving a $10,000 goal. Thank you. 
 



April 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Support For Agriculture 
 
Ms. Draude: —Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote from the 
Premier when he was in opposition. 
 

. . . perhaps they never knew what it’s like to farm with old 
machinery, and just to go from repair to repair to repair. 
Perhaps they’ve forgotten, perhaps they’ve never known 
what it’s like to have to find work off [the] farm, any kind 
of work, just to hold the farm together. 

 
Those words were spoken in April 1988. Mr. Speaker, I hope 
the Premier remembers saying this because today we have 
people with us who are living those words. The people I am 
talking about are the victims of the ag crisis, and they’re not just 
farmers. They are the wives who see first-hand what the crisis is 
doing to their families, the women who answer the phone from 
the bill collectors. They defend their family’s business decisions 
and cry as they hold their kids who are really baffled because 
mom and dad’s lives are falling apart. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is to this Premier. Why has he 
not lived up to the words that he spoke 18 years ago and do 
something to stop the ag crisis in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that question really raises again the credibility of the 
opposition. Clearly this government has significantly funded 
agriculture over the last few years, Mr. Speaker, in 
unprecedented amounts — $1.32 billion towards agriculture 
from the provincial treasury in the last couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We recognize that there is an incredible problem, crisis, on the 
farm today in Saskatchewan. We know that people are hurting. 
We have met with many people — farmers, farm families — 
and we know that there is a great deal of pain out there, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we have come to the table; we will 
come to the table with the resources that we’re able to as a 
province; but we need a federal government to take account of 
the reality out here and to come to the table with a proportional 
share, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what farmers need in this 

province is for this government to stop passing the blame to 
somebody else. The ag crisis has gone from the commodity 
prices and net returns and now we’ve reached the point where 
it’s just a social crisis as well. 
 
Today in rural Saskatchewan exists a blanket of despair, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read a quote from the Leader-Post article 
that says the wheat board “ . . . has started training frontline 
staff in crisis counselling given an ‘unprecedented’ number of 
calls from desperate farmers . . . ” The story goes on to say that 
the wheat board logs between 12,000 and 14,000 calls a week 
from farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women in the gallery here today are at the top 
of my list of people I respect, and they’ve earned the respect of 
every one of my colleagues and their communities because 
they’re fighting hard to keep their families’ lives together. 
These wives have seen what government policies have done, 
including this NDP government. They’ve seen their families 
suffer and they can’t take any more, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
here today to tell the Premier their story. 
 
Will the Premier meet with this group of farm wives today and 
tell them what he is personally going to do to stop the despair in 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s so important when people in this province are facing 
a crisis that we deal with the issues on a very factual base. And 
the revisionist history that is coming from the other side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, though I recognize it has partisan impact, 
though I recognize the Sask Party is trying to position 
themselves to put a wedge between farmers and this 
government, Mr. Speaker, they are not facing the reality that 
this province has had to face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 20 years there have been problems in 
agriculture in this province — problems, Mr. Speaker, that are 
not the fault of farmers. Mr. Speaker, there are structural 
problems. We have been pressing our federal governments for 
years to provide support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that over the last decade, Mr. Speaker, they 
have taken rather than given in to this situation. They have 
taken out resources, Mr. Speaker, $1 billion on trade injury — 
we sought that in ’99; it was never put back in — 500 million, a 
minimum average for what they took out of this province 
annually when they removed the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s where the problem lies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, many of the women that are here 
today come from the RM [rural municipality] of Porcupine 
which was declared a disaster area last fall and again this 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2006 

spring. Last year they suffered through horrific rain — 17 
inches of rain during combining time, 40 inches during the year. 
It was almost biblical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This spring the fields are filled with 3-foot ruts from combines 
that used dual wheels last fall. The land is drenched. There’s 
still 2 feet of snow in the fields and there’s no way there can be 
a seedbed prepared for spring. Crop insurance deadline passed 
on Friday. 
 
These women are requesting a specific disaster fund because 
CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization program] 
isn’t working and neither is crop insurance, because it isn’t 
designed for disaster areas. 
 
Agriculture needs a specific disaster fund, and they’re here 
today to ask the Premier for his commitment to implement such 
a fund for the province. Mr. Speaker, they want to assure him 
that their plight will be recognized and that it’s recognized right 
across the province at different times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit today to a meeting with 
this group of women and listen to their concerns? Will he give 
these farmers today some sign that he understands and cares 
about the agricultural crisis in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
member and all members that in each and every of my most 
recent conversations with the Prime Minister of Canada and the 
newly elected Government of Canada, I have been talking to 
them about the issues that are facing the producers of 
Saskatchewan this spring. And this comes, Mr. Speaker, as we 
all know, after four years of drought, a year of frost, a year of 
crop decimation last year that we saw the rain in harvest period. 
 
I want to assure that member that in speaking to my own family 
members who are today producers and farming, I’ve heard their 
concerns. But I look forward to the opportunity this afternoon to 
meet with the group who are here. We’ll find an opportunity. I 
may have some other obligations we’re going to have to mix 
around. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to meet with these 
women, these farm families, these producers, because this is 
known to Saskatchewan people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s understand this: we need solutions from 
the national government. We need solutions from the national 
government and we need the support of this opposition in 
getting those solutions just as we look to build that coalition of 
farm groups and producers so that we have a unified voice in 
the nation’s capital, Mr. Speaker. You cannot expect these 
producers to solve the problems without the support of the 
nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the Ag minister said he wants to deal with facts. Well 
let’s deal with the facts. In 1991 that government cancelled the 
GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program. And if they 
hadn’t done that, probably these ladies wouldn’t have to be here 
today because it would have dealt with the crisis going on in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the premier of the day said 
that he would replace it. Well here we are. We’ve got the CAIS 
program, a program that this government wouldn’t come to the 
table and help design because they didn’t want to put any 
money in. And again ladies like this have to come to the 
legislature to bring their issues to the forefront because they’re 
going broke out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister wants to deal with fact . . . He said, 
we will come to the table. What does he mean by that? Does 
that mean that he’ll come to the table and help these ladies, and 
help these farm families in the Porcupine area with disaster 
relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again 
we’re getting a reality check here, Mr. Speaker, because the 
problem, the problem is not again just found here. It is a 
problem that spreads across the nation, where farmers all across 
the nation are facing a difficult period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the GRIP program, yes in fact it was 
cancelled here. But you know what? It was cancelled all across 
the country. Why? Because it was unaffordable, Mr. Speaker, 
all across the country. That’s the fact. You know it. You take a 
look at the history and you’ll understand, Mr. Speaker, that it 
was completely unaffordable. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we can say clearly that this province has 
come to the table far more than any other province. The people 
of this province, the people of this province have supported — 
at $700 million last year, Mr. Speaker, 1.32 billion over the last 
two years, Mr. Speaker — far more than any province on a per 
capita basis, and we’ll be there again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s deal with a few 
more facts. These ladies are the bookkeepers. They have to try 
and balance the books on the farm to try and get that farm from 
this point till this fall, and it’s almost an impossibility. They’re 
also homemakers; they have to look after the family. They’re 
equal partners in the farm, and they’re here today asking for 
your help. And so far I haven’t heard one positive word for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has this government done to help these 



April 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

farmers? Well they cut spot loss hail. They cut fuel rebates. And 
crop insurance — what have they done in the last few years? 
Well they’ve raised premiums about 70-some per cent, and they 
cut coverage at the same time. Mr. Speaker, harvesting the 
crops out there was something that Crop Insurance made them 
do and cause the ruts that are in the field and maybe prevent 
them from actually seeding a crop this spring. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government has a number of things that 
they could help these people with, and so far we haven’t saw 
any sign of that. Mr. Speaker, these people are here today 
calling out for help. Will this government look at them and 
show some compassion and give them something to be 
optimistic about this spring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 
important to speak about the facts and what this government has 
done and will continue to do, Mr. Speaker. This year we put an 
additional $52.8 million in to provide relief for farmers and 
farm families. Why? Because we knew, Mr. Speaker, that they 
needed that relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the situation with crop 
insurance and the people in the northeast of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, do you know some of the helpful MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] from the other side and the helpful 
MP [Member of Parliament] from the Conservative government 
were out there telling people — believe this or not — that they 
had to use their 450,000 or $300,000 combines or whatever 
their particular combines cost to go and harvest a crop? You 
have to do it or you won’t get crop insurance, they said. Guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? That’s not the fact. That’s not the fact. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they can look to themselves, they 
can look to themselves . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members, members, order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Humboldt. 
 

Funding for Hospital Construction 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, because of the NDP 
mismanagement and bungling, the people of Humboldt have 
been waiting nearly 20 years for their new hospital. They put 
the last number of years to good use and they’ve raised $8 
million. But now, because nothing has been done by the NDP to 
start the project, the cost has increased from 19 million to an 
astounding 33 million. Absurdly the NDP are giving the people 
of my constituency 40 days to raise an extra $5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: why are the people of 
Humboldt being put on the spot because of the NDP’s delays 
and total incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Humboldt project is, as announced, proceeding on schedule, 
Mr. Speaker. The Humboldt project is one of several capital 
projects that have been approved and funded recently. And in 
fact a number of capital projects will be supported in the budget 
later this week, Mr. Speaker, for planning and for completion of 
the capital requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt costs have increased across this 
province — capital projects, whether it’s health or education or 
highways or putting a garage in your own backyard, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan’s share of the costs of the Humboldt 
hospital have increased as well, Mr. Speaker. This project will 
proceed and, Mr. Speaker, if those final dollars are in this 
budget, I ask the member opposite to support . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s taken year 
after year after year to get this project on the go and it still isn’t, 
but they’re giving the community 40 days to come up with $5 
million. The new Humboldt hospital will serve people from a 
wide area, yet the current NDP funding formula makes the false 
assumption that the local people will be the only ones using it, 
so they should pay 35 per cent of the costs. People in major 
cities don’t have to pay because the province picks up 100 per 
cent of the cost of major facilities. 
 
The only way the city of Humboldt and the towns and villages 
surrounding it and the rural municipalities have to raise this 
kind of money is to raise the taxes. This is nothing short of a 
rural health tax. Mr. Speaker, why is the funding formula set up 
to penalize the community of Humboldt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
capital share cost of community projects has been in place since 
the early 1990s, Mr. Speaker. Many projects across this 
province have been supported by the 65/35 share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, the province, working with communities, 
have developed a planning process that ensures that the 
community involvement in the planning process is significant. 
Mr. Speaker, the planning process in Humboldt has followed 
the planning process for many projects across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask the member opposite, of course, if the project’s final 
dollars are included in this budget, will she support the budget, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2006 

Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Humboldt community came up 
with their $8 million that was agreed upon, and it’s because of 
this government’s bungling and delays that they’re required to 
come up with an additional 5 million in 40 days. 
 
Recently the Deputy Premier urged the people of Weyburn to 
elect a government member because, according to the member 
of Yorkton, government MLAs get things done more quickly. 
So the question to the Health minister is this: are the people of 
Humboldt being penalized? Are they having to wait for their 
new hospital because of an NDP vendetta because they did not 
elect an NDP member? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course the province is picking up its increased share of the costs 
of the Humboldt project. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing I’d 
like better than to see a New Democratic Party member in the 
constituency of Humboldt. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to work 
with what the people give us. And, Mr. Speaker, the community 
of Humboldt is still very much respected by this government. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will complete that project with the input 
of the good people of Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage the member opposite to look closely 
at the budget on Thursday, and support it when the time comes 
to vote on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP’s first news release announcing improvements to the 
Preeceville Hospital came out on August 16, 1999. Over the last 
seven years, Mr. Speaker, there have been other news releases, 
all confirming the government support of the expansion of the 
Preeceville Hospital. 
 
The original cost of the hospital was pegged at 4.5 million and 
the community’s share was 1.6 million. Now the NDP 
government is telling the people of this community that they 
have to come up with a total of 3.5 million because the cost of 
the hospital has doubled to 9.9 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government now asking the 
community to come up with more than double what they were 
originally asked for, and what time frame will they have to 
produce this money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again the Preeceville project is proceeding according to the plan 
for the project, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very encouraged by the 
development of this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite is very much aware 
that over the last couple of years we’ve seen significant 
increases in the cost of capital projects — everything from 
highways and schools, Mr. Speaker, to a garage in the 
member’s own backyard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these costs have increased, the policy has been 
65/35 and, Mr. Speaker, the province is making up its increased 
share according to the policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, under the current cost-sharing 
formula, smaller communities are responsible for 35 per cent of 
the cost of a new health care facility. From a press release dated 
August 16, ’99, the then minister of Health, member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, was pleased to announce the $4.5 million 
project. From a press release on September 19, 2003, the 
government says, “Facilities of this type typically cost $6 
million.” I read from a press release of this government of 
October 6, 2005 that says, “Projects of this nature generally cost 
between 8 and $10 million.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you see what procrastination has done? It has 
meant that the people of Preeceville and area have to come up 
with $1.9 million more than they would have, than what they 
have sitting in the bank right now ready to do this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Health minister consider amending the 
cost-sharing formula so that the people in rural Saskatchewan 
aren’t left behind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite realizes, of course, that the more 
dollars that are put forward for any one particular project may 
mean fewer dollars for other projects not yet approved, Mr. 
Speaker. And rural Saskatchewan has indicated to us very 
clearly that there is a great need for projects throughout the 
province. And since 1994, Mr. Speaker, communities have 
funded 35 per cent of the costs, the capital costs of these 
projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Preeceville project is a very good project for 
the community and a very good project for the province. Mr. 
Speaker, the community planning process with the members of 
the community has helped to reduce the costs of that project, 
Mr. Speaker, and we believe that that project is going to come 
in at a cost that is reasonable for the people of the Preeceville 
area. 



April 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Population Statistics and Policies 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is still more 
evidence today of how the NDP is squandering this province’s 
future. Statistics Canada has released a further breakdown of 
our population figures in Saskatchewan. They show that the 
NDP is driving young people out of this province at an alarming 
rate. 
 
Last year Saskatchewan lost nearly 4,600 people to 
out-migration. Well over half of that number, Mr. Speaker, over 
2,500 were between the ages of 15 and 29 years old. That of 
course is the province’s future that this NDP government is 
squandering with its backwards economic policies. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: will he stand in his place 
and justify how his NDP government is driving young people 
from the province in the middle of an oil boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was at a luncheon 
meeting sponsored by the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority at noon, and so were several of the 
members of the opposition. 
 
And I’m surprised that they did not take the time to inform the 
Leader of the Opposition that in fact what was stated at that 
meeting by Mr. Mario Lefebvre of the Conference Board of 
Canada was this, Mr. Speaker. He said that in the last several 
years the rate of out-migration — albeit still negative, and we’re 
working on that, Mr. Speaker — was not as bad as it had been 
in years previous and that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat what I was saying 
because the opposition was yelling so loudly. They never want 
to hear the answer or the truth, Mr. Speaker. They only want to 
yell and scream. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. What Mr. Lefebvre said 
was that the rate of out-migration had been improving in 
Saskatchewan. He said that we had had good economic growth 
in the city of Regina for the last eight years. He also said that 
these things did not happen by accident. We are moving in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder why the 

business community, the co-operative and the private sector in 
this province has no confidence in that government? Did you 
hear what the minister just said? He just got up and justified the 
worst out-migration record in the Dominion of Canada by 
saying, well we’re not doing as bad as we used to do, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the justification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, imagine the Roughriders saying at an annual 
general meeting, well we’re not losing as badly as we used to 
lose, Mr. Speaker. It wouldn’t be acceptable from the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. It most assuredly is not acceptable 
from a tired, old NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we are losing the working age 
people of this province. Our demographics are such that we 
have a number of seniors in Saskatchewan — that’s a welcome 
thing — we have a number of people under 20. But there’s a 
big hole in the middle. It’s a demographic doughnut and this 
government offers nothing but well I guess it could be worse. 
 
Does the Premier have something more of a plan than that? 
What is his plan to attract and keep young people here in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, most fair-minded 
people in this province know that this government has a plan. 
We released the economic action plan last year, Mr. Speaker, 
with 81 specific points. 
 
We have reformed the oil and gas royalties. We have reformed 
the mining taxation system. We have reformed the personal 
income taxes. And I have every confidence that two days from 
now, my colleague, the Minister of Finance, will bring forth a 
plan for even more growth and opportunity in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would contrast our record with this, Mr. Speaker. What is 
his plan? He says he has two ideas. One, if he became Premier 
— which he won’t — he would appoint a committee to advise 
him what . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, they do not want to hear the 
answer. They want to shout me down, Mr. Speaker, because 
they do not want the people of the province to know that the 
Leader of the Opposition has no plan and no credibility, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2006 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government, I’ll be tabling 
responses to written questions 673 to 703. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 673 to 703 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Business Names Registration 
Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments 
will improve the business names registration system in a 
manner that will benefit the public and business and agricultural 
communities in Saskatchewan. The amendments will expand 
the scope of the Act to include Indian bands and limited 
partnerships as entities that can register business names under 
the Act. 
 
In addition the amendments will enable Saskatchewan 
agricultural producers to protect the goodwill associated with a 
business name. The amendments will also assist professionals 
who wish to obtain exclusive use of a business name that does 
not contain the name of a professional. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Business Names Registration Act serves two 
primary objectives. One is to enable the public to know who it 
is that they are dealing with when they conduct business. The 
other is to enable businesses to maintain exclusive use of a 
business name through registration under the Act. 
 
The provisions of the Act are currently not broad enough to 
accommodate all those who reasonably wish to register a 
business name. This has created frustration for entities such as 
limited partnerships and Indian bands who wish to register 
business names under the Act. The amendments include a new 
definition of the term person which will expand the scope of the 
Act to accommodate registration by Indian bands and limited 
partnerships. 
 
The amendment’s parallel provisions contained in The 
Partnership Act, 2006 currently before the legislature then 
enable Indian bands and limited partnerships to become 
partners within the meaning of that Act. As a result of these 
amendments, Indian bands and limited partnerships will be able 
to register a business name under the Act and protect the 
goodwill associated with that name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a further change made by this Bill, two 
categories of exemptions are impacted. The first is the 
exemption for entities whose sole business is the primary 

production of agricultural products. This exemption was 
enacted in 1987 with a view to saving agricultural producers the 
cost of registration under the Act. However since that time, 
there have been developments that would suggest this 
exemption is no longer appropriate. Mr. Speaker, it should be 
remembered that there is no prohibition against such 
registration, just an exemption from mandatory registration. 
 
Accordingly agricultural producers who do register a business 
name under the Act have found that they are powerless to 
prevent others from using identical or similar names, thereby 
causing confusion and potential business losses. 
 
The amendments will repeal the exemption for agricultural 
producers, allowing them to protect the exclusive use of their 
business name. This will put agricultural businesses on an equal 
footing with other businesses in the province, when modest 
filing requirements will allow those producers who choose to 
operate under a business name to protect the exclusive use of 
that name in the same manner as other businesses in the 
province. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should also be noted that there is nothing in this 
legislation that will require the vast majority of our agricultural 
producers to register under the Act. However where a producer 
decides to use a business name, the Act will now enable the 
producer to protect the goodwill associated with the business 
name. 
 
The other exemption that has created difficulties in the recent 
past is the exemption of professionals. The vast majority of 
professionals in the province practise their professions under 
their own family or surnames or the names of others who are or 
were associated with the practice. Most of these professionals 
have not registered under the Act. However problems have 
arisen where professionals use generic or geographical names 
under which to carry on business. The exemption has meant that 
professionals who do register such business names have not 
been able to safeguard exclusive use of the name. As a result, it 
has been possible for others to create confusion in the 
marketplace and potential loss of business through the use of 
identical or similar names. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will leave the 
exemption in place for professionals who practise under their 
own surname or the surnames of others who are or have been 
associated with the firm. No problems have arisen with respect 
to such businesses, and the public’s interest in knowing who 
they are dealing with will not be compromised by continuing 
the partial exemption, as it will only apply where the right to 
practise a profession is regulated by Saskatchewan legislation. 
 
Anyone with concerns regarding a professional business can 
contact the professional association for information regarding 
the identity and standing of the professionals involved in the 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments also contain some 
provisions of housekeeping nature. The registration of business 
names will not expire until the end of the month in which the 
third anniversary of the registration occurs. Applications made 



April 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

by individuals who are not residents in the province will be 
required of a power of attorney in Saskatchewan. In addition 
there are new notice and service provisions regarding the 
cancellation of registrations under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments respond to concerns expressed 
to us by the agricultural and business communities in 
Saskatchewan. I believe they respond to these concerns in the 
manner that will allow Saskatchewan businesses to protect the 
goodwill associated with the exclusive use of their business 
names. In addition they will protect the public interest in 
knowing who it is that they are dealing with when conducting 
business in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Business Names Registration Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 47, An Act to amend The Business Names 
Registration Act. Mr. Speaker, as I understand the Bill 
introduces a number of amendments on how business names are 
registered and makes changes to the definition of a business 
name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister pointed out, some of the major 
points are changes affecting Indian bands and limited 
partnerships. And, Mr. Speaker, it amends the definition of a 
business name to include Indian bands as a sole proprietor. 
Currently Indian bands do not fit within the category of entities 
which are entitled to register a business name. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, subsequent clauses of the Act are amended to reflect 
this change and also define the term persons to included limited 
partnerships. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, changes to the business name registration 
which states new subsections in the Act will mean that 
professions regulated by a governing body under an Act of the 
legislature will only be able to carry on a business name which 
incorporates the family name of a professional who is or once 
was associated with business. 
 
Also, new amendments, Mr. Speaker, also means that the 
agriculture producers will be allowed the same rights as other 
business to protect the exclusive use of their business name. 
Currently agriculture producers are exempt for this protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also speaks to . . . business name registrations 
will now expire at the end of a month after three years rather 
than on the three-year anniversary from the date of registration. 
Cancellation of business registrations also are included in a new 
section of the Act, outlines when a registration may be 
cancelled by the register. It also specifies mailing requirements 
for notices to be sent to registrants. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, offences and penalties, the provision 
requiring consent or a direction of the Minister of Justice prior 

to instituting enforcement proceedings is repealed, and this 
brings the Act into the line with other legislation in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it brings up a number of areas of how these 
changes affect in particular Indian bands and agriculture 
producers. There’s a number of areas around that concern 
Indian bands as far as taking out mortgages, doing commercial 
ventures, putting land or property up for collateral. And we’re 
going to have to look into this and speak to all the stakeholders 
concerned to see if this Bill has any effect on that, or hopefully 
a positive effect on that to allow business ventures, and really a 
smoother transaction or a smoother way of working with 
financial institutions so that Indian bands and individual First 
Nations people are able to take out loans for items as far as 
buying, purchasing personal homes or vehicles or also going 
into business themselves and able to put up pieces of property 
as collateral in order to get a loan from a banking institution. 
 
Also the other, the point that this Act may also include is 
concerning agriculture producers in areas around the homestead 
rights, and also, as with First Nations people, the ability to put 
pieces of property up — land and chattels up — for collateral in 
order to obtain loans to help with their ongoing business and to 
help out far as operating loans and mortgages and those types of 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll certainly be looking at this Bill with interest. We’ll be 
speaking to the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. And at this time, I’d 
like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 47 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of the policy field committees on Human Services, as well 
as on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:37.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................970 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................970 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................970 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................970 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................970 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................970 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................970 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................971 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................972 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Association for Community Living Holds Spring Fling Fundraiser 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Melfort Midget Mustangs Win Provincial Hockey Championship 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................973 
 Equipment Donated to Cochrane’s Practical and Applied Arts Program 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................973 
 Eatonia Student Wins Provincial Poster Contest 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................973 
 Campaign to Raise Public Awareness of Current Farm Crisis 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................974 
 Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology’s Waiting List Management Fees 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................974 
 Community and Corporate Initiative Raises $10,000 for the Northwest Health Facility 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................974 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support For Agriculture 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................975 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................975 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................976 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................976 
 Funding for Hospital Construction 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................978 
 Population Statistics and Policies 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................979 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................980 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................980 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................980 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................981 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




