
















































Hansard: November 27, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 19A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 573 
 November 27, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present today to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today in regards to the drug Avastin, and I 
will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitions today are signed by the good folks of the 
communities of Grenfell, Wolseley, and Sintaluta. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents that belong to 
my colleague and other of my colleagues around the province 
concerning the dialysis unit request for the Broadview Union 
Hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, today’s three pages of petitions are 
signed by individuals from the communities of Regina, 
Broadview, Cowessess, Humboldt, Fleming, Saskatchewan; and 
Regina. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 

Wynyard, and Kuroki. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a 
petition from harrowed drivers over the narrow Highway No. 5. 
Madam Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Bruno, Saskatoon, and Rosetown, as well as 
Kelvington. And I am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of 
provincial government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals 
all from the community of Carnduff. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to present a petition on 
behalf of constituents who are very concerned with this 
government’s addiction to gravel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22, 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Madam Deputy Speaker, come from 
the communities of Earl Grey and Southey. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you Madam Deputy Speaker. Again I 
rise today with petitions of citizens that are concerned of the 
safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And to demonstrate what an important east-west corridor that 
this is for our province, the signatures, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
are from Foam Lake; Cudworth; Saskatoon; Blaine Lake; 
Melfort; Naicam; Humboldt; Bruno; Preeceville; Muenster; 
Watson; Clavet; Englefeld; Airdrie, Alberta; Calgary, Alberta; 
Edmonton, Alberta; and Renver, Manitoba. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are very concerned about this government’s two tiered 
health system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is signed by citizens of 
Carievale, Lampman, Carnduff, and Glen Ewen. I so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to introduce another petition from the citizens of 
Wilkie who are concerned about their reduction of health care 
services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain, at the very least, their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to present another petition on behalf of the 600 
children under six years old and their parents that live in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon needing a much-needed 
elementary school in that area. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build an elementary school 
in Arbor Creek. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

The petitioners today come from Chotem Crescent, Peters 
Cove, and Kenderdine Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the health care system. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Wolseley, 
Broadview, and Grenfell. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a petition 
here with citizens calling on that Highway 15 from the junction 
from Highway 11 east to junction of Highway No. 2 to be 
repaired and resurfaced: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of Highway 
15 be repaired and resurfaced immediately to remove the 
safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this vital road 
for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Davidson, Bladworth, and Semans. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have 
a petition today from citizens concerned with the government’s 
failure to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular petition is signed by 
citizens from the towns of both Wilcox and the city of Regina. I 
so present. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This 
petition is that this is the first time in the province’s history that 
the government has denied coverage of a cancer drug 
recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today with a 
petition regarding the widening of Highway No. 5, a highway 
which passes through my constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. 
I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon, Quill Lake, Humboldt, and among them they 
include a former NDP [New Democratic Party] MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] candidate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I have another petition urging this government 
to fix Highway 36. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good 
people of Coronach. And I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
have a petition to present on behalf of constituents from 
Carnduff. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitioners, Madam Deputy Speaker, come from the 

communities of Carnduff, Carievale, and Gainsborough. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition today on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who 
are very concerned about the future of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 

 
Madam Speaker, I proudly present this petition on behalf of 
various Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I too am pleased to be able to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are very 
concerned about the future of the Canadian Wheat Board. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the 
last sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are 
hereby read and received. 
 
[13:45] 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: in the 
Kindersley area, is SaskPower conducting conversion of 
oil wells from natural gas to electricity? And, if so, is there 
an associated fee and what is that fee? 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Rec: which persons 
or companies received contracts from the department to 
provide advertising or marketing research services for the 
fiscal year 2006-2007? 

 
I have a similar question back to year 2001-2002. 
 
I have a written question. I shall on day no. 24 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: what 
was the total number of dollars received by each 
advertising or marketing research firm contracted for 
services for the fiscal year 2006-2007, back to the year 
2001-2002? 

 
And my last question. I give notice I shall on day no. 24 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Rec: how many 
firms submitted a proposal the last time the department’s 
advertising contract was tendered? 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: for the 
following land description, the northwest quarter of 18-2-8 
west of the second, when was the fence completed? Was 
the project tendered and, if so, who won the contract and 
what was the cost of materials and labour? And 
furthermore were the labour and material paid for 
separately? 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: which person or companies received 
contracts from Executive Council to provide advertising or 
marketing research for the year 2006? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2005 and 2004. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I further give notice that I shall on day 
no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: what is the criteria used by Executive 
Council when choosing a tender for advertising and/or 
marketing research services? 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I further give notice that I shall on day 
no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: what was the total number of dollars 
Executive Council spent on advertising and marketing 
research services for the year 2006? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2005 and 2004. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have 
a number of questions to present today. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 24 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the number of 
long-term care beds in the Keewatin Yatthé Region for the 
years 2002, 2003? 

 
I have similar questions for the following years up to 
2005-2006. And I also have questions regarding this very same 
thing regarding the Kelsey Trail Health Authority as well as 
Sun Country Health Authority for the respective years. 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government 
the following questions: 
 

How many people are currently waiting or on the waiting 
list for long-term care in the Cypress Health Region? 
 

I have the similar question for all the health regions in the 
province, be it Five Hills, Saskatoon, or Kelsey Trail. 
 
I so present. And while I’m on my feet, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I also have questions to the Minister of Health. I give 
notice that shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: when did the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency submit a proposal to Sask Health for a 
provincial colorectal screening program? 
 

I have a number of questions regarding the colorectal screening 
program that the minister has mused about that we have raised 
in this House. I have a number of questions regarding that and 
so, Madam Deputy Speaker, instead of reading all the . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well I certainly can read all the 
questions if that’s what it would take, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 
I shall give notice to the government that on day 24 I shall ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: has the government funded a 
study to determine the benefits of a provincial colorectal 
screening program? 
 

I shall give notice on day no. 24 that I shall ask the government 
the following question: 
 

When does the government intend to implement the 
recommendations from the Canadian Cancer Society on a 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

provincial colorectal screening program? 
 

I shall give notice that on day no. 24 I should ask the 
government the following question: 
 

When did the Canadian Cancer Society ask the 
government to consider a colorectal screening program? 
 

I shall give notice on day no. 24 and ask the government the 
following question: 
 

Who are the members of the expert panel that is 
examining how a colorectal cancer screening program 
would work? 
 

I shall give notice on day no. 24 and ask the government the 
following question: 
 

What is the mandate of the expert panel that is examining 
how a colorectal cancer screening program would work? 
 

I shall give notice on day no. 24, ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many times has the expert 
panel that is examining how a colorectal screening 
program would work, have they met? 
 

I shall give notice on day no. 24, ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: can you please provide a copy 
of the minutes from all the meetings held by the expert 
panel that is examining how a colorectal cancer screening 
program would work? 
 

And I give notice that on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: when is the expert panel that is 
examining how a colorectal screening program would 
work expected to release its findings? 
 

Those are the questions that I have on the colorectal program. 
And I’m glad that the members are starting to listen now 
because I certainly have a number of other questions that if they 
so choose, I could read through. 
 
And the question is: and I shall give notice that day no. 24 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the total number of 
acute care beds occupied by patients that were waiting for 
placement in a long-term care facility in Cypress Hills 
region for the years 2002-2003 following through to the 
year 2004-2005, 2005-2006? 
 

But not only for that health authority. I have the same questions 
for each and every health authority for those same respective 
years. And I’m glad the government is listening now. I so 
present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: does the federal government’s 
decision to allow seniors couples to split income for the 
purposes of calculating federal income tax affect 
provincial income taxes in any way? If so, how? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: does the provincial 
government intend to allow seniors couples to split 
pension income for the purposes of calculating their 
provincial income tax? If not, what problems will this 
cause in terms of tax filing for the Saskatchewan seniors 
as Saskatchewan income tax is currently based on the 
federal rules for calculating taxable income? 
 

Another question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much would it cost the 
Saskatchewan government to allow seniors couples to split 
income in the calculation of Saskatchewan income tax? 
 

Again a further question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much would it cost the 
Saskatchewan government to allow senior couples to split 
all of their taxable income in the calculation of 
Saskatchewan income tax? 
 

And one final question, Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much would it cost the 
Saskatchewan government to allow income splitting for all 
Saskatchewan couples for the purposes of calculating 
provincial income tax? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Today we’re joined in the Speaker’s gallery with 19 
members of the public service in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They come from departments of Advanced Education and 
Employment; Agriculture and Food; Community Resources; 
Corrections and Public Safety; Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
Environment; Health; Learning; and the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they’re here for the day. They’ve had 
a chance, as I understand it, to tour the building. They’ve gotten 
some historic information about the legislature. They’ve been to 
the Legislative Library. They’re going to meet with the member 
of the opposition and myself about the public service. As well, 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

they’ll be meeting with the Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, included in this group is Reiko 
Nakatsuchi, who is a international student from Japan who’s 
presently doing a Master of Public Administration at the 
University of Regina, and she is here as a intern to the deputy 
minister of Advanced Education and Employment, Bonnie 
Durnford. And Reiko has been to my office many, many times 
and I know that she really is enjoying her time in Canada and 
plans to return with all of her skills to Japan. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these 
public servants to our Assembly and in particular welcome 
Reiko to Saskatchewan and our Assembly. Thank you very 
much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
also join with the members opposite in welcoming the civil 
servants to the House today. It’s, I think, a valuable process for 
them to come through the legislature and to see the operation of 
the legislature, in the same fashion it will be for members to 
enjoy working with these people through the rest of the year. 
Having the people come here, they get a sense of what goes on 
here and what our needs are. 
 
I look forward to meeting with those individuals later on in the 
afternoon. I want to welcome them to what is their legislature 
and would like to also join with the minister opposite in 
welcoming Reiko as well. Thank you, Madam. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Vanier Cup in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Well last 
week, Saskatoon was shining and so was the entire province. 
And it wasn’t just the sunny day that many of us enjoyed at 
Griffiths Stadium for the Vanier Cup; it was the entire week. 
The week that began with the coaches’ press conference when 
Coach Towriss and Coach Constantin talked a little bit about 
the football game coming up on Saturday. And then an amazing 
awards gala at TCU Place, Madam Deputy Speaker, that was 
very, very well attended, and where Teale Orban of the Regina 
Rams was nominated for the Hec Crichtonand Jordan Rempel 
of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Huskies was 
nominated for offensive lineman of the year. 
 
Later that night, it was Great Big Sea at the field house. I think 
3,500 people packed the field house and enjoyed a great night 
there. The next day, the Russ Jackson luncheon was held. And 
there were awards given out honouring volunteers, assistant 
coaches, the coach of the year and, of course, academic 
excellence amongst the CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] 

football players. And that night, the Road Hammers culminated 
another great night of entertainment at the field house. 
 
Then it was time for the big game on Saturday, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and while we all wish the result would have been a 
little bit differently, it was an amazing thing to see 12 to 13,000 
people enjoying the game. It was a little chilly there to be sure, 
but people enjoyed the warmth of the crowd. And it was a 
sunny day, and it was great football although, as I say, we wish 
the result would have been a little bit differently. 
 
So we do congratulate the Rouge et Or of Laval on their win. 
We congratulate the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
Huskies who against many, many odds got there in the first 
place. We congratulate them. To Hugh Vassos and the host 
team, the volunteers — hundreds of them — well done, you 
made Saskatchewan proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the Huskies 
football program is undoubtedly one of the strongest in 
Canadian interuniversity sport. Since 1989, the Huskies have 
been to the Vanier Cup nine times and have won the coveted 
national championship three times. So while it was a bitter day 
in Saskatoon on Saturday, both in terms of temperatures and in 
terms of the hopes of Saskatoon Huskie football players and 
fans, it was still a Vanier Cup for Huskies and for the people of 
Saskatchewan to be proud of. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, although the outcome on the field was 
not the one that we were all hoping for, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, this was a Vanier Cup to be remembered. This was the 
first Vanier Cup held outside the province of Ontario, and it 
was the first Vanier Cup that had been sold out with nearly 
13,000 football fans coming out to battle the minus 23, 25 
degree for over five hours. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the entire weekend was filled with 
activities which gave this year’s Vanier Cup an amazing festival 
atmosphere. It also provided a unique opportunity for Huskie 
alumni to gather and celebrate in true Huskie football tradition 
and to cheer on the 2006 team. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 
thank the organizers and volunteers for this really outstanding 
Vanier Cup weekend. It was truly an amazing football weekend 
which could have only taken place in Saskatchewan. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating all the players and 
coaches of the 2006 Huskie football team on another great 
season. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Moosomin Moose Make a Million 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

Deputy Speaker, I believe the headline in the recent Moosomin 
Spectator says it all. It says, “Moose make it a million.” It goes 
on to say: 
 

The Moosomin Moose have done it again. For the fourth 
time, the Moose have taken to the ice and raised more 
money for the integrated health care facility than anyone 
would have thought possible. 
 
The 30-hour Moose Game held Nov. 3 and 4 raised 
$150,000, pushing the total raised directly through the four 
games to more than $655,000. 
 
Including the indirect fundraising . . . the Moose are being 
credited with raising $1 million for the integrated health 
care facility. 

 
[Former mayor of Moosomin] Mayor Don Bradley praised 
the Moose for their efforts, and also thanked surrounding 
communities for working together to make the new facility 
a reality. 
 

[14:00] 
 
He said: 

 
“The real winners in this thing are the people of the area.” 
. . . “It’s been a pleasure to work with the mayors and 
councils of our neighboring communities. [And] This 
wouldn’t have happened if we hadn’t sat down together 
and said, ‘let’s make . . . [it] work.’” 
 

And make it work, they have. The Moosomin integrated health 
care facility is currently under construction on the east side of 
Moosomin. The 85-bed integrated facility will replace 
Moosomin Union Hospital, Moosomin nursing home, and 
Eastern Saskatchewan Pioneer Lodge. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think a big hand of congratulations 
goes to the Moose, all the volunteers who participated in this 
tremendous fundraising event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Yorkton. 
 

Ukrainian Canadian Congress Honours 
Two Yorkton-Area Women 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, Ukrainian-Canadians have 
played a vital role in helping to build our country, build our 
province, and build our communities. The Saskatchewan 
provincial section of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress recently 
held its 12th annual Nation Building & Community 
Recognition Awards. 
 
People of Ukrainian descent have strong roots in the Yorkton 
region, and that’s why I’m happy to rise today to congratulate 
two of my constituents who have received awards — Evelyn 
Hull and Taisa Trischuk. 
 

Willowbrook’s Evelyn Hull, who works at the Yorkton 
Regional Health Care Centre, received a Leadership Award for 
her devotion to the preservation and development of Ukrainian 
culture. She co-founded the Willowbrook and district Veselka 
dance club and taught young students about pysanka, Ukrainian 
tradition in decorating eggs. She has been active in the parish 
council at St. Mary’s Ukrainian Catholic Church of Beaverdale. 
 
Yorkton’s Taisa Trischuk received the Youth Achievement 
Award. Her interests in Ukrainian and other forms of dance led 
her to travel around the world, including Brazil and Holland. 
She has also been active in the Red Cross, Kids Help Phone 
line, the Terry Fox Run, and she’s now a student of the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in congratulating the 
important contributions that Ukrainian descent have made here 
in Saskatchewan and to help me congratulate both Evelyn and 
Taisa for their achievements. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Weyburn Army Cadet Takes Part in 
Mont Blanc Expedition 

 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the army cadets have a long tradition in 
Weyburn, dating back to 1914. And this year one cadet added to 
the proud tradition of 2302 Weyburn Legion Cadet Corps. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this past September, 17-year-old 
Anthony Thompson of Weyburn took part in the annual Army 
Cadet international expedition. This year’s trek was the Tour du 
Mont Blanc, an eight-day hiking expedition around Mont 
Blanc, the highest peak in Western Europe. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Anthony’s trip took him first to 
Halifax, then to London, and then parts of Italy, Switzerland, 
and France. Anthony’s colleagues in the Army Cadets and 
indeed the people of Weyburn take pride in this 
accomplishment as Anthony was one of only 16 cadets across 
Canada who were selected for this trip, and the only cadet from 
Saskatchewan to take part — something which gives Anthony a 
lot of pride. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Anthony is a fifth-year cadet. Anthony 
was selected in part after he placed second provincially on this 
year’s National Star Certification exam. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, for a young man who had never been further east than 
Winnipeg, the Tour du Mont Blanc was certainly an incredible 
experience for Anthony. 
 
Anthony entered the cadets to learn more about the military. His 
experiences have led him to decide to continue on with a 
military career after he completes his education. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, on behalf of the people of Weyburn Big-Muddy, I 
offer my congratulations to Anthony on this worthy 
accomplishment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Alumni Crowning Achievement Award 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Elaine 
McNeil has distinguished herself in Saskatchewan through her 
commitment to education, her professional dedication, and her 
compassion for people around the world. For these reasons, she 
has recently been awarded an Alumni Crowning Achievement 
Award by the University of Regina. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Elaine began her career in 
international development as a volunteer nurse in Malawi, 
Africa. When she returned to Canada, she enrolled in the U of 
R’s [University of Regina] Faculty of Education where she 
earned both a bachelor’s and a master’s degree while raising 
five children with her husband, Will. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
Elaine eventually began working as an international project 
coordinator for SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology] and has worked tirelessly to raise the 
profile of international development. She has been instrumental 
in creating co-operative relationships between Canadian 
institutions and developing countries around the world. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Elaine and I go way back, as we are 
both alumni of St. Paul’s School of Nursing. We also share a 
passion for Africa, not only for its many social and political 
problems, but for its unique opportunities in partnership and 
friendship. In January, Elaine is off to Africa again to continue 
her work. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join 
with me in congratulating Elaine McNeil on her selection for an 
Alumni Crowning Achievement Award. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Cuts to Literacy Programs 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have repeatedly heard this NDP government take cheap shots at 
the Saskatchewan Party for federal cuts to literacy 
programming. We’ve heard the member from Regina 
Coronation Park talk about how these cuts to literacy amounted 
to the Saskatchewan Party standing against Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The member from Regina Walsh Acres has criticized these cuts, 
yet ironically she had her own problems reading the history of 
the new Coca-Cola. 
 
Even the Minister of Finance has accused the opposition of 
wanting to cut literacy programs, but the truth is, Mr. Speaker, 
cutting funds to literacy programs is an idea that belongs to him 
and him alone. The NDP has tried to gloss over their own 
hypocritical record of cuts to regional library services while 
pointing the finger at the federal government. The NDP 
government has downloaded the cost of maintaining these 
regional libraries and the service that they provide on our 

municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was this NDP government that cut $74,610 from 
the Chinook Regional Library, 83,888 from Lakeland, 34,327 
from Palliser, 37,942 from Parkland, 114,215 from Southeast, 
102,816 from Wapiti, and 101,156 from Wheatland. Mr. 
Speaker, once again we have another example where the 
members like to play the blame game, but when it comes to 
their own responsibilities, they’re all talk and no action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

 
Temporary Closures of Rural Hospitals 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Michelle Yaremchuk is a nurse in Endeavour who works at the 
Preeceville Hospital. Preeceville Hospital has been closed for 
the last three weeks. Well last week her son dislocated his hip 
while at school in Preeceville and was taken for a 30-minute 
drive by ambulance to Canora. The doctor in Canora wanted to 
admit her son for observation but had to send him home 
because all the beds were full because of the closures of the 
Preeceville and Kamsack hospitals. All the beds were full in 
Canora, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re hearing stories of that here in Regina. When there 
already is a bed shortage in Regina, some of these closures are 
affecting what the hospitals in Regina can do. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, when a hospital closes, the whole system is affected. 
 
You know, we mentioned an idea about a hospital hotline a 
couple of weeks ago thinking that as a joke it couldn’t be that 
bad. But unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, reality is out 
there. It is that bad. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, will the minister live up to the 
government’s promise to provide primary health care within a 
30-minute drive of residents in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And again I remind the member opposite, the media, 
and the members of the Saskatchewan public that indeed when 
Saskatchewan hospitals are closed in circumstances like this, 
these are temporary closures. They are temporary closures that 
have been called by the regional health authorities who have the 
responsibility for day-to-day operations of the health system. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, these closures are meant to 
ensure the safety and security of the patients within the region. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are a number of areas in 
Saskatchewan where physicians or nurses have been very 
difficult to recruit. We now have in place a recruitment agency, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to assist the regions in their 
recruitment efforts. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we also have 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

a locum program that’s in place, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
again assist regional health authorities to manage difficult 
situations like the ones in Preeceville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Our 
health care system is so fragile right now that even the 
temporary departure of a doctor to do some exams will shut 
down a hospital in rural Saskatchewan. The minister announced 
this morning about some initiative for foreign-trained doctors, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, but that would do nothing when it 
comes to recruiting teachers or faculty to train some of these 
foreign-trained doctors if they have trouble. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s no funding for more faculty for 
the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] College of Medicine. 
This is the only college of medicine in North America that was 
on a probationary licence just a few years ago because of lack 
of funding by this NDP government. Can the minister please 
explain how his announcement today of 115,000 is going to 
solve the problem that his government has put us in in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The member opposite is so busy looking for negative 
news that I’m surprised that he has found some positive news. 
We are very excited about the announcement today, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. This is very positive news and I’m glad the 
members opposite have recognized it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the step that was taken today, 
primarily by the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education 
and Employment, signed an agreement with the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to ensure that there is assistance 
provided to international medical graduates, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Fifty-three per cent of physicians in Saskatchewan are 
trained outside of Canada, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is a 
very important initiative for the people of Saskatchewan, to 
ensure that those internationally educated physicians are able to 
qualify to work in this province. Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
are very excited about this initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, people at the news 
conference today met his announcement with real mixed 
emotions. There were few details and certainly not enough 
money to address the issue that is facing Saskatchewan people 
across the province. 
 
Just like the nursing shortage, the Saskatchewan Party has 

called on this NDP government to address the problem and 
we’ve been saying the same thing regarding the doctor 
shortage. And finally, Madam Deputy Speaker, in an 
announcement today, they acknowledge that we’ve got a huge 
problem regarding rural Saskatchewan retaining physicians, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It only is after the Saskatchewan Party 
pulls this government kicking and screaming before they’ll start 
to address the issues. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the reality is is when a physician 
leaves in rural Saskatchewan, the hospital has to close. He talks 
about locums. That certainly isn’t enough to fill a demand in 
rural Saskatchewan. We’ve seen it in Canora, Preeceville, 
Kamsack, Spiritwood, Big River, Shellbrook, Bengough . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — . . . the question, please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Coronach, Vanguard — so many hospitals, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
When will the minister start following through with their 
commitment and guaranteeing health care within a 30-minute 
drive for Saskatchewan students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And again, every facility that the member opposite 
mentions was indeed a temporary closure managed for the 
safety and security of individuals within the system. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, the members opposite continually 
argue that this is a problem that can be solved instantaneously; 
that, with a snap of our fingers, we can have more doctors 
working within this province. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that is certainly not the case and it does require an intensive 
approach towards recruitment and retention — something that 
we’ve been working on since 2001, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
with additional resources that we’ve been able to obtain because 
the provincial economy is doing better than it was previously. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is not a case that’s isolated to 
Saskatchewan. I pull a news article out of Alberta, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, where hospitals have temporarily closed in St. 
Albert and Grande Prairie, and in the capital health region of 
Edmonton where there are 300 shortages of doctors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we have been 
calling on this government to deal with this issue for eight 
years. It’s not just the last couple of days or the last couple of 
weeks with all these hospital closures. We’ve been calling on 
the government to deal with the RN [registered nurse] shortage, 
to deal with the doctor shortage for eight years. And finally, 
they’re starting to throw a little bit of money out which won’t 
even come close to addressing the real problem, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

[14:15] 
 
When we look at the next couple of weeks when more people 
are out on the highways because of the holiday season, when 
there’s an influx of people coming into this province to visit 
their family — all the people that have left this province — 
Madam Deputy Speaker, where there are highways are being 
taxed because of poor road conditions, there’s going to be a 
huge pressure on the hospital facilities throughout the province, 
not just in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Can the minister please tell this Assembly what other rural 
hospitals will be closing in Saskatchewan that the public of 
Saskatchewan should know about in the next few weeks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I think if we look at Hansard over the last little 
while, they’ve been talking about this for first four years, then 
five years, then seven years, and now today it’s eight years, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. We don’t know at all how long 
they’ve been talking about it, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 
they change their story every week. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Alberta Medical Association says 
they have a shortage of doctors and that the hospital closures in 
Alberta are going to continue because of a continuing shortage 
of doctors in the province of Alberta. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a Canada-wide challenge to the 
health care system to be able to ensure that there are enough 
professionals working within the system to keep all of the 
facilities open. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have put this year alone an extra 
300-plus millions of dollars into the health care system, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, 150 million of that for health care providers 
alone, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we’ve just heard from my colleague, the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone, talking about the domino 
effect that happens when rural hospitals close. 
 
And the minister’s talking about Alberta. Well they now have a 
population of over 3 million, and in my constituency, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we’re facing the same challenges. Broadview 
Hospital will be closed from December 11 to January 12. That’s 
over an entire month, Madam Deputy Speaker. And again it’s 
because of a lack of doctors. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, can the minister explain what he is 
doing to prevent the same thing from happening in my 
constituency as we see happening across rural Saskatchewan, 
and can he assure Saskatchewan people that they will not be 

facing overcrowded and overpressured hospitals this hospital 
season? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And indeed the Broadview situation is another one of 
those situations whereby it is recognized that it’s a doctor 
shortage but, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is indeed a unique 
situation in Broadview where the two physicians, the two 
physicians, Madam Deputy Speaker, in Broadview have 
indicated that they needed to be away for personal reasons at 
exactly the same period of time, Madam Deputy Speaker. Very 
unique circumstances, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
This has nothing to do in Broadview with a shortage of doctors. 
It has to do with the unique circumstances of the two physicians 
that are working within that particular facility. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, they have announced that they need to be away during 
this period of time preceding Christmas. Normally, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the locum program kicks in and assists with 
this. Madam Deputy Speaker, the locum program is overtaxed 
at the Christmas season. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that is indeed the problem. This government 
has not fulfilled its commitment to even have the locums 
available to address the needs when Broadview faces a situation 
of this nature. 
 
And maybe I need to refresh the Health minister’s memory on 
how many hospitals have had temporary closures or continue to 
remain closed. There has been Kamsack, Canora, Big River, 
Arcola, Spiritwood, Bengough, Coronach, Preeceville, 
Shellbrook, Central Butte, Vanguard, and now Broadview. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, how many more communities are 
facing this challenge? That’s quite a list, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, can the minister explain what specific 
steps he is taking to assure Saskatchewan families that rural 
hospitals will not be closed during this holiday season? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. As I had indicated earlier, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
have a number of programs that are specifically designed to 
assist regional health authorities in managing the professionals 
within their employ or with whom they have contracts. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of those programs is the locum 
program which the member opposite talked about. 
 
They ask me, how is it working for you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. They ask me, how’s it working? Well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the locum program is being used in the Broadview 
area. A locum has been secured to operate at the Broadview 
Hospital for part of the period of time whereby the two doctors 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

have indicated they will be away. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, additional nursing staff have been hired to help with 
diagnostics during this entire period of time. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, this is an important, important time for the people of 
Broadview and they need to continue to work with the regional 
health authority to ensure that those who need care are treated 
in a safe and secure manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re speaking of a 
whole month and there’s a locum for four days in that whole 
period. This government, Madam Deputy Speaker, made a 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan. It promised that every 
citizen would be able to access health care within 30 minutes of 
their home and now we are seeing this promise, like many 
others, vanish. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what this government doesn’t seem to 
understand is health care in rural Saskatchewan is failing. 
We’ve seen how the domino effect has played out in 
Canora-Pelly with overcrowded hospitals. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, can the minister guarantee 
Saskatchewan families that their hospitals will not be 
overcrowded because of closures, and then can he explain why 
he is going back on his government’s promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The member opposite, like his colleague, the critic for 
Health, is constantly looking for the negative news across the 
province. And indeed there are challenges, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that we are addressing, Madam Deputy Speaker, with 
all the resources we have available to us. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are other regional health 
authorities and other communities that are having great success, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in securing locums and in recruiting. 
Why, right here in my hand, Madam Deputy Speaker, from the 
Wadena News in early November, just a couple of weeks ago, 
what’s the headline? “Good news,” Madam Deputy Speaker, 
“Community elated about the recruitment of doctor.” 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the regional health authorities across 
this province this year alone have recruited an additional 140 
new doctors into this province, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
they put them to work. We still have challenges in various 
communities, Madam . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Cellular Service in Middle Lake Area 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Madam Deputy Speaker, last fall Alex 

Dobrohoczki, a Middle Lake area farmer, got trapped between 
his swather and his tractor. He was fortunate that someone 
driving down the highway noticed and stopped to help. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when the good Samaritan went to 
call 911, she couldn’t get a cell signal and had to drive some 
distance to the man’s farm to place the call — despite the fact 
that Middle Lake is right, smack in the middle of an area that is 
supposed to receive full cell service, that wasn’t the case. 
 
Following the incident, SaskTel said it was going to make 
improvements to this service. Madam Deputy Speaker, can the 
Minister Responsible for SaskTel tell this Assembly what has 
been done since the accident to improve cell service in the 
Middle Lake area? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, what I 
will say to the members opposite is that SaskTel has been 
expanding its cellular service to many areas of the province. We 
have wider coverage in the province of Saskatchewan than any 
other cell service deliverers. SaskTel cellular service is now 
available to 95 per cent of Saskatchewan’s population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel’s number one priority is to provide 
service, top quality service to the people of Saskatchewan and it 
will continue to do so, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Madam Deputy Speaker, that coverage might 
be 95 per cent on the map, but how about actual coverage? 
Middle Lake is home to a retirement community. Many seniors 
carry cellphones. School buses in the area were also recently 
ordered to purchase cellphones for improved safety in times of 
emergency. 
 
A couple of weeks ago there was an incredible snowstorm in 
the Middle Lake area. During that storm an elderly man got 
stranded but couldn’t get cell signal to call for help, and he 
ended up walking some distance with his cane to find help. A 
school bus also got stuck in the middle of the storm. It was the 
same sad story — no cell signal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Manitoba’s telephone system can provide cell 
service to coverage 97 per cent of the province, why can’t 
SaskTel do the same? Mr. Speaker, when will this government 
address the lack of cell service in and around the community of 
Middle Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we all know 
that SaskTel has the widest coverage in the . . . covering the 
province of Saskatchewan than any other cell service deliverer 
in Saskatchewan. Madam Deputy Speaker, priority one for 
SaskTel is to provide the best services at a competitive cost to 
the citizens of Saskatchewan, and we’ll continue to do that. 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

Madam Deputy Speaker, just the other day there was a report 
from J.D. Power and Associates that talked about SaskTel 
Mobility ranked highest . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m asking the member to come to 
order. The question has been placed by his colleague. Will you 
allow the minister now to respond. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the J.D. Power 
and Associates report rated SaskTel Mobility. It ranked highest 
in satisfying Canadian wireless service customers. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ll continue to provide good 
services to the people of Saskatchewan, providing expansion 
when and where possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Recruitment of Police Officers 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, on March 20 of this 
year the Justice minister said the promise made by his party in 
1999 to increase the number of police officers in Saskatchewan 
by 200 had been fulfilled. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, he 
was wrong then and he’s wrong now. 
 
The latest number from Statistics Canada’s police 
administration survey show that there are only 100 new police 
officers this year compared to 1999. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this NDP government is fond of 
broken promises and half measures. Why has this minister 
failed once again to deliver on this province to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker, the 
member opposite said at one point in discussion about how 
many police officers there were in this province that his caucus 
could not count to 200. And he delegated, he delegated this 
count to the Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers. He 
said that the minister should spend more time with them 
because they knew how many officers there were. I think the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast should check with the 
Federation of Police Officers. He will find that their position is 
that that promise has been kept, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I have checked with 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Police Officers. They tell me 
they don’t believe the promise has been kept either. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, in 1999 there were 1,930 police officers in 
Saskatchewan. That’s according to Statistics Canada. Today 
there are 2,030. Over the past year the net increase in officers 
was 19. This is an extremely poor performance on behalf of the 

Minister of Justice. Can he tell us when he plans to live up to 
that election promise of 1999 or will we simply assume that it 
will never be fulfilled, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Speaker, pre police promise in 
the year 1998 to 1999, which is the year that the members 
opposite like to start off with, 13 police officers were added by 
the province of Saskatchewan — 13 municipal police officers. 
By the end of 2006-2007, this fiscal year, the 200 police 
officers will have been added per the commitment — 54 
municipal, 136 to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], 
10 to safer communities and neighbourhoods. In addition 14 
police officers for gang suppression, 8 police officers for 
missing persons, 6 more drug enforcement officers under 
Project Hope for a total of 241 police officers, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s like an income 
and an expense statement. Some officers come in every year 
and some officers go out every year and you’ve got to look at 
the net number, not simply what you add. This is a promise that 
this Justice minister has failed to act on. A year after 
announcing more officers for the missing persons task force, 
there were still vacant spots. The minister expressed his 
frustration and disappointment, then the jobs were filled. 
Madam Speaker, why doesn’t this minister do his job, express 
his frustration and disappointment on this issue as well, then 
maybe we’ll get the 200 officers that were promised in 1999? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Madam Speaker, I did express 
my disappointment with the RCMP for not filling some of the 
missing persons positions — four of them — or the historic 
analyst positions, Madam Speaker. But since 1999, since 1999 
this government has increased funding for police services by 
more than $45 million. Before I communicate any 
disappointment on the part of the members opposite, I would 
like to know from the member from Saskatoon Southeast what 
he thinks the police are spending the $45 million on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my hope that the 
police services in this province are spending that money on 
salaries, police cars, training, and the things that they’re 
supposed to spend it on. But what that minister has to do is do 
an accurate count of the number of officers in this province. 
And I challenge him to stand in the House today and tell us the 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

number of police officers that were in this province in 1990, 
2000, or in any other year, what the full-time equivalents were. 
Because I’ll tell you, Madam Deputy Speaker, he is not capable 
of answering that question in any year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well well, Madam Speaker, the 
question’s been asked in estimates. I expect it might even be 
asked in estimates again. We’re quite capable of answering it. If 
I had time I could read the three- or four-page response that we 
sent to the Human Services Committee last time this question 
was asked, going detail year by year by year by year. The fact 
is, Madam Speaker, that the commitment has been more than 
completed. We are now in excess of 240 police officers added 
since 1999. These are officers that are doing important work — 
serious crimes, gang suppression, missing persons. And the 241 
officers did not include the five officers recently added by the 
provincial government in the area of child sexual exploitation, 
to the RCMP, to the municipal police forces. We are doing 
good work. We are doing focused work and we take crime 
seriously, unlike the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip, 
the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the 
government I would table responses to written questions no. 
119 to 149 inclusive. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The answers to written questions 119 
to 149 inclusive have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Infrastructure Fund Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
rise today and take part in the discussion on Bill No. 35, An Act 
to establish the Saskatchewan Infrastructure Fund. 
 
A number of my colleagues have already spoken on this Bill, 
and I had an opportunity to speak with the minister last week on 
the Bill. And although it was no surprise, it was very frustrating 
to learn that this government has introduced the Bill and has 
actually committed to spending amounts of $100 million and 

has yet to set the criteria of this fund. 
 
It has been said by many people in this House and outside the 
House that the $100 million is this government’s election slush 
fund. They’ll have an opportunity to go willy-nilly around the 
province and give the money out to whoever has applied for a 
proposal, but more importantly in an area where they believe 
they can win a seat or hold on to a seat. 
 
In a committee meeting the other night, I had the opportunity to 
ask the minister about the criteria, and he admitted that there 
was no criteria developed for this fund yet. We have $20 
million to be spent between now and the end of March, and 
there is no guidelines. There’s no form. There’s no application 
form ready to be sent out to people. There is no discussion on 
how the merits of a proposal will be determined. There’s no 
discussion on who will be on the board and how the 
commitment will actually be determined. 
 
The minister did acknowledge that they would entertain 
applications from people who had already started a project, in 
other words somebody who was pre-committed by spending 
some money on some infrastructure in their area before this 
fund was announced. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, we on this 
side of the House are always a little leery of accepting what this 
government has to say when we know very well that this is 
meant for one purpose and one purpose only, and that’s to 
ensure that they can give money out to communities who may 
ask for it, and there will be a photo op at the end of the day by a 
minister. 
 
One of the communities just on the border of my constituency is 
Tisdale. And last summer the Premier had an opportunity to 
attend a function out in Tisdale and made an announcement 
about his frustration that this community had applied for three 
different . . . had applied three different applications to . . . for 
funding for the town that had received no money. And so they 
had managed to come up with a cheque for that community, for 
Tisdale, the day the Premier was there. 
 
To me this was just an opportunity to ensure that when the 
Premier and this government goes out to a community they 
have a cheque to hand to them. So it makes them feel good even 
if it doesn’t particularly make the people who have worked hard 
to get the tax dollars into the hand of this government, maybe it 
doesn’t make them feel better. 
 
The $100 million was announced about the time that the $880 
million slush fund was announced. And it’s always a question 
on this side of the House as to how the government will 
determine how much money they’re going to throw into their 
slush fund or into their Infrastructure Fund. How do they 
determine how much money is required? 
 
The minister acknowledged that there was a huge shortfall in 
facilities in sports, recreation, and culture, and on this side of 
the House we’re quite aware of it. Most of us live in small 
communities where in 1967, or our centennial year, there was 
rinks built right across Saskatchewan when the province was 
actually booming and bustling and we had people in small 
communities. And I can tell you my hometown, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, now has a rink that is sitting empty. Not only is there 
not enough people to actually have the hockey teams that we 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2006 

need and the skating rinks . . . the people that need the skating 
facilities, but they can’t afford some of the infrastructure needs, 
the actual maintenance and upkeep of the building. 
 
The one thing that this, the government has not acknowledged 
in this, by this Bill is the high cost of SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy that has a huge impact on the feasibility and the 
sustainability of some of these rinks. We need to ensure that not 
only will the building be there but that the funds will be there to 
actually run it as well. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in my community we’ve had a number 
of places that have spent a lot of time and effort gaining money 
to build places like the swimming pool in Kelvington and in 
Porcupine Plain and in Wadena. The Foam Lake community 
hall, it was a tremendous amount of work went in a community 
effort to pay for these buildings, and they did it without any 
help from the government at all. They’re wondering why they 
put all their money into . . . the sweat and tears it took to build 
their infrastructure, and now the government has determined it’s 
okay to put taxpayers’ money into another community. 
 
There are issues in Saskatchewan that are affecting people. I 
don’t want to downplay the importance of sports and culture in 
Saskatchewan. We all know it is a vital part of making a full 
and whole community, but we have to ask what the 
government’s responsibility is. They are challenged and 
charged with the responsibility of spending the taxpayers’ 
dollars that come into this legislature, into this provincial 
government. And we know that the government’s responsibility 
first and foremost are health and education and infrastructure 
and a safety net. 
 
Everyday when we stand in the House and we look at the issues 
that are brought forward by the opposition — issues like health 
that we’ve talked about many times in the House, the education 
issues that are discussed — and there always appears to be not 
enough money for the basics that we need in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have other issues like cellular service; my colleague from 
Batoche talked about that today. And Batoche isn’t the only 
area that doesn’t have cell service. It’s important, not only for a 
business, but it’s important for safety and for ensuring that our 
young people have the same benefits as people right outside the 
province. 
 
We need more money for workers to deal with provincial 
disaster assistance. Some of my town still don’t have the 2005 
claims paid from the government, and there is still more needed 
for the 2006. 
 
We don’t have high-speed Internet in many parts of rural 
Saskatchewan. In fact I believe the Wheat Pool stepped up to 
the plate not too long ago and provided high-speed Internet to 
customers even though the government has decided that rural 
Saskatchewan doesn’t need it, that’s it’s not important. 
 
We have the highways, like Highway 310 and Highway 49, that 
are in terrible shape. And the government has spent some 
money on it this year, but we should add the weather conditions 
and the traffic has now taken the highways back to the shape 
they were in this spring. In fact many of the people living along 
these highways are saying — you know what? — the highway 

is going to be in as bad a shape if not worse next spring than it 
was this spring. 
 
The government doesn’t have funding for programs like Teen 
Challenge. It doesn’t have funding for brush removal, for flood 
prevention. It doesn’t have money for beaver control to prevent 
flooding. But now we have a government that’s decided they’re 
going to spend $100 million at their will to communities that 
apply in a form that as yet has not been laid out by the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been 38,000 people left the province in 
the last five years — 38,000 people since this Premier took 
power, in fact 17,000 in the last couple of years. These people 
are not going to come back again unless there is some real 
opportunity that shows that there’s some longevity in their life 
here in Saskatchewan. I know that the rinks and the cultural 
facilities are important, but there has to be an economic reason 
for them to come here. They have to have good paying jobs. 
They have to be able to ensure that their children will have a 
school to go to, that their community will have a health care 
centre, and that they can get to these facilities on decent roads. 
In our province our infrastructure is in tough shape, and the 
hospitals that are still open are in desperate need of personnel to 
ensure that the people receive the coverage or the health care 
that they need. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have to ensure that this 
government spends the money — this $100 million that they 
brought in through the hard work of taxpayers in this province 
— in a way that will benefit everybody in the province, not just 
the people that this government has determined should benefit. 
It’s not an opportunity . . . this is not government money to 
determine where it should be spent. This government should not 
be allowed to be picking winners and losers with this fund. This 
fund has to be . . . If the government has decided they’re going 
to spend $100 million, we have to be able to feel secure that it’s 
going to be given to everyone, that it’s not just going to be 
given to people in a community where there’s a chance that 
they can win the seat in the next . . . [inaudible] . . . election. 
 
We’ve heard this so many times when we’ve talked to people 
around the province. People are doubting it. They’re doubting 
how this government will actually spend the money. We have 
the mayors in communities right around Saskatchewan are 
saying, I doubt if we’re going to see it. I doubt if we’re going to 
see this money because — you know what? — the seats are 
probably as secure as any seats out here. The government isn’t 
going to win back farmers in rural Saskatchewan — rural 
Saskatchewan period — by introducing a $100 million fund to 
put up an arena. What they’re asking for is this government to 
give them a livelihood and a chance to ensure that 
Saskatchewan will grow and the potential will be there in the 
future. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of people that are 
wanting to talk to us about this issue. It’s one that we 
understand is a government priority, and for us we want to 
ensure that it’s something where all the people in Saskatchewan 
can benefit, where everybody’ll have the same opportunity. We 
want to see the criteria laid out. We want to see an application 
form. We want to know who’s going to be on the 
decision-making board. We want to know if . . . We want to be 



November 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

ensured that people who have pre-committed some facility will 
still have an opportunity. And as such, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader, the member from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to facilitate the good work of 
the Standing Committee on Human Services as well as the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
now moved the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:45.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................575 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................575 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................576 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................576 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................576 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................576 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................577 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................578 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Vanier Cup in Saskatoon 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................578 
 Moosomin Moose Make a Million 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................578 
 Ukrainian Canadian Congress Honours Two Yorkton-Area Women 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
 Weyburn Army Cadet Takes Part in Mont Blanc Expedition 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................579 
 Alumni Crowning Achievement Award 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 Cuts to Literacy Programs 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................580 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Temporary Closures of Rural Hospitals 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................580 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................580 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................582 
 Cellular Service in Middle Lake Area 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................583 
 Recruitment of Police Officers 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................584 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  The Deputy Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................585 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Infrastructure Fund Act 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


