


















































Hansard: May 03, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 52A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 3, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1491 
 May 3, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today to present a petition to this Assembly addressing 
some significant needs in the agriculture community and more 
specifically the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the provincial 
government work closely with the federal government to 
develop a simple and effective farm income assistance 
program that will adequately serve both Saskatchewan and 
Canadian agriculture producers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by the good folks 
of the communities of Sintaluta and Wolseley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the plight of agriculture and the concerns that they 
have going into this year’s spring seeding. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the provincial 
government works closely with the federal government to 
develop a simple and effective farm income assistance 
program that will adequately serve both Saskatchewan and 
Canadian agriculture producers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Summerberry and Wolseley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned that the 
government isn’t funding the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

The people who have signed this petition are from Tisdale, Star 
City, Arborfield, and Bjorkdale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today to do with the drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of funding 
for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition appears to be signed by individuals 
all from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding safer driving conditions on Highway No. 3. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and including the Livelong access 
road. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on these petitions are from a very wide-ranging 
area: Glaslyn, Livelong, Meadow Lake, Turtleford, 
Lloydminster, and Mervin. I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
deliver a petition regarding the deplorable situation of Highway 
No. 3 as it leads to the very popular Turtle Lake area. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access to No. 
795. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Livelong, 
Lashburn; Hobbema, Alberta; and Wetaskiwin, Alberta. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will come as no 
surprise that I again today have petitions about Highway No. 5. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, show how well travelled this 
highway is. They are from Meacham, Wadena; Calgary, 
Alberta; Regina, Saint-Front, Saskatoon; Edmonton, Alberta; 
Humboldt and La Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the deplorable 
state of Highway No. 3. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Spruce 
Lake, Turtleford, Saskatoon, and Livelong. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents of Meadow Lake concerning 
the condition of Highway No. 3. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
Signed by the good people of Spruce Lake, Turtleford, and 
Livelong. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

read a petition concerned with the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon 
and St. Louis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens opposed to possible reductions in services to the 
Davidson, Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Davidson and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too today rise 
with a petition that this is the first time in the province’s history 
that the government has denied coverage of a cancer drug 
recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding the funding of the drug Avastin. I will read a portion 
of the petition. It states that the Colorectal Cancer Association 
of Canada states that in combination with other treatments, 
Avastin is the standard of care for this disease. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 



May 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by concerned swing voters 
from the constituencies of Greystone and Eastview. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise on behalf of citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
government’s failure to address some of the concerns 
surrounding the autism spectrum disorder, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer is too lengthy to read but I just will read a 
couple of brief points from what the petitioners are asking for. 
They’re asking: 
 

That access be made to specialized equipment and supplies 
based on the need, and ensure that ASD adult services and 
supports are accessible and based on need rather than on 
IQ or physical disability. And also to encourage and 
support autism-related research in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to present this petition on behalf of 
citizens from Saskatoon. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 7, 13, 27, 64, 67, 638, 639, 
664, 669, and 738. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 57 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many grains and 
oilseeds producers have contacted Crop Insurance after the 
March 31 deadline in an effort to reinstate their coverage 
for 2006? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members a new staff member in my office, a 
summer student who’s joined me for the summer. She’s just a 
terrific, bright, hard-working young person. And I would like 
all the members to welcome Caitlin Cottrell, who is seated in 
your gallery. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to this 
Assembly I’m pleased to introduce in your gallery my son, 
Bradley Chisholm. Bradley is a former Saskatchewan Junior 
Citizen of the Year. He was also Saskatchewan’s representative 
to the United World College of the American West in 
Montezuma, New Mexico. Brad’s a graduate of McGill in 
economics and a recent graduate of law from the University of 
Calgary. Brad is supposed to be home seeding today but, as the 
weather was not conducive, Brad stopped in to see his dad at 
work. 
 
I’d like to ask that we all join to welcome Brad to what I hope 
will be his provincial Assembly some day. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all of my colleagues in the House I’d like to introduce 33 
grade 8 students from Porcupine Plain Composite High School 
and their teachers, Annette Legare, Heidi Moulton, and Doug 
King, and the chaperone, Don Watt. 
 
All these good-looking, enthusiastic, and obviously intelligent, 
very political people from Porcupine represent everybody. 
We’re all the same in northeast Saskatchewan. But I’d like to 
identify two individuals specifically and I know that there are 
three ministers that know their fathers. Wes Black’s daughter 
and Leo Howse’s daughter, could you stand. I want you to 
know that we are all very proud, not only of your fathers for the 
work that they’ve done with the flooding concerns in that area 
of the province, but for all of the work that they’re doing on 
behalf of farmers in this very desperate time. So thank you for 
coming. I look forward to talking to you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to welcome here today and introduce to you and through 
you 35 grade 10 students from the Melville Comprehensive 
School along with their teacher, Perry Ostapowich, who 
faithfully brings his classes in to the legislature to see the 
proceedings. Also chaperone O.J. Kozey. And I apologize to the 
bus driver, the lady at the back, but we also want to welcome 
her here today. 
 
And on behalf of myself and the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that some of the students live in, I ask all 
members to welcome them here today and hope they enjoy the 
proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

Battlefords Chamber of Commerce 
Business Excellence Awards 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had 
the pleasure last night of attending and participating in the 
Battlefords Chamber of Commerce 13th annual Business 
Excellence or BBEX Awards as the community honoured the 
best in the business sector. 
 
[13:45] 
 
In this, the Battlefords chamber’s 100th birthday year, the 
actual award was again designed and built by local and 
world-renowned master craftsman, Stan Wychopen. The 
sponsors of this wonderful event included BCU Financial, RBC 
Royal Bank, CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce], 
and the provincial Crowns — SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and Business of the Year 
sponsor, SaskTel. 
 
This year’s best included heritage winner, K & B Construction; 
community contribution winner, Sobey’s Ready to Serve; 
export achievement winner, Northwest Organic Community 
Mills; marketing winner, Battleford Furniture; new business 
venture winner, Kitchen Zone; customer service winner, 
Viewpoint Photographic Design; people’s choice winner, BCU 
Financial; and Business of the Year, Mr. Speaker, award for 
2006, Scott Campbell Dodge. 
 
The community thanks the chamber, its president, Rob Rongve, 
master of ceremonies David Dekker, and all those who made 
this a very special evening for these very special business 
people in the Battlefords. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination in  
Regina Wascana Plains 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must apologize 
about this member’s statement because it’s information we’ve 
heard before, and it’s information we’re going to hear again in 
the future. But I think it’s extremely important that it’s said 
again. 
 
Hundreds and hundreds of memberships sold, another packed 
hall, over 400 people in attendance, two great candidates 
delivering excellent speeches about the future of our province, 
another inspirational speech by the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party — yes, it’s another Saskatchewan Party nomination 
meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last night the constituency of Wascana Plains, Regina Wascana 
Plains members decided on who the next MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] would be for their constituency. 
Christine Tell and Don Saelhof both did an excellent job in 
selling memberships and getting their votes out. I am pleased to 
say today that Christine Tell will be the next candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Christine Tell will be an excellent candidate 
and an excellent MLA in this Legislative Assembly. She 
obtained her psychiatric nursing diploma from SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
before becoming a member of the Regina city police. Christine 
had spent over 26 years with both the Regina and Saskatoon 
police services. Over the last five years, Christine has been the 
president of the Regina Police Association. People of Regina 
Wascana Plains are looking forward to seeing Christine 
represent them in this Legislative Assembly as soon as the 
Premier gets enough nerve to call a general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, on May 2 the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services, along with Regina’s mayor, rolled up their 
sleeves to help serve lunch to the members and staff of the 
Regina branch of the Canadian Mental Health Association. This 
lunch was an event to help raise awareness about Mental Health 
Week which takes place May 1 to 7. 
 
The theme of this year’s week is: Take control of your health. 
Take care of your mind. This is a powerful message, Mr. 
Speaker. We often forget that being healthy also means taking 
care of the mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many Canadians have mental health issues. In a 
recent Stats Canada survey almost the same percentage of 
people reported experiencing symptoms of depression as those 
experiencing diabetes or heart disease. Mental health is an 
important issue, Mr. Speaker. Our government recognizes this 
and annually spends about 140 million on mental health 
services and programs. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this past week we announced significant 
increases to child and youth mental health services across 
Saskatchewan. With an extra 1 million this year and 2 million 
annually beginning next year, we will continue to work with 
groups like the CMHA [Canadian Mental Health Association] 
to provide excellent mental health services for children and 
youth as early in their lives as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the commitment and work of the 
Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association and all of the other dedicated groups and 
organizations that work in the mental health field. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing Mental Health 
Week and congratulating those involved in providing these vital 
services. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



May 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

Praise for Federal Budget 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the headline on the 
editorial line of today’s Leader-Post says it all: “[federal] 
Budget keeps promises.” Isn’t it a refreshing change to see a 
government that keeps all of its promises with its first budget? 
It’s a far cry from what we have seen in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, with everything from PST [provincial sales tax] hikes 
to cuts in agriculture budgets. 
 
In this federal budget, working families will see significant tax 
savings through the lowering of the GST [goods and services 
tax] and an employment tax credit that recognizes the financial 
contribution that working families make every day. This tax 
relief will allow all Canadians to keep more of their money in 
their pocket. 
 
Along with this well-deserved tax relief for Canadian families, 
we now have a government that seeks to stand with farm 
families and help them through this difficult time. This budget 
announced $1.5 billion in new money for Canadian farm 
families which is in stark contrast to this provincial government 
slashing support for farm families in our province. 
 
Apparently our federal Agriculture minister was able to buck up 
funds to help our producers. Now the question remains as to 
whether the NDP [New Democratic Party] min-i-steer of 
agriculture will now buck up his government’s contribution . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I think I would 
advise the member to be judicious about adjectives applied to 
members of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
Minister of Agriculture will now buck up his government’s 
contribution to ensure that our agricultural producers are able to 
deal with the recent income crisis. 
 
The Leader-Post editorial concludes by saying that Prime 
Minister Stephen Harper has established the all-important trust 
factor with voters, certainly a lesson this NDP government has 
yet to learn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

World Harmony Run Promotes Peace and Unity 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s all in the name. The 
World Harmony Run is a global torch relay promoting 
international friendship and unity. It is an expression of 
humanity’s essential need for co-operation and peace. 
 
This year international team members associated with the run 
will visit more than 70 countries, carrying a torch as a symbol 
of hope for harmony throughout the world. Mr. Speaker, last 
year I participated in the World Harmony Run in Regina. This 
year I was honoured to facilitate, through the Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation, May 3 through May 6 being 
declared World Harmony Days here in Saskatchewan. 
 

For the next four days the World Harmony Run will be in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Melfort, and Prince Albert, promoting peace 
and unity. I welcome the opportunity to participate in World 
Harmony Run 2006. Today at 5 p.m., on the steps of this 
legislature, all MLAs are invited too. And who knows? There 
might even be an opportunity to hold the harmony torch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should be mindful and even proud that Canada 
is envied by much of the world for our unity within diversity. 
Please join me in thanking Sutapa Adelman for coordinating 
Saskatchewan’s World Harmony Run events and in 
congratulating all participants for promoting unity and oneness 
within the human family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 
30 to May 6 is North American Occupational Safety and Health 
Week. Regardless of the workplace, a good work site is a safe 
work site. Today, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, I want 
to express our ongoing support for the efforts of businesses, 
employees, and unions to ensure that all workers are able to do 
their jobs in a safe workplace. 
 
First established in 1997 following an agreement between 
Canada, the United States, and Mexico, North American 
Occupational Safety and Health Week is an opportunity for 
workers and employers to focus on the importance of workplace 
safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all too often in Saskatchewan we hear stories on 
the news about workers injured on the job, including workers 
employed by the government or Crown corporations. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we are fortunate to have an occupational 
health and safety division in the Department of Labour which 
strives to protect people’s health and safety at work, and whose 
goal it is to prevent and reduce the number of accidents, 
injuries, illnesses, and deaths on the job in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today I want to ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
expressing support for North American Occupational Safety 
and Health Week and the need for ongoing efforts to keep our 
workplace safe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

New Book Honours Saskatchewan Centenarians 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They say, Mr. Speaker, that one’s soul 
can be seen through the eyes of a person. Through spectacular 
black and white images, Mark Greschner has captured the 
hearts and souls of many Saskatchewan centenarians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I rise in the House to congratulate Mark on 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

the release of his book, One Hundred Years of Heart. 
 
Along with the two main sponsors, the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation on behalf of Saskatchewan Centennial 
2005 and Mayo Schmidt from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, I 
was pleased to join Her Honour, Dr. Lynda Haverstock, who 
hosted this event at Government House this morning. 
 
I was also pleased to visit with Brent Pylot, a former Meadow 
Lake resident who did an outstanding job in the design of the 
book and who too should be congratulated. 
 
As a friend and neighbour from Goodsoil, I was thrilled to join 
Mark’s parents, George and Mary Greschner, and his in-laws, 
Mike and Helen Pylot, as well as Mark’s wife, Cindy and their 
two children, Drake and Orisha. 
 
Many, many family and friends from across the province and 
indeed from across the country were also there with Mark and 
his family on this very special occasion. 
 
The centenarians’ faces will tell many stories and they are 
stories about the history of this province. They were young 
when this province was young and together they shaped our 
future and we owe them a huge debt of gratitude. 
 
It is with an enormous sense of pride that we thank Mark 
Greschner and our centenarians for giving us this lasting legacy. 
 
As Mark said, “Their images are captured by the camera, but 
their spirit is boundless.” 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Wait Time Guarantees 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the federal government announced that it will be 
working towards developing patient wait time guarantees. Such 
a plan would ensure that people have access to medically 
necessary treatment within clinically defined wait times. The 
commitment is really a breath of fresh air, especially for 
Saskatchewan people who linger on some of the longest waiting 
lists in Canada. 
 
The NDP has never made a commitment for such guarantees. 
Now that the federal government is taking the lead on this issue, 
will this provincial government follow along and guarantee wait 
times like the federal government is asking? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member opposite will know, prior to the federal budget I 

have had a number of interviews and made a number of 
comments with regards to the federal government’s desire to 
institute wait time guarantees. 
 
On behalf of the province of Saskatchewan and in conjunction 
with other provinces, Mr. Speaker, we are saying to the federal 
government we are prepared to sit down and talk with them 
about wait time guarantees. But we need a commitment from 
the federal government to ensure that the financial resources are 
available, committed to ensure that those wait time guarantees 
do not penalize any province in this country, Mr. Speaker — 
provinces that have different needs and priorities, provinces that 
are working on their own wait time guarantees in their own 
ways. Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to work with the federal 
government on this, but we need additional commitments from 
the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when I’ve asked this minister 
and the former minister about wait time guarantees, they 
normally give the answer about the Saskatchewan Surgical Care 
Network website about managing the wait times and managing 
people on these wait times. It brags about how people can 
phone this network and find out where they’re at. 
 
Well unfortunately we found out last week that people phone 
the wait list to find out how long they have to wait and are told 
that they have to wait to find out how long they have to wait, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, websites and waiting list hotlines do not deal with 
the issue of wait times. Mr. Speaker, the solution is personnel. 
The solution is people. It’s doctors. It’s nurses. It’s specialists. 
It’s other health care professionals. Mr. Speaker, how does the 
province expect to follow along with the federal government’s 
leads on guaranteed wait times when it can’t supply the 
professionals we need in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again the member opposite is aware that prior to the federal 
government . . . in fact two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the first 
ministers met. They set up a 10-year action plan in health care. 
In that 10-year action plan were commitments that each 
province would make with regards to wait times and surgical 
care and other matters pertaining to the health care field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is leading Canada in some of the 
responses to that 10-year plan begun by the premiers in 2004. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud to say that our Surgical 
Care Network, our new diagnostic imaging network, Mr. 
Speaker, are being looked at by other provinces. Our wait times 
are being reduced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we will continue to work with the federal government with 
additional resources to ensure that we can meet the needs of 



May 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate the 
hard work that our health care professionals do on a daily basis. 
But you have to understand the workplaces that they’re working 
in. They’re short-staffed which leads to high stress and 
burn-out. Increase in WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 
claims are all results of short staffing levels, Mr. Speaker. And 
short staffing levels result in long waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses have gone and 
said that we need 600 new nurses to fill the vacancies, the 
retirements going forward, but more importantly, so nurses can 
maintain professional standards. And yet the minister doesn’t 
seem to give them the time of day. He won’t deal with that 
issue. 
 
Can the minister provide this Assembly with some sort of a 
timetable when he’ll start filling the vacancies so that we can at 
least get in the ball game of guaranteed wait times? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again the member opposite will know that this government has 
committed in the previous budget — as a result of previous 
discussions with the federal government — $42 million to assist 
with the recruitment and retention of physicians practising in 
the province, Mr. Speaker, a commitment that is having an 
effect in Saskatchewan with the number of physicians 
practising increasing year over year. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to hear the 
member opposite cheerleading for the federal government and 
their budget announced yesterday in the one area where there 
was no additional money for the provinces to keep up our needs 
and priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We will do it within the resources we have available and, Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to work with the federal government 
and other provinces to keep that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the course of 
this session, the official opposition has raised a number of cases 
that demonstrate the shortage of specialists throughout 
Saskatchewan. Despite the high incidence of diabetes in 
Saskatchewan, we know that there are three vacant 
endocrinologist positions in Saskatoon. People are requiring to 

go out of the province to get services that should be delivered in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve learned over the last couple of weeks that there’s a 
shortage of oncologists, where people in this province have to 
wait three times the national average to see an oncologist for a 
first visit. Mr. Speaker, we cannot come anywhere close to 
guaranteeing wait times until we sufficiently supply this 
province with specialists, with nurses, and other health care 
professionals. When will he take his job seriously and start 
dealing with the real issue in this province, and that’s a 
personnel issue of specialists in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m glad the member opposite raises the issue of 
endocrinologists, particularly in the Saskatoon Health Region 
because it is a case where the region and the province is 
working very hard to replace professionals and specialists who 
are leaving the province with other ones who can do the job, 
Mr. Speaker. Indeed in endocrinology in Saskatoon, we have 
one retiring, one on a leave of absence, one on maternity leave, 
and one who had left the province for other reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have recruited and are very close to agreement 
with a new endocrinologist. We have worked on building a 
part-time locum to work there. The department of medicine is 
currently recruiting for two additional positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take this responsibility very seriously. We are 
acting on that, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to work with 
the regions and the people of Saskatchewan to ensure their care 
needs are met. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Declining School Enrolments 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I told 
this Assembly how the NDP’s failure to grow the economy and 
its pathetic economic policies are causing teaching positions to 
be cut across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is causing a domino effect throughout the 
education system. A CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
news story reported that enrolment is down by 10,000 over the 
last three years and that classrooms will be cut by 300. 
 
My question to the minister is this: how many schools will have 
to be closed across this province to make up for the cut in 
classrooms? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

leaves all kinds of openings to have a bit of a debate here. 
 
The Minister of Industry and Resources would love to get up 
and talk about our booming economy and all the good things 
that are going on in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite talks about the drop in 
enrolment, and he is accurate in his numbers. There has been a 
drop in enrolment of 10,000 over the last three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with no adjustments or major adjustments in 
staffing over that time, many of the divisions have been waiting 
to see what the restructuring would do, what resources were 
needed at that time. And now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved on 
with restructuring. The new divisions are in place, and there 
will be decisions made over the next short while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Impact of the Economy 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be a 
pleasure to listen to the Industry minister talk about how this 
robust economy is resulting in 10,000 fewer students in the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, by any measure, that is a 
dismal failure. It’s not only students that are leaving this 
province. It’s parents. It’s teachers. It’s other people who are 
leaving in spite of a booming economy, Mr. Speaker. That 
simply cannot be explained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister dodges the question. She has said and 
admitted that we’ve lost 10,000 students. How many schools 
are going to be closed as a result of this NDP government’s 
mismanagement of the economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to accept the 
invitation to get up and talk about the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And just a few things going on that I might 
want to remind the opposition of, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
has achieved a decades long dream of our people to become a 
have province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — One of only three in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
the province was reported recently for the first time in our 
history of having personal income above the national average 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — With only two other provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. And according to the Fraser Institute, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like the opposition to know this. We have the second lowest 
bundle of personal taxes for our people in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, as all of these facts 
would show, we have a growing economy and we’re going in 
the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, only in the NDP’s jaded 
mentality would they suggest there’s a booming economy 
resulting in 10,000 students leaving the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Only in their economy would they admit 
that losing these students and their parents and the teachers that 
they need to teach them and other citizens, our losing the 
population in this province, that would be a success. Only in the 
NDP’s reality would they believe that losing workers and losing 
jobs is a successful economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who are leaving this province are not 
doing so because there’s a booming economy here. They’re 
doing so because they need to find their dreams and their 
opportunities in other provinces and other countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, how many schools are going to be 
closed in this province as a result of their booming economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The opposition says that only we talk about 
the booming economy. Well I want to say to the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Todd Hirsch, the chief economist for the Canada 
West Foundation that the opposition likes to quote, he has this 
to say in The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker. He says we have 
“. . . the third-highest rate of GDP growth . . .”That’s what he 
says, Mr. Speaker. He says we’re “. . . the newest member in 
the club of ‘have’ provinces . . .” He says, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote, “Taxes are falling.” He says we have favourable personal 
income taxes. He says, “Business taxes . . . are coming down.” 
 
And then he says this, Mr. Speaker. He says, “People in 
Saskatchewan don’t really [need] . . . to be so miserable all the 
time.” And I would say, Mr. Speaker, you could rephrase that to 
say people in the Saskatchewan Party don’t need to be so 
miserable all the time. He says our glass is half full, and we 
have a lot to celebrate in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 



May 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
hope that the Minister of Industry has the names and addresses 
and the forwarding addresses of all these parents of these 
10,000 students. 
 
I hope he has the forwarding addresses of all the people that 
have left this province seeking to build their dreams elsewhere, 
Mr. Speaker. And I hope he has forwarding addresses of those 
students and he has the addresses in Saskatchewan of the 
communities where schools are going to be closed. 
 
Perhaps he can send this buoyant information that he’s 
broadcasting in this legislature to those families and to those 
parents and tell them about their buoyant economy, tell them 
how many schools they’re closing in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he invited me to get up 
and talk about the economy. Now he invites me to tell people in 
other parts of the country about the exciting things happening in 
the Saskatchewan economy, and we’re going to do just that, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to do just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re going to have a campaign to 
counteract the doom and gloom of this opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
And if I have to listen to this doom and gloom every day, I’d 
probably leave the province too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I want to complete the phrase that 
Todd Hirsch used in The Globe and Mail. He said, Mr. Speaker, 
“If you can keep them . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Would the Minister of Industry 
and Resources complete his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is what 
Todd Hirsch has to say about the moaners and complainers. He 
says: 
 

If you can keep them from complaining for 10 minutes 
[we haven’t been able to do that yet] you find that they are 
actually a lot of fun. Deep down, beneath the layers of 
pessimism and despair, they are the most thankful people 
on earth. And they should be — the glass in Saskatchewan 
is more than half full. 
 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, deep down there is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Terms of Appointment at Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minster of Labour. The Government of 
Saskatchewan’s website states that Saskatchewan’s Labour 
Relations Board operates in a quasi-judicial manner to resolve 
disputes arising under The Trade Union Act. I take this to mean 
the activities of the board are free from political interference. 
Can the minister tell us if that is his understanding of the term 
quasi-judicial and whether the current board is still operating 
without political interference. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to take the 
question of course. The Labour Relations Board operates in that 
fashion, and we believe it to operate today in that fashion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, The Trade Union Amendment 
Act of 2005 allows members of the Labour Relations Board to 
complete their active cases after their appointments have 
expired. Can the minister tell us if the Labour Relations Board 
is in compliance with the provisions of that Act? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Labour Relations Board is a very important part of The Trade 
Union Act and the work that it does. And we have a good 
board. But it’s important to realize it is arm’s length and that the 
work that it does, it’s important that we don’t interfere in it. 
And I’m not sure if the member opposite is going on a bit of a 
fishing trip here or what. But I am concerned about the 
direction he’s going here. 
 
You know we have people on the board — the Vice-Chairs and 
the Chair — and they’re hired through the Public Service 
Commission and the advertising that goes on with that. And we 
think this is the appropriate way to do things. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
Walter Matkowski, the Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations 
Board went to work March 2, 2006, his card would no longer 
let him into the parkade, and when he arrived at his office, his 
computer was gone. Mr. Matkowski still had Labour Relations 
Board cases left to complete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why this Vice-Chair was 
removed apparently in violation of The Trade Union 
Amendment Act? 
 
[14:15] 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You know, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
really important that the work of the Labour Relations Board 
. . . does its work in a timely fashion and be efficient as 
possible. And when situations arise and some of the cases are 
taking a bit of time, I think that it would be appropriate for the 
board to think about this. 
 
I mean here’s a specific case, so I think it’s really important to 
continue to be arm’s-length here. The Chair of the board is 
acting in the way that he feels is appropriate. And I don’t think 
it’s appropriate for me to comment on one or two or three cases, 
but it’s really important that the Labour Relations Board does 
its work and that people have faith in the work it does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not a matter for the minister 
to say it. I think it should be dealt with in cases. I want to quote 
from The Trade Union Act, section no. 4, clause (1.2). And this 
is what it says: 
 

If the term of a member of the board expires after the 
member has begun hearing a matter before the board but 
before the proceeding is completed, the member may 
continue as if his or her term had not expired for the 
purpose of completing the proceeding. 
 

That is what The Trade Union Act says. Can the minister assure 
us that the Labour Relations Board is not in violation of this 
section of the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I think the operative word 
here is, may. It’s really important that the work of the Labour 
Relations Board moves appropriately, in an appropriate fashion 
after they do their hearings and witnesses are called. And so this 
is a case where it may be extended. 
 
But it’s really important again to keep this at arm’s length so 
people have faith, both the employers and employees have faith 
in the board, and that this must not become a political football. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
obtained a copy of an affidavit of Mr. Matkowski prepared by 
his legal counsel. On pages 2 and 3 of that affidavit, Mr. 
Matkowski states that on June 24, 2005, he was told by the 
deputy minister of Labour that he would not be reappointed 
because, and I quote: 
 

Craik advised me that some of the unions had been 
complaining about my decisions. I asked Mr. Craik what 
. . . the Unions [were] saying about me, and he would not 
say, advising me it was “hearsay”. I stated to him that it 
was obviously effective hearsay, to which he agreed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, was the Vice-Chair of Saskatchewan’s Labour 
Relations Board removed by this government because of his 
rulings? And does this not constitute an example of direct 
interference in the affairs of the board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I find this very interesting, 
this line of questioning where we’re getting into a political 
debate here. We know the work of the Labour Relations Board 
and how important that is. 
 
Last Friday we heard the members opposite in their debate talk 
about competitive labour law, and then they bring it up in the 
House here. He has completed a term, and we know that. 
You’re hired to be on the board, you do your work, you do it 
well, and then that’s the way it goes. 
 
But I think it’s really unfortunate that this becomes a political 
football. And the folks over there may laugh, but this is very 
serious to the people in the trade union movement and for 
employers, that the board does its work well and is at 
arm’s-length from the politicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
the minister to confirm again, based on the affidavit that has 
been put forward on behalf of Mr. Matkowski and the concerns 
raised by his . . . the fact that he still has cases to deal with, with 
the Labour Relations Board. Can the minister conclude that in 
fact that the reason to not reappoint Mr. Matkowski was not 
political? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
appropriate to respect the arm’s-length nature of the board. And 
I would ask the member to table his work that he’s quoting 
from here. I think that it is appropriate that we can all see what 
he is quoting from. I think that what is the process that’s 
outlined is appropriate. It’s the right way to do things, and I 
think that’s the way to go. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 



May 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

matter of Jack Hillson, taxpayers were left with a much higher 
bill at the end of the day following a court ruling which said 
former politicians must be given their old job back. In this 
matter, it appears someone has lost a job with the Labour 
Relations Board even though that person still has outstanding 
cases to resolve. This also appears to be in direct violation of 
The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister undertake to investigate this 
matter to find out exactly why Mr. Matkowski was removed, 
and whether this was in violation of The Trade Union 
Amendment Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
really important to emphasize some of the things that we’ve 
reviewed: the operative word being, may; the term expired the 
end of March. I think it’s very important, critical to understand 
that this is arm’s-length. The work of the board is critical to 
many people in this province, employers and employees, and 
there is no guarantee of the job for life. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s appropriate that we do 
not make this into a political football. This is most unfortunate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling written responses to written questions nos. 1,066 
and 1,067. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 1,066 and 1,067 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 54 — The Cancer 
Agency Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
enter into debate on Bill No. 54, The Cancer Agency Act, and 

just the different issues that this Bill presents. It’s interesting 
that this Bill is in before the House today, and in light of all the 
different issues that we have been talking about regarding the 
cancer agency. And I want to talk about some of those different 
specific issues as we go through this Bill and the changes that 
this Bill makes. 
 
This Bill really is changing the whole governance structure of 
the cancer agency. We’ve had the privilege of meeting with the 
cancer society as well as . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. Order. I 
would ask all members to reduce the level of the whispering so 
that the member who is speaking can be heard. I’ll just wait for 
a moment for members to kind of settle out. I recognize the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
the cancer agency has certainly been in . . . We’ve been talking 
a lot about it over the last number of weeks and I want to talk 
about some of the issues that we have been saying about the 
cancer agency. 
 
But in particularly this Bill talks about governance and the 
change of structure for the cancer agency. I was saying that 
we’ve had the opportunity to meet with the cancer society and 
have their input as to what they felt, how this Bill would impact 
their society. And we’ve also had the opportunity of meeting 
with the cancer agency themselves, Bob Allen, and talking to 
them as far as how this Bill will affect them doing their work 
and the whole change in governance. 
 
And there are some major changes in the governance and the 
way the board is structured, from people being appointed from 
different organizations to now the minister having the authority 
to appoint the board as they see fit. And the cancer agency 
didn’t seem to have any real concerns about that because they 
felt that regardless of who was appointing it, that the members 
on the board as long as they had the right skill sets, that they 
brought the right skill sets to the board . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I wonder if the 
two members might excuse themselves and . . . Order please. 
Once again I invite the member for Indian Head-Milestone to 
proceed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
whether I should start from the top again or not but I was saying 
about how the governance structure will change and the skills 
sets that are brought to the board don’t necessarily have to come 
from each organization, they can come from outside those 
organizations. And the change in the structure with the minister 
being able to appoint may very well bring that about. 
 
So most of the people that are involved with this Act felt it was 
moving in the right direction. It was though interesting when we 
met with both the cancer society as well as the cancer agency 
we’d talk about the Bill, and the major conversation or the 
major dialogue in the meetings that we held with these two 
organizations was about the Bill itself. But you can’t help but 
— after you’ve done talking about the Bill — start talking about 
some of the other issues that have been in the media recently; 
some of the issues of people having to wait as long as they’ve 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

had to wait to see oncologists, some of the various issues 
around cancer treatment in the province. 
 
And I think it’s extremely important to say today, and I want to 
have on the record, the absolutely marvellous work that the 
people in the cancer agency do, the absolute marvellous work 
that oncologists do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely unrealistic for this 
government to think that when you’re running with three short, 
three vacancies of oncologists in this province, that you’ll be 
able to deal with the backlog that you have. 
 
I mean, it’s unbelievable that the government sits over there . . . 
And they’re hooting and hollering now because they, you know, 
they think I’ve said something really amazing. And it’s 
absolutely not amazing. We absolutely do respect the work that 
the people in the cancer agency do. In fact, we absolutely 
admire it because the people in the cancer agency — whether 
it’s the nurses, whether it’s the oncologists — are expected to 
do so much with such short personnel. 
 
We know that we are short three oncologists in the province. So 
you’re expecting fewer oncologists to deal with the demand. If 
we didn’t need the use of those oncologists, it would be fine to 
have the vacancies there. But the oncologists that are here in 
this province right now are having to take up the slack of these 
vacancies. 
 
So when I talked to . . . And we talked about it today in 
question period when I questioned the minister on the fact of 
vacancies. And he talks about, well we had one endocrinologist 
in this case retire and now we’re starting to recruit. You know, 
we’ve talked to this government and asked this government for 
years now to have human resources plans. Doctors don’t retire 
just like that. They know, we know well in advance that there 
should be physicians, whether it’s endocrinologists, oncologists, 
whoever it might be, will be retiring. 
 
So what has this government done to fill those spots? It’s not 
good enough to have an endocrinologist talk about retiring 
today and now we’re going to start recruiting. The recruitment 
needed to start a couple of years ago. And that’s just the exact 
problem with this provincial government, that they have no 
human resources plan. They fail to deal with the issues that are 
put at hand. 
 
And I think when you deal with a cancer agency it’s extremely 
important to realize that when you’re running short three 
vacancies — when you have three vacancies, for example, of 
oncologists — that you’re expecting the ones left in this 
province to do so much more work. They have to do so much 
more work. They’re running at absolute capacity. And the 
problem with that is when they’re running at absolute capacity 
is they can’t keep up. And when you can’t keep up . . . Well the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana seems to be — I don’t know 
what type of gestures I could describe them; I don’t think I will 
— making gestures over here. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The fact is that those endocrinologists, that people in the cancer 
agency are absolutely running at capacity because this 

government fails to give the resources for the personnel that 
they need to do the jobs that they need to do. You know, it’s 
absolutely amazing that the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
would stand there and make the gestures that she has been 
making, when this province has three times the wait time for 
people visiting an endocrinologist or an oncologist for the first 
time. Three times the wait. The average for waiting from 
physician referral to the first visit of an oncologist is four to five 
weeks. That’s the average wait. But what is the wait in 
Saskatchewan? I ask the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
What’s the wait in Saskatchewan? 
 
Do you not have any . . . does she not have any constituents that 
are waiting 12 weeks for that first visit? And then to see the 
gestures that she’s making in here, making fun of it, is 
absolutely appalling. You know, I mean it’s absolutely 
appalling. Does that member not have people waiting to see an 
oncologist for the first time? Because if she does, I would like 
her to go and make those same gestures to them, say, oh it’s 
okay that you have to wait three times the national average for a 
first visit to oncologists. It’s unacceptable. 
 
What we have done for people, the professionals that are 
working in this field, is expected them to do so much with such 
a backlog that you do get issues of stress and of burnout 
because they are expected to do so much with so little. They 
don’t have the professionals, they don’t have the personnel to 
do the job that they want to do. And that is absolutely a given. 
 
And, you know, we have talked about this for a very long time. 
We have talked about it and it doesn’t matter whether it’s in 
cancer treatment, whether it’s in general medicine, whatever 
area of the health field, we continually see that there is a 
shortage of personnel. And as I said in question period, you 
know you can do all the work you want to do around a surgical 
care network and a website and a hotline where you can phone. 
That does not deal with the root cause of the problem. The root 
cause of the problem is not enough health care professionals. 
 
You know, a classic example why we’d be short of oncologists 
or endocrinologists and people are leaving, the minister says we 
had four leave in the last little while. In the Saskatoon region 
they’ve recruited one. We still have three vacancies. 
 
Well I would submit to you that one of the reasons why people 
leave this province, why some of the health care professionals 
leave this province, is because they don’t have the support. 
They don’t have sufficient human resources. They feel that they 
. . . if they had, for example, these vacancies filled that it would 
make a certain . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Estevan on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — To introduce guests, please. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 



May 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone for allowing me to do 
this. But, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members 
of this honoured Assembly I would like to introduce two people 
that are very special in my life. And every session they come up 
and spend a couple of days with me and this is a total surprise 
again, but my two sisters, Edna Irwin and Audrey Thompson. 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was interesting. 
Just as I was sitting down I heard the minister yell across, say, 
did you interview these physicians why they were leaving? Did 
you interview them? 
 
You know what? A better question is, did that minister 
interview the physicians when they’ve left this province, you 
know? Because they certainly do not. 
 
We know of an oncologist that has left this province that has 
gone to BC [British Columbia], that was very vocal on the way 
this government deals with the whole issue of cancer in this 
province and the lack of human resources that they have, Mr. 
Speaker. So instead of him asking whether we interview him, it 
would be a very good idea if that minister would do an exit 
survey of all the specialists that we lose in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But back to the Bill is that the Bill certainly does deal with the 
governance of the cancer agency and for the most part that is 
well received. What isn’t well received is the way this 
government deals with the human resources in health care and 
that is seen in many different fields. So at this time we’d move 
this Bill to committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 54, The 
Cancer Agency Act, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the Bill be referred to the Crown and Central 
Agencies Committee. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 51 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly is a privilege again to enter into the debate on this Bill, 
Bill No. 51, An Act to amend The Regional Health Services 
Act. And it’s again an interesting Bill to talk to. We’ve talked to 
a number of organizations and they feel it’s a companion Bill to 
the previous Bill I spoke of, the cancer agency. 
 
But I do want to say a few things with the health care 
authorities — first of all districts and now authorities — and the 
changes that those areas have been through. Of course we 
started when we went through this health, not rationalization, 
health . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . reform, thank you. When 
we went through the health reform, we went to 32 health 
regions. Obviously that was a mistake because the government 
then went down to 12 health authorities. And there are still 
problems in the whole structure. Now this Bill deals with the 
RHAs [regional health authority] and their relationship with the 
cancer agency. And you know as I said, it’s a companion Bill. 
 
But we do know that there are still many issues that the RHAs 
are dealing with — dealing with issues of communication. You 
know, and I don’t know if it has ever been more evident than 
when you hear the case of baby Paige and what that family has 
gone through over the last number of weeks. And it really is 
astonishing that our health care system could have someone like 
that fall through the cracks like that poor family and that poor 
baby has experienced over the last couple of weeks. And thank 
heavens that that family had the fortitude and the foresight and 
the desire to get out of this province and take their child to 
Edmonton where they were able to receive the care that they 
should have been able to receive here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the minister still hasn’t released the report and hasn’t 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2006 

talked much about the report regarding this whole situation. But 
there are issues around the MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], 
whether it was operating or not. In the House he used the 
analogy about taking your car in for servicing and that was done 
with an MRI. 
 
But the point being with the different health authorities and 
communication that if there wasn’t the capacity in Saskatoon, 
that why wouldn’t they have talked to Regina? Regina has just 
installed a new MRI. If it was an emergency, why they couldn’t 
have talked to Regina and sent the child back down to Regina? 
But there seems to be some issues with communication with the 
RHAs. And unfortunately in this situation, this family had to 
endure, and endure a screaming child for three weeks, before 
they finally couldn’t stand it any more and got out of the 
province. It’s a real, if you ask me, a black mark on our health 
care system. 
 
I know that a number of people access the system and have no 
problems going through the system. But I think how you judge 
a system is when you have cases like this and how the system 
responds. And this was one incident where unfortunately the 
system did not respond very well. So there are issues with the 
RHAs. 
 
As I say, this Bill is a companion Bill with the previous Bill that 
I spoke on regarding the cancer agency, and it deals with those 
issues. I am looking forward to the day when the minister will 
stand in the House and deal with some of the real issues that 
we’re finding in health care, and that’s the human resources 
issue. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move this Bill to 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 51, The Regional 
Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the Bill be referred to the Crown and Central 
Agencies Committee. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 51 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister for Advanced Education and Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in order to expedite the 
work of the committees, I would move that the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Advanced Ed and Immigration that this House do now adjourn. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:42.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1493 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Battlefords Chamber of Commerce Business Excellence Awards 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
 Saskatchewan Party Nomination in Regina Wascana Plains 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
 Mental Health Week 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
 Praise for Federal Budget 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1495 
 World Harmony Run Promotes Peace and Unity 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1495 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1495 
 New Book Honours Saskatchewan Centenarians 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1495 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Wait Time Guarantees 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
 Declining School Enrolments 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
 Impact of the Economy 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1498 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1498 
 Terms of Appointment at Labour Relations Board 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1501 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1503 
 Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1504 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




