
















































Hansard: April 25, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 46A  TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1325 
 April 25, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I have before me a special report dated April 
25, 2006 to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly on The 
Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act by the 
Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate which I table at this time. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today as well to present another petition to this 
Assembly on behalf of a number of people from the beautiful 
city of Saskatoon regarding a provincial children’s hospital in 
that community. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s or next year’s financial 
budget to build a provincial children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier the petition is signed by 
people from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
residents of the city of Saskatoon I too rise to present a petition. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding a children’s hospital in the 
community of Saskatoon. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary actions to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have a petition to present on behalf of people petitioning for a 
new hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all the signatures on this petition are from the city 
of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition requesting allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. This petition is signed by 
people who believe that children in this province deserve the 
finest health care. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition all come from the 
city of Saskatoon. I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition regarding 
funding for a provincial children’s hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
These signatures come from the city of Saskatoon. I present it 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased to 
rise this afternoon to present a petition regarding the need for a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Martensville, Perdue, and the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition to present on behalf of citizens who are very 
concerned that this province does not have a children’s hospital. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial hospital, children’s hospital, in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the great 
city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with 
my colleagues expressing the concern of citizens about the lack 
of a pediatric children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the city of Saskatoon, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition requesting allocation of funding for a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon, 
Grandora, and Rosthern. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
again today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatoon who are asking for funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of residents across 
Saskatchewan that are concerned that Saskatchewan is the only 
province besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that does not have 
a dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, 
Silverspring, and College Park in northeast Saskatoon. I so 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with a 
petition today from citizens that are getting tired of the NDP’s 
[New Democratic Party] promises about hospitals and would 
like to see some action. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens from Saskatoon and 
Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present a petition on the request to have a children’s 
hospital. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Warman 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also join with my 
colleagues on calling the government for a children’s hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on a 
petition. 
 

That a health facility focusing specifically on the areas of 

pediatric patient care, disease and injury prevention, 
pediatric health education, and research which would best 
optimize the safety, health, and welfare of our children. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present yet 
another petition regarding allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by concerned voters from 
Saskatoon Eastview, Saskatoon Meewasin, and Saskatoon 
Greystone. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And finally, Mr. 
Speaker, I too rise on behalf of concerned citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the health care of 
children and want to see a children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens of Melville and Saskatoon. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order an addition to a previously 
tabled petition being sessional paper no. 644 has been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 14(7) is hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 51 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: does SGI pass any 
private client information to Imperial Parking Canada for 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

any means? And if so, for what purpose and how many 
referrals has SGI made to Imperial Parking Canada in 
2005? 
 

And I give notice that I shall on day no. 51 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: does SGI have an 
agreement with Imperial Parking Canada to pass private 
client information over to Imperial Parking? And if so, has 
SGI tried to end this agreement? 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, seated today in the Speaker’s 
gallery, it is my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly Marian 
Powell, who will on May 2 be retiring as Legislative Librarian 
after a distinguished career of 24 years. Marian holds the record 
as the longest serving Legislative Librarian in Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
Her achievements are numerous and I can say with certainty 
that the Legislative Library services were transformed more 
during Ms. Powell’s tenure than during the entire existence of 
the Legislative Library before Marian. When Marian Powell 
took on the job as Legislative Librarian in 1982, there were no 
computers but the library had two telephones and one electric 
typewriter. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Today information can be accessed by Internet from several 
specialized databases and soon the final portion of the old card 
catalogues will be online, enabling members and their staff to 
locate material owned by our library from any 
Internet-connected computer in the world. 
 
Under Marian Powell’s leadership, the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library was the first to tailor service to the needs of 
individual MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. Many 
of the wonderful electronic information resources currently 
available to MLAs are the result of cost sharing partnerships 
championed by Marian. 
 
Besides modernizing the means and expanding the extent of 
information accessed through the Legislative Library, Marian 
Powell also oversaw major physical improvement in the 
Legislative Library. The reading room was renovated and 
restored to its original beauty. Custom-built shelving was 
purchased for both the reading room and reference areas. The 
library collection was consolidated so that materials can be 
retrieved in a very efficient and prompt manner. Our collection 
is shelved under environmentally controlled conditions to 
ensure preservation of these collections for future generations. 
 
Bringing the library from 19th century technology to the e-age 
required vision and excellent managerial skills. Marian was able 
to hire, train, motivate, and retain a professional cadre of 
employees whose services are both appreciated and admired. 
The amazingly positive attitude our library staff brings to this 
magnificent building is a tribute to Marian’s leadership style 

and we thank her for that. Congratulations are extended to 
Marian Powell on her official retirement. 
 
With Marian today is her mother, Mrs. Jean McKillop, our 
Acting Legislative Librarian, Pat Kolesar, and Marian’s 
husband, Trevor Powell who is also retiring from a 
distinguished career as Provincial Archivist. MLAs, it is a 
pleasure today to welcome to this Assembly Marian Powell, 
Legislative Librarian, and Trevor Powell, Provincial Archivist. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Provincial 
Secretary, the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank you for allowing me to join with you in welcoming our 
guests, Marian Powell, her mother Jean McKillop, and Trevor 
Powell to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure of knowing both Marian and Trevor for a 
number of years, and I thank them both for their hard work and 
their commitment to their fields and their endeavours on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to add to your comments, Mr. Speaker, with a bit of 
information about Trevor Powell, our former Provincial 
Archivist. Mr. Powell has been employed with the 
Saskatchewan Archives since 1973, working as a staff archivist 
and then in later years moving to become director. 
 
In 1986 he became our Provincial Archivist and has served in 
this position until his recent retirement, serving in that position 
for 20 years. He was instrumental in leading the major revision 
and updating of The Archives Act, a development which 
included a major expansion of the institution’s role in the 
management of Saskatchewan’s government information. 
 
In 2002 he was awarded the Queen’s Golden Jubilee Medal in 
recognition of his public and community service, his long-term 
contributions to the Canadian and Saskatchewan archival 
communities, and his leadership of the Saskatchewan Archives. 
 
I’d ask all members, Mr. Speaker, you and others, to join with 
me in showing our appreciation as well to Mr. Trevor Powell 
for his achievements in the archives field. And we wish him and 
his family all the best and many, many years of good health and 
a wonderful celebration of their retirement years together. 
Trevor. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to join with the Provincial Secretary in thanking Trevor and 
Marian Powell for their commitment and service to the province 
of Saskatchewan and the legislature and to wish them well in 
their retirement. On behalf of the official opposition, thank you 
and good luck. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

The Speaker: — Members, it is also my pleasure today to 
introduce the Legislative Librarian of Manitoba, Ms. Sue 
Bishop. She is joining us today at Marian Powell’s farewell 
reception to bring greetings from the Association of 
Parliamentary Librarians of Canada known as APLIC. 
 
Members, would you welcome to the Assembly today the 
person who’s helping us honour our retiring Legislative 
Librarian, Ms. Sue Bishop. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure I rise to introduce to you and through you, 24 students 
from Three Lakes School at Middle Lake, Saskatchewan. And 
that happens to be the school that I attended many years ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s 24 young kids there, really good-looking grade 3 
and 4. With them today is teacher, Valerie Rohel and 
chaperones — we’ve got Janice Martin, Gary Berting, Michelle 
Heidecker, Gerard Pitzel, Joanne Laforme, Lisa Demers, Allan 
Olynuk, Ross Hauser, Rob Baker, and Ken Parsons. And I wish 
all members to help me welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the member from Batoche in 
recognizing one of the chaperones that was introduced just a 
few minutes ago. I understand though that this is the grade 4 
and 5 group, not the grade 3 and 4, and some information on the 
sheet wasn’t quite accurate. 
 
But I’d like to introduce Mr. Ken Parsons. Ken is a graduate of 
Invermay School and he was a graduate in — well, I will say it 
— 1982-83, which is my last year of teaching in Invermay 
School. 
 
But most importantly, a small school doesn’t achieve winning a 
lot of sports awards without a lot of dedication. And in 1982, 
Invermay School was fortunate in achieving a medal in senior 
boys’ volleyball, and Ken played a very important part in that. 
 
So I want to recognize Ken. I know his wife Lisa teaches in 
Middle Lake as well, and their family. And we enjoy the 
friendship we have with this couple. And I’d ask all members to 
join me in recognizing a former grad of Invermay School, Ken 
Parsons. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Remembering the Holocaust 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Yom 
haShoah Day, or Holocaust Remembrance Day. Shoah, Mr. 
Speaker, is Hebrew for whirlwind or catastrophe. On this day 
we honour and remember the 6 million Jewish men, women, 
and children whose lives were swept away tragically during the 
Holocaust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that we remember and 
commemorate this horrible event, an atrocity that claimed the 
lives of millions of innocent people. By recognizing this day 
each year, we are reminded that the Holocaust was not a 
random, isolated incident and that anti-Semitism and racism are 
not vices of the past. 
 
Tragically, anti-Semitism, racism, xenophobia, and genocide 
are realities of our world today. It is the understanding of these 
events that will enable us and enable the future generations to 
look beyond cultural and racial difference to a society with the 
promise of tolerance. 
 
We must continually examine the responsibilities of democratic 
citizenship and reject the dire consequences of indifference and 
inaction. Mr. Speaker, it is also important to remember the 
victims of this atrocity and to honour their memories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Yom haShoah is indeed a day of reflection 
observed by the international community. However, members 
of this Assembly as representatives of our communities must 
also accept the responsibility of leading the struggle against 
violence, against discrimination, and against cultural 
intolerance. Mr. Speaker, it is only through the efforts of every 
community that the fires of hate might be snuffed out. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it has been 
some 60 years since the end of the Second World War which 
also brought to an end one of the most horrendous acts taken 
against mankind, and I speak of the Holocaust and the attempt 
to annihilate the Jewish community in Europe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last spring I had the pleasure of joining the 
Minister of Finance, many community leaders, educators, and 
leaders in the Jewish community from across Canada on a trip 
to Poland to attend and participate in the March of the Living. 
This event was organized to remember the travesty of the 
Holocaust and those who died, and also to remind us how 
important it is for us to not only remember the tragedy of the 
Holocaust but to work to ensure that an event of this nature 
never happens to us again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you travel through Poland, whether it’s the 
Warsaw ghetto, whether it’s the camps at Treblinka, Auschwitz, 
Auschwitz-Birkenau, your heart is touched. And it’s just hard to 
imagine what took place some 60 years ago as men and women, 
boys and girls were taken from their homes never to return. 
 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

How important it is for us to not only remember but to continue 
to work to ensure that this doesn’t happen. And unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis we are continually reminded of 
the fact that we haven’t reached that utopia of peace where all 
men and women can continue to enjoy the peace that we enjoy 
in this nation today. May we continue to remember and never 
forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, April 23 
through 29, is National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness 
Week and in support my colleagues and I are wearing the green 
ribbon lapel pins. I note there is an information display on the 
lower level of this building. 
 
The Saskatchewan Coalition of Organ Donor Awareness, 
SCODA, along with this government, recognize the need to 
increase public awareness and education with regards to organ 
and tissue donation. SCODA is the only coalition of its kind in 
Canada and health care professionals throughout the country 
look to SCODA as a leader in collaboration initiatives to 
promote organ and tissue donation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the coalition references three primary facts as the 
foundation for necessity of an awareness campaign. First, only 
3 per cent of all deaths are of persons considered to be potential 
donors. Second, there is about 4,000 people awaiting transplants 
in Canada. And third, a single organ or tissue donation could 
save or improve the lives of at least 11 of these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the House may not know of my 
personal experience with this. My husband, Vic, received his 
transplant in the 11th hour. It’s a huge emotional impact to 
know that someone else’s loss is your salvation. I know that this 
final gift is deeply and gratefully appreciated, and I would like 
to invite all members to join with me in congratulating SCODA 
on its tireless efforts to bring light to organ and tissue donation 
on this National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination in The Battlefords 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to announce that last evening the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate was selected by the people of The Battlefords 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — To a packed house, to a packed house of 
over 350 people at the Tropical Inn in North Battleford, Herb 
Cox was announced as the next MLA for The Battlefords. 

Mr. Speaker, this was yet another heavily contested nomination, 
attracting five very competent community leaders vying for the 
opportunity to represent The Battlefords. The background of the 
candidates was impressive. They brought to the meeting their 
experiences in economic development, education, Aboriginal 
leadership, agriculture, business, law enforcement, and labour 
relations as well as extensive community involvement. This, 
Mr. Speaker, is what the Saskatchewan Party represents. 
 
The people of The Battlefords have chosen a very capable, 
hard-working, and sincere candidate to represent them in the 
next provincial election. Herb Cox is a man of action that 
understands the needs of the people in The Battlefords 
constituency. He’s involved in the community, Mr. Speaker, as 
a minor hockey coach, a 4-H leader, a director of the 
Saskatchewan Quarter Horse Association, as well as being the 
representative of his business colleagues. He and his wife have 
three adult children, unfortunately two of which have found 
employment outside this province. 
 
He will make a great addition to the Saskatchewan Party team, 
and we look forward to having him join us in forming the 
government after the next election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Joins 
Top 20 Employers 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Queen’s University School of Business has recently named the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, SOCO, one of 
Canada’s top 20 best small and medium employers. SOCO, 
operating as Innovation Place, for those who are not familiar, is 
the organization responsible for managing the province’s 
research parks in Regina and Saskatoon as well as the forest 
centre building in Prince Albert. 
 
This honour, Mr. Speaker, recognizes Canadian employers with 
employees possessing superior levels of interest and 
commitment to their organization’s success, relative to other 
companies surveyed. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Queen’s University of School of Business compiled the list 
of businesses based on methodology developed with the 
world’s largest human resources outsourcing and consulting 
firm, Hewitt Associates. 
 
This year, more than 100 small and medium employers 
registered to participate, Mr. Speaker, of which 80 ultimately 
qualified to compete for best employer status. 
 
As one of the top 20 small and medium employers in Canada, 
Innovation Place has been recognized as an organization where 
the staff are fully engaged in their work, proud of the difference 
they make, and supportive of the company’s mission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite the Assembly to join me in 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

congratulating SOCO for this prestigious award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Cancellation of Premier’s Dinner 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week the Saskatchewan Party brought this legislature news 
of the Premier’s southeast dinner in Weyburn. The Premier was 
to talk about his vision of the future for this province. 
 
However there was a glitch. No one wanted to hear this 
no-vision speech. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s 
southeast dinner has been cancelled — no sales. The Regina 
organizers of the big event informed people by email that the 
Premier and his caucus were no longer coming to Weyburn. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is happy to give this Chamber an 
update of the NDP’s leadership race: the member for Regina 
South, 12; member for Saskatoon Massey Place, 12; the 
Premier, zero. I guess the NDP are still reeling from the sparse 
crowd at their Weyburn nomination coronation, and the lack of 
interest in the NDP budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, higher education property taxes in the Weyburn 
area, long waiting lists for health care and education, higher 
taxes on oil production, the worst job creation record in Canada, 
is just not the vision the people of Weyburn are looking for. The 
people of Weyburn-Big Muddy just don’t want the tired, worn 
out, brown corduroy, shag carpet policies of the NDP 
government. What they want, Mr. Speaker, is the bright, fresh 
vision of the Saskatchewan Party. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Kraft Hockeyville 2006 Competition 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
March 27 at the Meadow Lake Minor Hockey Association 
annual general meeting, the ringing of the cellphones was 
absolutely deafening. That day it was announced that Meadow 
Lake had survived the first round of cuts in CBC’s [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] Kraft Hockeyville 2006 competition. 
 
More than 400 communities entered the competition, Mr. 
Speaker, of which only 50 were chosen for the next round. 
These communities, including Meadow Lake, submitted brief 
videos explaining why they should be crowned Kraft 
Hockeyville 2006 as the second phase of the competition. 
 
Carpenter High School students Kelsie Valliere and Krystina 
Arnold produced the video for Meadow Lake. The entry 
featured vignettes involving construction workers at PineRidge 
Ford playing hockey during their coffee break and a hockey 
game in the aisles of the Co-op Marketplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the video entries were aired on April 12 and April 

19 with 25 featured each night. Only 25 communities have been 
selected for the third round of the Kraft Hockeyville 2006 
competition, 20 of which were determined by a panel of judges 
and five which were determined by popular vote of the 
audience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased to announce that Meadow Lake 
has been chosen as one of the final 25 communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all 
members to join with me in congratulating the people of 
Meadow Lake in their success in CBC’s Kraft Hockeyville 
2006 and in wishing them the best of luck as the contest 
unfolds. And as they do for their MLA, vote early, vote often — 
but this time, vote for Meadow Lake. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Out-of-Province Medical Services 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister said that 
his department would be covering all of baby Paige’s medical 
costs while she is in Edmonton. And we thank the minister for 
that action. I know from speaking with the family that they’re 
greatly relieved to hear that the minister’s department will do 
that. 
 
Why, in the three weeks that baby Paige was in the Saskatoon 
health system, was the family never told in advance that if they 
chose to take baby Paige to Edmonton, that their costs would be 
covered? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member opposite will know, yesterday I announced that I 
have asked my deputy minister, in consultation with the quality 
of care coordinators and the chief medical consultant in the 
province, to conduct a review of what took place in this case, 
including activities such as that which the member opposite just 
raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that review is currently being undertaken. The 
deputy minister has informed me that he expects to have a 
report in my hands before the end of the week. And I will be 
pleased to be able to share some of that information with the 
member opposite when that report is received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping the minister 
himself, who is the head of this entire system, can answer a few 
of these questions. This family was led to believe all along that 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

they needed a referral in order to be pre-approved for funding. 
Mr. Speaker, in my dealings with Paige’s mother, Michelle, she 
told me that she asked anyone who would listen to please refer 
her daughter to Edmonton so that they could be pre-approved 
for funding. Paige’s family doctor told Michelle that he did not 
have the authority to refer her and that a referral would have to 
come from a pediatrician. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government is willing to pay for this 
treatment, why didn’t anyone in that system tell this family that 
they could go to Edmonton and their medical costs would be 
covered? Do people in the system not know that that is the 
policy of this government, or was this family simply given 
incorrect information? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated in response to questions last evening in estimates, the 
province’s out-of-province medical care expense policy has 
been in place for some time. That policy is such that 
out-of-province care is covered unless it requires prior approval 
for MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], cataract surgery, or 
bone density scans. Mr. Speaker, the physicians in this 
province, the specialists in this province, should be aware that 
that is the policy of the province. They should be aware that 
that’s the kind of message that they provide to their patients and 
people in need of care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, along with baby Paige’s 
family, I personally have some questions in this particular case. 
In trying to help this family get the care that baby Paige 
required, I myself made several phone calls. I spoke directly to 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority. While she was genuinely concerned about 
this case, she did not tell me that the family’s costs would be 
covered if they chose to go to Edmonton themselves. I spoke to 
the vice-president of rural health with the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority, and he did not inform me that the family’s 
costs would be covered if they went to Edmonton without a 
referral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to the minister, why aren’t the people, the 
people at the top of the regional health authority, telling patients 
that are desperate that they can go out of province without a 
referral and their costs will be covered? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again as I indicated in estimates last evening, when a person is 
referred — a patient or a resident of the province is referred out 
of province — it is generally for specialist care or for diagnostic 
treatment that does require a physician referral. Mr. Speaker, it 
is generally the physician that initiates the referral activity. It is 
generally the physician which takes the lead in these matters. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this particular case, the deputy minister has 

taken on the task, as well as the regional health authority, of 
reviewing all of the incidents in this case, and these incidents 
will be referred to me, I’m told, before the end of the week. And 
I will share that information with the member opposite when it 
is received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I personally would like 
some questions answered by that minister. I was so frustrated. I 
had phoned everyone that I could think about, the authority and 
the regional health authority. Honestly I would have phoned 
their dog had I known their phone number. 
 
And out of frustration I phoned that minister’s office. And you 
would think that someone working in the minister’s office 
would have known that baby Paige’s treatment would be 
covered if they did not have a referral and chose to leave the 
province. But guess again. The ministerial assistant that I dealt 
with from the Minister of Health’s office first asked me: what’s 
the minister supposed to do about this? And then he told me 
that Paige would need a referral from her pediatrician before 
she went to Edmonton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even that minister’s own aide was unable to tell 
me that this family did not need a referral and that the costs 
would be covered under reciprocal agreements. Mr. Speaker, 
why is his office not providing the information? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. The 
member opposite will remember just a few moments ago I 
outlined the policy which indicated that prior approval is 
required for MRI and bone density scans. Mr. Speaker, 
depending on the way the question was asked, what service was 
being required, it is entirely possible that the answer to the 
question would have been, for an MRI you need a referral; for a 
bone density scan you need a referral. 
 
In the case that’s in front of us, Mr. Speaker, the reference that 
has been made through the media, that an MRI was required 
may or may not have been part of the question. And also a bone 
density scan is different from a nuclear bone scan which was 
required in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that the review being done by the 
Saskatoon Health Authority and secondarily by my department 
is required to answer some of these questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be more than happy to help 
the minister out and along with his investigation. I asked that 
baby Paige be sent to a children’s hospital because they were 
unable to diagnose her in Saskatoon. So I didn’t ask for any 
specific tests. I did not know what was wrong with her, and I 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

am not a doctor and don’t know what needs to be done. 
 
Let’s just review for a minute all of the people that were 
contacted about baby Paige’s situation that I know of. The 
general practitioner, the health care workers in the St. 
Elizabeth’s Hospital in Humboldt, a pediatrician, numerous 
nurses, a quality care coordinator, other health care 
professionals that dealt with her in her two-week stay at Royal 
University Hospital, the CEO of the regional health authority, 
the vice-president of rural care for the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority, and the minister’s office itself — yet no one 
told myself or baby Paige’s parents that she could go to 
Edmonton to the sick children’s hospital and that costs would 
be covered. 
 
Why is this the best kept secret in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, Mr. Speaker, thank you very 
much. And I reiterate that the physicians in this province are or 
should be well aware of the province’s policy with regards to 
out-of-province referral. That having been said, Mr. Speaker, 
the results of the investigation will provide us with additional 
data on which to gauge and judge and make changes perhaps to 
the policy as we go forward. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that a lot of the 
questions being raised were, is this service available in the 
province of Saskatchewan, before a referral is made. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is also a part of the review that’s being taken on. 
Was the service available in the province of Saskatchewan? 
Were the physicians, the pediatricians available within the 
health region in Saskatoon to deliver the care that baby Paige 
required? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Timeliness and the urgency of a situation 
has to be factors that are looked at, not just whether or not it’s 
available at some time in Saskatchewan. The baby Paige case 
has also highlighted the work of quality care coordinators who 
do play a vital role within the system. And we’re concerned that 
they’re not providing the patients with all the options that are 
available to them. In this case this family was told by the 
quality care coordinator to go back to square one and see their 
family doctor. This was despite the fact that the child required 
diagnostic testing and a visit with the specialist. 
 
Emily Morley of Meath Park was initially told that she would 
have to wait three months for her visit with an oncologist. The 
family was told by the quality care coordinator that they should 
wait like everyone else. 
 
As the minister reviews all this, will he undertake in addition to 
the investigation into the specific baby Paige case to review the 
roles of the quality care coordinators to find out what can be 
done to improve the services that they are providing? 
 
[14:15] 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 
say that every aspect of this case will be reviewed as we take a 
look at what took place in the baby Paige case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I had indicated publicly previously, I take this 
case very seriously. I believe that not only the Saskatoon Health 
Region but the system as a whole can learn from what took 
place in this case and can ensure that by learning from it that we 
can ensure that it’s not repeated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have also indicated that I believe that the 
quality-of-care coordinator positions that were instituted a 
number of years ago are an important part of our system. The 
people doing that work are doing a tremendous job generally 
across the province. And we need to recognize and support the 
difficulties faced by the quality of care coordinators and respect 
the work that they are currently doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the minister 
that these are not the first cases that we have raised where the 
family doesn’t believe that they were provided with all the right 
information from the quality care coordinators. 
 
I’m sure all MLAs remember the case of Mr. Stan Szostak of 
Preeceville who was facing a three- to four-month wait for 
prostate cancer surgery in one health region, when the wait in 
another health region was much shorter. Yet the quality care 
coordinator failed to provide him with the information on that 
option. 
 
Again to the minister: will he commit today to review the role 
of the quality care coordinators to ensure that they are properly 
equipped with all of the information necessary that patients 
require? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question 
is certainly yes. I believe the quality of care coordinators 
provide an essential service within the system, and I want to do 
everything that I can from the position of minister to ensure 
they have all the tools necessary to ensure that they can do their 
job. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote to the 
member opposite if she hasn’t read the Regina Leader-Post 
from today, the editorial in the Regina Leader-Post which talks 
about the health care system. The final paragraph in the Regina 
Leader-Post editorial today reads and I quote: 
 

The message is clear: a few well-reported failures don’t 
reflect the reality that our health system is generally doing 
a [very] good job. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I support the people who are working hard within 
the system, that includes quality care coordinators. I will do all 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

that I can to ensure they have the tools necessary to do their job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in this House 
supports the front-line workers and understand that they’re 
doing the best they can. But the system is frustrating, and there 
are problems within the system as a whole. 
 
Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition asked the Premier to 
ensure that an external investigation of this situation be ordered. 
And as you know, the Premier and the Minister of Health both 
refused to have that done. 
 
It should be noted that there have been investigations into the 
health care system by external parties before. Dr. Jon Witt used 
to head up the emergency services at Royal University Hospital. 
After raising concerns about patient care and understaffing in a 
letter to the former minister of Health, an Edmonton-based 
consultant was called in to review the emergency services. Mr. 
Speaker, why was an external review ordered in that situation 
and not now? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to add to the information that the member already has 
from me personally and through the media, that the review that 
I have requested through the deputy minister includes the 
province’s chief medical advisor. That advisor, Mr. Speaker, is 
the chief medical officer for the Five Hills Regional Health 
Authority, a well-respected individual within the province, 
someone who is at length from the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority and the facility and physicians in question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very much a review that involves 
independent individuals to ensure that we get a medical review, 
a systems review, a process review, so that we can learn from 
the activity that took place there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Access to Emergency Room Services 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as an elected representative for 
the people of Saskatoon, I was horrified this morning when I 
read the story of Ron Bitz. Mr. Bitz had a serious heart attack 
March 15. He was driven to City Hospital but arrived 10 
minutes before the emergency room was to open at 9 a.m. Mr. 
Speaker, Ron Bitz was on the steps of a hospital, but the NDP’s 
health care system — the same health care system that the 
Premier likes to describe as an NDP health care system, the 
same one that he brags about — that system would not let Mr. 
Bitz through the doors. Mr. Speaker, why was that allowed to 
happen? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I appreciate the question from the members opposite. I 
read the newspaper this morning and read the account that 
appeared there of this case in Saskatoon, and like the member 
opposite, I found that there was reason to ask some questions in 
this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the division of authority is very clear with regards 
to the day-to-day operations of the health care system. And the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority and the emergency 
medical personnel at the City Hospital have made a number 
decisions and have policy in place which led to the 
circumstances that occurred there in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is important for all to recognize that the 
regional health authority made a decision some 10 years ago 
that they did not require three emergency rooms operating on a 
24-hour basis. And that policy is currently in place and 
operating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Ron Bitz was transported to 
another hospital by MD Ambulance. He got a bill for $275 for 
that ambulance trip because he picked the wrong hospital, 
because he assumed an NDP health care system would have its 
emergency rooms open. He assumed an NDP health care 
system would have trained staff in place to deal with his 
emergency. 
 
Will the Minister of Health to commit today to an investigation 
into this matter and the other matters that we are raising before 
this House? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I am aware from discussions with the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority that the regional health authority, 
which is their responsibility, has begun a review in this case. 
Mr. Speaker, that is entirely the appropriate way in which this 
case should be reviewed. I’ve asked for the results of that 
review to be made available to me. And I support the regional 
health authority’s review in this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Quality of Health Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network has a website listing wait 
times for medical procedures. That website says that there are 
29,192 people in our province waiting for treatment. Can the 
minister tell me how many of those patients would be eligible 
for out-of-province treatment? Better yet, can the minister tell 
us of those almost 30,000 patients in Saskatchewan, how many 
of them have been told the options that they have, like receiving 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

treatment outside of this province without pre-approval? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member opposite knows, we’ve spent a great deal of time, 
effort, and money over the last few years to reduce our wait 
times. Mr. Speaker, we are very pleased that on our 
long-waiters list, the reduction has been almost 50 per cent in 
the last two years alone on our long-waiters list. Mr. Speaker, 
we are making significant progress on our long-waiters list. 
 
And I ask the member opposite how he would have addressed 
this issue had he been in a position to initiate his own election 
promise of several years ago to freeze funding for regional 
health authorities and the health care in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let’s talk about this NDP government’s 
Surgical Care Network. They provide a toll-free number for 
people to phone in. Patients are encouraged to call this number 
so that they can, and in the brochure it says, have a 
communication link to the health care system. Mr. Speaker, if 
you were to call that toll-free number today, you’d get a 
recorded message. And this is what the recorded message says: 
due to a high volume of calls, it may take us a few days to get 
back to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that sick people calling the surgical care wait-list, 
finding out how long they have to wait for surgery, now being 
told how long they have to wait to find out how long they have 
to wait, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister comment on the fact that he’s 
asking people to wait to find out how long they have to wait? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let 
me preface my remarks in this regard to again quote, not from 
the Regina Leader-Post, but from this time from the Conference 
Board of Canada, Mr. Speaker, that says that Saskatchewan, 
according to the Conference Board of Canada, has the third best 
health care system in Canada. Mr. Speaker, we are very proud 
of that fact. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the fact that unlike 
many of the other provinces in Canada, we have initiated the 
Surgical Care Network — a way in which we can manage 
waiting lists. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I ask the member opposite to let us 
know how he would have done any of this by freezing the 
budgets of the health care system as was his election promise 
just a few short years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we heard the Premier angrily proclaim, “You bet it’s 
a New Democratic Party health care system in this province.” 
 
Well people around the province are understanding what health 
care means under this NDP government. What it means is that 
sick children don’t get the treatment they need and have to go 
out of province to find that treatment. What it means is that 
people phoning a wait-list are told to wait to find out how long 
they have to wait. That’s what the NDP health care system is all 
about. We are told that people that are going to the emergency 
rooms in Saskatoon have to wait to get into the emergency 
room because it’s not open yet. That’s the health care of this 
NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care system in this province is failing 
far too many people. When will the minister take his job for real 
and start dealing with the issues of wait-lists, of people having 
to leave the province, of the poor shape that this health care 
system is in? When will he start taking that job seriously? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I urge the member opposite to read the Regina 
Leader-Post this morning, the last paragraph of the editorial:  
 

The message is clear: a few well-reported failures don’t 
reflect the reality that our health system is generally doing 
a [very] good job. 

 
Mr. Speaker, more than $3 billion is now being assigned to the 
health care system from this budget. Mr. Speaker, had the 
budgets been frozen when the member opposite was claiming it, 
there’d be about one-half billion dollars less in the system 
today. Mr. Speaker, thank goodness the people of Saskatchewan 
have not had to find out what their life would have been like 
under that party government, Mr. Speaker, and they never will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the reality today is under this 
NDP government, people are not receiving the health care they 
need. They’re waiting outside of emergency rooms to get health 
care. They’re phoning surgical networks, waiting to find out 
how long they have to wait. People are having to be shipped out 
of the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, people don’t understand from this 
government, because they keep it hidden, what their options 
are. There is not once that this government has come clean and 
told people of the province that if they need care outside of the 
province, they will be covered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a kept secret. When will they come clean? 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

And instead of advertising the Finance minister’s budget for 
$500,000, maybe they should advertise what people can access 
from this Health department when it calls for out-of-province 
care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
looks like the members opposite don’t want to hear the answer 
to the final question of the member opposite. 
 
I simply remind the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that 
had that government been elected, had that party been elected, 
the system would have $1.5 billion fewer dollars in it, and the 
waiting lists would be longer. The care would be less. We’re 
proud of the system that we’ve got in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re learning from mistakes. But, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very, very proud of the people and the system that’s 
serving the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. For written questions, the Chair 
recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 
924 to 1,014. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 924 through to 1, 
014 inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into the Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — The question before the committee this 
afternoon is interim supply. Before the resolutions are 
introduced by the minister, I would ask of the minister to 
introduce the officials that he has with him this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
 
I am very pleased today to be joined by five officials who are 
with us from the Department of Finance. Sitting to my 
immediate left is Kirk McGregor, who is the acting deputy 
minister of Finance. Sitting to my right is Karen Layng, who is 
the assistant deputy minister responsible for treasury board . 

Behind her is Dennis Polowyk, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the treasury and debt management division. Directly 
behind me is Joanne Brockman, the executive director of 
economic and fiscal policy branch and the carrier of the 
calculator, she advises me, so any tough math questions will go 
to her today. And next to her is Terry Paton, the Provincial 
Comptroller. Those are the officials joining me. 
 
The Chair: — I now invite the minister to move his motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 
am a little new to this so you’ll forgive me as I work my way 
through the script. Motion no. 1 reads that: 
 

Be it resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,207,151,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2007. 

 
The Chair: — The motion before the Assembly is no. 1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,207,151,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2007. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair, thank you to 
the minister for his motion, and thank you for the attendance of 
his officials. I’d like to congratulate Mr. McGregor on his 
acting deputy minister’s position and wish him well in that 
position as the search goes on for a new deputy minister. 
 
First question to the minister. This year we’ve seen a budget 
that was presented after April 1, I think a first budget in a long 
time that was past the March 31 deadline. Can the minister just 
outline for the House why the delay and if indeed . . . Well just 
to begin with, why the delay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much for the question. 
The delay was in large part due to two reasons. First of all was 
the timing of my appointment into the portfolio. With my 
coming in at about February, I needed some additional time 
simply to come up to speed with the number of issues that we 
were dealing with in budget. That delayed the budget 
deliberation process somewhat. 
 
And second of all, because of the nature of the issues that we 
were considering, particularly the Vicq recommendations, I had 
wanted some additional time to consult with the business 
community about the implications of that and what their views 
were about this. I had wanted — although those consultations 
had initially been done by the previous minister of Finance — I 
had wanted to undertake them again myself just to hear 
first-hand what the concerns, issues, and understanding were of 
the business community. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I had heard 
that you were awaiting also some information from the federal 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

government. Was that the case? Was there any information that 
you were awaiting that contributed to the delay? If so, what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We were hopeful at the point that we 
working through the budget that we would have a better 
understanding of where the federal government would be going, 
both in terms of their own budgetary policy and also in terms of 
some of the major program issues. For example what their 
position was likely to be on CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization], where they were headed on issues like the 
equalization formula — 10-province standard with the 
exemption of natural resources — promised by Prime Minister 
Harper, those kind of issues. 
 
It became clear, I think, as the new federal government was 
getting seated and working through its budget process that they 
were going to take some more time to deliver their budget. We 
did not end up getting much clarification in terms of the 
direction they were going to pursue and as such based our 
assumptions on what we understood. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take from his 
answer that then this isn’t precedent setting, and in light of 
unusual circumstances that’s what happened this year and we 
will not see this in future years. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — My hope would be that the budget will 
be down well in advance of March 31 of next year. That’s the 
planning cycle we’re normally on. There were again largely two 
main issues for the delay. One was the cabinet shuffle and the 
second was really the issue around the Vicq commission. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you 
also for a copy of the interim supply. I guess you have to 
provide this to me if I’m going to know what you’re proposing. 
I just wish in the future that we could get this a little bit earlier. 
And the copy that I have here, it looks like it’s been 
photocopied quite a few times, and some of it is hard to read. So 
I hope in the future maybe we could get this at least the day 
before and have some time to prepare. 
 
That being said, I have a few questions here, Madam Speaker. 
Under Agriculture and Food, it talks about $205,000. It’s under 
the category of less statutory amounts. Can you tell me 
specifically what the $205,000 pertains to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The interim supply motion is relatively 
straightforward. As the member is aware, the Act provides us 
currently with one-twelfth . . . [inaudible] . . . What we are 
essentially now dealing with is two-twelfths, which will take us 
to the end of May, which will mean that we do not need to 
come back in May to do it. There’s actually not a need for us to 
be doing the interim supply, as I understand it, at this point for 
this first twelfth, but we’ve decided instead we want to go with 
the two-twelfths. 
 
The numbers that are provided within this list simply reflect 
two-twelfths of all expenditures with the exception of the 
Department of Learning, which I understand represents 
two-tenths because of the way that the school year funding 
works. Oh and SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation] also. 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Madam Chair, I understand the 
two-twelfths formula and with 264 million, that amounts to 44 
million. But there’s a category of less statutory amounts, 
205,000. And members on our side just had a question 
regarding that specific amount and I’m sure it’s something that 
the minister could point to and identify. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised that what we’re dealing 
with is the two-twelfths of the non-statutory vote. The statutory 
amounts are simply reflected there. They are simply required. 
So it is simply a statutory payment. 
 
The specific around the amount, I don’t have as to why that 
particular revolving fund has a net expense of 205,000 in it as a 
statutory requirement. But it is in fact a statutory and obviously 
triggered by some other piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll 
accept that answer and pass it on to my colleagues. Under the 
Environment department, it talks about the two-twelfths 
amounting to $33.47 million. Can the minister tell me if any of 
that is destined for capital expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The allocation of the two-twelfths 
allows the departments some flexibility to meet the 
expenditures that are coming forward. They’re expected to 
manage within the amount. There is or may well be within this 
some capital expenditure that they will undertake during the 
period under review. But it is largely a lump sum that is 
provided which allows them to manage their affairs between 
now and the time the budget is passed, at which point we will 
see the appropriate amounts reflected in each of the 
subcategories. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Madam Chair, 
to the minister, along that same line, the footnotes at the bottom 
of the page no. 2 talks about an amount allocated to the 
Property Management Corporation or Sask Property 
Management — $12 million. It says, of that, 6.382 million to 
provide for capital asset acquisition. Does the minister know 
what the specifics are of this capital asset acquisition that SPM 
would be undertaking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I understand what they’re looking at is 
413 vehicles which were ordered in January for April delivery. 
And this is to make sure that the vehicles are in place for the 
summer season. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the 
lending and investing category, the two-twelfths interim supply, 
there’s some smaller amounts for most departments yet the 
Advanced Education and Employment shows a $10 million 
figure under lending and investing. That seems to be quite a 
large sum compared to others in that category. Can the minister 
provide any additional details of what indeed that money would 
be used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It reflects monies required for the 
Student Aid Fund and as such reflects the usage within that 
fund at that point . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry. As I 
understand, it deals with loans to the Student Aid Fund is what 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

we’re dealing with here and so it is a usage issue. That’s why 
the number is fairly large. It has to do with the timing within 
that program. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Again, Mr. Minister, a similar question 
under Agriculture and Food — the sum of $67,000. Is the 
minister aware of what that would be used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am told it is the Ag revolving fund 
for pasture lands. And again it is the amount that is deemed to 
be necessary as we deal with this interim supply. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, the budget, as my 
colleague has asked, is an April budget and the year-end of 
March 31 passed before a new budget was introduced. 
 
Are there departments or are there third party funding . . . And 
I’m referring to school boards, hospital, regional health 
authority boards, those kind of different entities within the 
province of Saskatchewan. Do any of those boards receive 
funding on the 1st of the month? My question then being very 
specific is, was there funding entitlement to any agencies or 
boards on April 1 that has been missed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Perhaps what is best is that I simply advise you what the acting 
deputy minister has told me which is, pursuant to section 14(1) 
of The Financial Administration Act of 1993, departments were 
provided with an automatic interim supply. This is deemed to 
be a temporary measure and was largely based on the 
supplementary estimates and further estimates that we dealt 
with in November. There were in fact as a result no agencies 
that went without funding as a result of the delay in the budget. 
 
This interim supply however will provide the reflection of the 
new budget that was brought down on April 6. And so the 
previous interim supply was able to cover off the . . . or the, 
sorry, the provision under The Financial Administration Act 
was able to cover off the delay. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, that 
provision that you indicated was introduced not too long ago. 
Can you indicate what amount of monies are provided in the 
first month of a new budget based on previous supplementary 
estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is in fact one-twelfth of the previous 
budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So then, Mr. Minister, as a result of that 
provision for any entity that would have received funding on a 
normal basis on the first of the month, none of those different 
entities would have incurred any interest costs because they 
would not have had their funding from the provincial 
government in place at the expected time, which would have 
been April 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m not aware of any organizations 
that would have incurred any interest cost as a result of it. The 
only thing that was impacted by the delay in the budget was 

obviously organizations received no funding for new initiatives 
that were contained within the budget. 
 
So it was essentially a status quo budget until it’s released in the 
legislature at which point we now, through this set of interim 
supply, reflect the funding for new initiatives. So agencies, third 
parties that might have been receiving funding for new 
initiatives will receive that through this interim supply. They 
would not have been covered off under the previous allocation, 
which really dealt with what the supplementary estimates were 
in November. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I note 
in the Department of Learning estimates — and I know this is a 
specific department, but on a global basis — a number of the 
funds that are allocated are based on the provision of actual 
expenses. Some of the funding has changed and, as former 
minister of Learning, I’m sure you were aware of that. 
 
Does the interim supply that we’re dealing with today, does that 
cover off monies that are allocated on a monthly basis? Or will 
it also include any funding for some of the provisions that you 
have indicated are now within the budget, that the particular 
board of education must actually supply receipts and invoices 
and make a application — I guess is the best way of putting it 
— for conditional funding? Does interim supply cover off 
conditional funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The school boards receive two-tenths 
under this appropriation, under this interim supply Bill, to 
recognize the way that their costs are dealt with. 
 
The question about how the actuals are then dealt with, it is in 
fact dealt with on a reconciled basis after this as we actually go 
through the year. So this is largely a lump sum payment. And as 
the year moves on, we reconcile with what the actuals are. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a general 
question for the minister then. As far as the whole column of 
two-twelfths interim supply, can he point to anything that is out 
of the ordinary or anything that specifically needed to be 
funded, anything that’s out of the usual circumstance that needs 
to be done from this funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The only two issues that would be out 
of the ordinary are in fact the 18.8 million for the Department of 
Learning which represents two-tenths, and the 6.4 for the 
Department of Property Management which deals with some of 
the construction projects and the 413 vehicles I’d indicated. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A few general 
questions just regarding the debt of the province this year, and I 
see that the Bank of Canada hiked the interest rate again for the 
sixth consecutive time, and I suspect our debt payments, the 
interest rates will be increasing somewhat. But can you just 
outline for me, regarding the provincial debt, how much of it 
will come due this year on a average basis and what we’re 
looking at as far as the extension out of the long-term debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am advised that this year we’re 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

expecting to borrow, as reflected on page 73 of the budget and 
performance plan summary . . . $1.117 billion is what we have 
coming due this year. And so we would be refinancing that 
within the market. We’re expecting that the assumptions which 
are built into the budget I’m told on page 63 are still holding 
true and that we are expecting no significant upward pressure. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you for 
that information. Just a question about the, you know, the price 
of oil and what we’ve seen happen lately. Oil touched $75 US 
[United States] a barrel on Friday. It’s down a little bit. Over 
the course of the first quarter, it’s quite conceivable that we 
could be well above your estimate of $60 US a barrel. Can the 
minister tell me if there’s any calculations, any estimates on 
where we’ll be at the first quarter, based on what we’ve seen so 
far in the first month of the first quarter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is in fact too early to say. And I 
think as we’ve seen with some of the volatility in the market, 
it’s hard to tell what was necessarily driving it up towards that 
$75 number. We are still anticipating at this point that we are 
going to be relatively close with the overall year rates. 
 
The one question that obviously comes up and — although the 
member himself hasn’t asked it — I hear fairly often is, at what 
point do we then, if we have some windfall money, start to 
think about reallocating it? My suggestion would be that that 
would certainly not occur in the first quarter. This is something 
that, if it did appear, that we needed to look at some change in 
projection. If the price of oil were staying high, we would start 
to look at that probably closer to the midterm as those numbers 
come in. But at this point it’s hard to tell. 
 
I would just indicate for the member’s information that during 
the budget process, we saw oil fluctuating anywhere from as 
low as 57 to about 63. So there is still some volatility although 
that seems to have narrowed somewhat in terms of the overall 
piece. 
 
The second issue that affects oil prices, at least in terms of what 
the provincial government receives, is the value of the dollar 
which is also up about two and a half . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . 2 cents, about 2 cents higher than we had 
estimated in the budget. So these two interact to a certain 
extent. So we’ll need to really see what the first . . . several 
more weeks in until we’ll have any idea of what the first quarter 
looks like, but I wouldn’t be looking at making any substantive 
changes in terms of mid-year spending until truly mid-year. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
Chair, I guess I’m quite concerned about that comment because 
of the lack of funding in the budget for the CAIS program. It’s 
been outlined by yourself and by the Minister of Agriculture in 
the House that CAIS was not funded in this budget, and we 
would look to subsequent reports from yourself to fund CAIS. 
 
And I was hoping that at least at the first-quarter report we 
could get CAIS funded, have that taken care of and look at 
other priorities like, you know, reducing income tax for 
low- and middle-income people or putting it on the debt. Or I 
guess where I was going to go with some of this questioning is, 

what were your priorities? But my concern is that CAIS was not 
funded. The amounts were some $150 million less than last year 
for agriculture, total. And when would the minister anticipate, 
you know, his commitment to CAIS funding this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think I’ve indicated several times 
both in the Assembly and publicly — certainly the Minister of 
Agriculture last night indicated in the House — that this is 
something that we’ll look at, at third quarter, as the final 
numbers become available. 
 
I don’t at this point know what the final cost is for the CAIS 
top-up, and I would argue that I doubt that anyone else does at 
this point. So we need to see what the 2006 numbers look like 
first, at which point then we’ll make a decision about the 
third-quarter expenditure for it. But this is an expenditure, at the 
earliest, that’ll come in the third quarter. 
 
I think the Minister of Agriculture indicated last night we are in 
fact about six months ahead of other provinces in terms of the 
commitments on this, who in many cases — these other 
provinces — wait until the next fiscal year to in fact make the 
payments under the previous year’s commitments. So we’re 
doing this, we’re attempting to do this within the current year. 
We’ll have a better idea of what those numbers are when the 
final information becomes available around the third quarter. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m a little 
disappointed in the answer, but I guess we’ll just have to live 
with it. I know in my first year in this House that we were 
waiting well into December, well into the last few days of the 
year, before we saw any commitment whatsoever towards 
CAIS. And I would just encourage him if he could see his way 
to fund it earlier, that certainly members on this side of the 
House would encourage him to do that. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister, just talking, looking at page 78 of the 
budget performance summary, we see that the increase in the 
net debt for the Government of Saskatchewan — a figure that 
has been well documented across the province — the increase 
in the net debt as a result of this budget was $288.5 million. Can 
the minister outline right now why he saw it fit to increase the 
net debt of the province of Saskatchewan at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to address two issues. First of 
all on the issue of CAIS, if the member opposite has some 
knowledge of what the 2006 final numbers are, I would 
appreciate him sharing them with us so that we know 
specifically what it is those 2006 final numbers are. 
 
At this point the federal government’s not been able to provide 
us with that. The program’s not been able to provide us with 
that, and we would not be in a position to make a decision about 
the final top-up until we see the numbers. I think that that’s a 
perfectly rational way for us to undertake the budgeting 
although it is different in other provinces that force their 
producers to wait until the next fiscal year to actually have that 
money available. 
 
On the question of the debt, I think that I would draw the 
attention of the member to page 76 of the budget and 
performance plan summary. At the bottom of that he . . . About 
midway through, bottom of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund there’s 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

a number of . . . Oh sorry, bottom of Treasury Board 
organizations’ list, there’s an issue identified here as adjustment 
to account for pension costs on an accrual basis. 
 
The actuarials changed the assumptions within the plan. This 
resulted in a charge of $336 million to the treasury and as such 
that is reflected in terms of the overall increase in the debt. Had 
there not been that change in the actuarial assumptions, then 
debt of the province would have decreased. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you 
for the answer on the CAIS question. Certainly we will look at 
what other provinces do. I had some information that Alberta 
was well ahead and prepared to do the funding. But I think 
more importantly what I heard from the minister is a 
commitment to fund CAIS as soon as possible within the 
Department of Finance’s realm and also when the accurate 
numbers are in place. So that’s the important commitment that 
he’s made, and we hope that he does it in a timely manner. 
 
Can the minister elaborate on the adjustment to account for 
pension costs on accrual basis? Certainly it’s, you know, a third 
of a billion dollars there. Can he just tell me exactly what 
necessitated the adjustment? Of course it’s important that these 
numbers be taken into account. And as the Provincial Auditor 
has stated, the summary financial statements are the important 
one to look at. The debt has gone up by 288.5 million, and that 
would be certainly information I’d like to get from the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I suspect it’s clear to everyone 
that it was a change in the discount rate, whatever that means. 
This is one of these complicated issues that actuarials deal with. 
And it is probably something that we should pursue in terms of 
providing some more detailed explanation at a later date. But it 
largely deals with the change of assumptions actuarials have 
made in terms of what they expect the plan to either earn or a 
number of people to draw down on it or what the basic 
assumptions are. I’m afraid I don’t have a more detailed 
explanation at this point. But it may be best pursued directly 
with the officials. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly the 
discount rate is something that I haven’t been briefed on either 
by our officials, so I’m not well aware, although the former 
Finance critic probably has a book on it somewhere that he 
could share that information with me. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve provided me with some information — 
components of the tax estimates — in a timely manner, and I 
appreciate that. There’s one document that I still require, and 
it’s called, the other federal-provincial programs. Could I have 
your undertaking today to provide that information? If you 
don’t have it with you, to get it to me as soon as you can? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes I’m sorry. I didn’t realize that that 
wasn’t attached at the time, but I’ll certainly endeavour to 
provide that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And again I’m 
sure that you would provide that information. I appreciate that. 
 
Just a general question regarding relations with the federal 
government, can the minister outline for us if he’s had 

conversations with the new Finance minister, if he’s undertaken 
to have any meetings in the next while, and what the status of 
relations are with the federal government and the provincial 
government with the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I have had one very preliminary 
conversation with Minister Flaherty. He had called shortly after 
being appointed. I welcomed him to his new position. Both he 
and I, of course being new, were looking forward to getting an 
opportunity to meet with each other and to have an opportunity 
to talk about some of the significant issues. I have not had any 
other contact with the federal minister. 
 
Obviously there’s been a number of discussions with federal 
officials through the officials channels about how various issues 
are being pursued. I anticipate at this point that we are looking 
at the national Finance ministers coming together at some point 
in late June to talk about a number of issues. Obviously one of 
them will be the priority of the new administration to deal with 
fiscal imbalance and other things. 
 
I have to say that I am optimistic that we are going to see this 
new administration take an approach which will favour Western 
Canada, which will deal with some of our historic grievances. 
We of course are heartened by the Prime Minister’s 
commitment to undertake a change in equalization, at least to 
deal with the movement of equalization to a 10-province 
standard with the removal of natural resource issues in it. 
 
That is a huge benefit to Saskatchewan and, I would argue, to 
western Canadians if you were to undertake this change to the 
equalization program. In Saskatchewan’s case it means a 
difference of about $850 million a year to the fiscal payments. 
This means $850 million of Saskatchewan taxpayer money 
that’s currently flowing to Ottawa would be retained in the 
province for various expenditures. 
 
So I’m optimistic that as the federal government is able to bring 
down their budget — as they are able to work their way through 
a number of these files — that we are going to find a good 
working relationship. For my part, I am quite interested in 
working with the new federal government to deal with some of 
these issues. 
 
This is not necessarily the approach that, in terms of a 
full-change equalization, that we would like. But just as we said 
with the Martin government, we were prepared to work with 
them in a way that met their commitments and their priorities, I 
would say the same again to Prime Minister Harper’s 
government — that we’re interested in being a co-operative 
partner in the federation and helping it work. 
 
What we need, however, to see are a couple of major issues 
dealt with, and there are some very significant issues that 
Saskatchewan will be pressing the federal government for. 
Number one is for the Prime Minister to act quickly to 
implement the 10-province standard with the exemption of 
natural resources. If we go to the 10-province standard, I am 
told that it is $894 million worth of upside to the province of 
provincial money that currently flows to Ottawa that would be 
retained. If it is based on the — is it the five-province standard? 
— five-province without the natural resource clawback in it, it’s 
834 million. 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

And the other major issues that we’ll be looking to work with 
the federal government on is to get certainly a better 
understanding of where Minister Strahl is going with CAIS and 
what Ottawa may be dealing with in terms of national 
agriculture financing. This has been a difficult issue. There’s no 
doubt been a great deal of debate in this House about what the 
federal government may be undertaking on that, that’s 
significant to us. The other issue that we’ll be looking at is 
where they decide to move in terms of dealing with the 
Kelowna accord and what the implications are in terms of First 
Nations funding. 
 
The only dark cloud I would say that is on the horizon — and it 
is indeed not, you know, close; it’s not a huge difficulty at this 
point — is that none of these three issues that we’ve identified 
that would be at the top of our list to deal with Ottawa are 
indeed at the top of their list. And unfortunately each of these, 
as we deal with Ottawa, are often characterized as priority six 
on their list of five priorities they want to deal with. 
 
I think as the federal government settles into office, as they 
become more comfortable with running the federal government 
and indeed engage the provinces more, we’ll start to see them 
engage on these other issues. We’re prepared to give them some 
time to do that, mindful that every day that we delay the move 
to the 10-province standard costs Saskatchewan two and a half 
million dollars. So those are our three issues. 
 
We’re interested in working with the federal government, and 
I’m hopeful that we are going to have a positive working 
relationship. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Chair recognizes the hon. member 
for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And before 
my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, 
concludes his questioning, Mr. Minister, a couple of questions 
on debt servicing and renewal of debt. I know my colleague has 
asked a couple of questions regarding debt. 
 
I note from the government document, from the budget 
document that you provided, that the debt servicing estimate for 
this year versus the forecast for the conclusion on March 31 ’06 
is very nearly the same, approximately $550 million. However I 
note that the interest or the debt servicing costs for last year, 
forecast versus estimate, is in fact about $40 million less. I’ve 
talked to officials within your department about the Public 
Accounts document — and I don’t have my Public Accounts 
document with me — and I know that there are various maturity 
changes that occur with monies that are coming due. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could indicate as debt 
matures in this year, in this fiscal year ’06-07, do you expect 
that the new debt that will be required to set up a new system of 
repayment on that debt, will you be incurring similar interest 
rates, or in fact will you be incurring less interest rate in 
relationship to the interest rate of the debt that is now maturing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I understand that the reason the 
numbers work — in the simplest of terms — is that the debt 
that’s retiring, we have nothing retiring at a rate of more than 
10, and we’re not expecting to look at a rate of much more than 

6 on anything we’re financing new. So these are going to be 
relatively close I think as they work out, is my understanding. 
 
The second issue that impacts somewhat is we are dealing with 
somewhat higher than normal cash balances. So in fact this may 
reduce some of our borrowing need. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then going back to my 
comments initially, the $40 million less cost for debt servicing 
for last year, from the estimate to the forecast, what were the 
main factors that contributed to $40 million less debt servicing 
costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It did in fact have to deal with cash 
balances. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Minister, getting back to your 
comments regarding the federal government . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Excuse me. I recognize the hon. 
member for Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, 
getting back to federal-provincial relations and the comments 
that he made regarding the federal government, on behalf of the 
official opposition, I’d just like to extend our co-operation in 
dealings that he has with the federal government. 
 
His predecessor, the previous minister of Finance, invited me to 
attend a meeting with the Senate committee regarding 
equalization. I think it sent a powerful message to that body 
when both the opposition and the government attended and 
made the case for Saskatchewan. So I’d certainly extend our 
co-operation and any assistance that we can be as he talks about 
equalization with the federal government or any other relation 
that will be a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time I’d like to, Mr. Chair, thank the minister and his 
officials today and look forward to providing the funding 
necessary to provide people of Saskatchewan with the programs 
that they’ve paid for through their tax dollars. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. Members of the committee, 
the resolution before the House is: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,207,151,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2007. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. There is a second 
resolution that I would invite the Minister of Finance to move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I would move: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $1,207,151,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $1,207,151,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
This is the resolution. Is there any debate on it? Are members 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — All those in favour of the resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. Any dissenting? So that 
is carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I would move that the committee rise and that the Chair 
report that the committee has agreed to certain resolutions and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that 
the committee rise and report the resolutions just referred to. Is 
it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the Committee of Finance has agreed to 
certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the same, and to 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read a 
first time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would move that the resolutions be now read the first 
and second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Later this day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. By leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 65, 
The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 1) be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 65, The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 1) be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is the leave of the Assembly 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — By leave of the Assembly and under 
rule 57(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Granted. 
 
Moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 65, The 
Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 1) be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 62, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2006. As many members will know, 
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act establishes a key element 
of the provincial financial assistance for urban and rural 
municipalities. These amendments will give legal effect to 
decisions announced in the 2006-07 budget. 
 
The Bill establishes the amount of the funds available this year 
to both the urban revenue-sharing pool and the rural 
revenue-sharing pool. As you will recall, Madam Speaker, the 
fiscal circumstances of the province late in the 2005-06 fiscal 
year enabled our government to provide municipalities with a 
supplementary top-up to revenue sharing of just over $12 
million. 
 
That, Madam Speaker, brings us to the 2006-07 fiscal year and 
the Bill that I present today. Madam Speaker, I am pleased to 
announce that this Bill provides for an ongoing increase this 
year for urban revenue sharing of $7.4 million and for rural 
revenue sharing of $4 million. This, together with funding for 
northern municipalities, represents an increase of $12.2 million 
to revenue-sharing grants provided to municipalities from last 
year’s budgeted amount. 
 
Madam Speaker, this means that over the last four years, 
through various increases, our government has provided over 
$102 million more in municipal revenue sharing than 
municipalities would otherwise have had. Municipalities are 
now receiving over $42 million more annually to assist in their 
day-to-day expenses and operations. Madam Speaker, this 
year’s revenue-sharing program in total will distribute over $97 
million to municipalities in this province. That is a 76 per cent 
increase over what was provided through revenue sharing in 
2001. 
 
Our government is committed to increasing revenue sharing as 
resources permit to ensure stable, sustainable long-term funding 
for municipalities. This increase means an additional $5.3 
million in unconditional funding for cities. For towns, villages, 
and resort villages, the increase is $2.1 million. And for rural 
municipalities, Madam Speaker, the increase is, as I indicated, 
$4 million. 
 
My officials have consulted with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, the cities, and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities on how to distribute the 
funds this year. Their views have been considered. 
 
The cities have agreed to make further progress in 
implementing a new distribution strategy by using a two tiered 
system. Saskatoon and Regina will each receive a $63.01 per 
capita payment, and all other cities will receive a $75.01 per 
capita payment. All towns and villages will receive an 
additional $10.13 per capita payment over what was received 

last year through the revenue-sharing program. It should be 
noted, Madam Speaker, that these per capita increases are made 
using the 2001 census Canada population figures. 
 
We will be pursuing discussions with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association over the coming year regarding the 
distribution formula for revenue sharing for town and villages. 
The distribution formula needs to be updated. Next year the 
2006 census figures will become available. This may provide 
the opportunity to begin to update the formula. 
 
Madam Speaker, individual rural municipalities will receive 
unconditional revenue-sharing grants as determined by a 
formula that includes both a transportation and a service 
component. This formula is based 85 per cent on the road 
system in each RM [rural municipality] while the remaining 15 
per cent is based on a three-year rolling average of expenditures 
such as protective services or culture and recreation services. 
This formula was developed and implemented in consultation 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities a 
few years ago. 
 
In addition, Madam Speaker, the formula for rural 
municipalities provides a degree of equalization for 
municipalities with different fiscal capacities as costs will be 
adjusted based on the taxable assessment of each RM and on 
the varying costs of providing services. 
 
There are two other aspects of this Bill that bear mentioning, 
Madam Speaker. First, as I noted earlier, the province’s fiscal 
situation late in the last fiscal year enabled the government to 
pay just over $12 million to municipalities as a top-up to 
revenue sharing. At the recommendation of the Department of 
Justice, this Bill includes some minor amendments to the 
wording in section 4 that will ensure proper statutory authority 
exists to exceed the maximum amount payable in 
revenue-sharing grants if this situation arises again in the future. 
 
Second, members will note that this Bill includes a repeal of 
section 10 concerning grants to organized hamlets. These 
provisions, Madam Speaker, will be moved and added to The 
Rural Municipalities Revenue Sharing Regulations. This will 
provide more consistency in where the formula for rural 
revenue-sharing grants are described. All the other formula for 
rural revenue-sharing grants are currently found in those 
regulations. Moving the organized hamlet grant section to the 
regulations will also provide an opportunity to review the grants 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 
 
In closing, Madam Speaker, I’ll remind all members that this 
Bill will help to provide for over $97 million of revenue-sharing 
grants to be distributed amongst all Saskatchewan 
municipalities. Madam Speaker, this funding is critical to the 
prosperity and well-being of all communities and municipalities 
in Saskatchewan, and I urge all members to support this Bill. 
 
Madam Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 62, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . I recognize the 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It’s a . . . to get up 
to talk on this particular Bill. This Bill is very important to all 
the residents of Saskatchewan, whether you’re in a city, 
whether you’re in a village or a town or a resort. And I’ve met 
with many RMs, many towns in my constituency and there’s a 
few points I would like to just put on record that they want me 
to pass. 
 
And one of them is, they would always like to know is that they 
were going to be guaranteed a set amount of money coming in 
so they can plan. Budget for a few years in advance is what they 
would like, so they would know from year to year what they are 
going to get; especially on capital projects as your waterworks 
are changing, your sewer infrastructure — a lot of them are 
having to update that. And they would like a steady stream of 
knowing in advance of always the money they’re going to have 
so you can plan. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Another issue is with the smaller towns I have and the resort 
area. Unfortunately they’re losing people and a lot of the grants 
are on per capita at that end of it. So their money is shrinking 
even though the government may be increasing a little bit at one 
end. But because you’re going back to per capita, they’re also 
losing. And when the new census comes out, unfortunately 
some of my towns are going to be — especially the smaller 
ones — are going to be dropping in people. So that makes it a 
little more of a challenge too with them because, unfortunately, 
it still costs the same amount of money to supply safe drinking 
water, for garbage removal, for all the services that they’re 
entitled to at that end of it. 
 
So those are some of the issues that have been raised with me 
over the years and I hope that we can pass it on to the 
government, is . . . One of them is a steady funding so they can 
plan years in advance because it’s getting expensive to run 
services on, whether it is garbage disposal, on the rules, 
regulations out there, whether they . . . Some of them are 
talking about doing some regional, going into some regional 
development, whether it’s a pipeline being brought in or on a 
garbage disposal on a regional end. But you also need to know 
what kind of funding they’re going to be getting. 
 
And also to the towns, that they can kind of plan for years in 
advance, because these are going to be huge capital projects if 
you’re bringing in pipelines at that end. 
 
And also, is it the per capita? They would like that addressed. 
 
This particular year with the flooding out our way, we have 
extra costs with the towns. The town of Kenaston, Bladworth, 
some of the towns I know on No. 11 Highway have to spend 
extra money this year. 
 
Bladworth, in fact, was pumping water for I think about four 
days steady. So, you know, that diesel and gas adds up and also 
paying somebody to maintain it. So there’s extra costs this year 
that they normally don’t have from year to year and one of them 
is water with that. In fact, they had quite a bit of trouble just 
protecting the sewer system — the pumphouse — around it. 
They had to bag it with sand so it didn’t get surrounded with 
water and contaminate the well at that end. 

And I know other towns had that trouble with flooding this year 
because we even had . . . Out our way, we haven’t had this kind 
since ’74. So I know that that puts another little pressure on the 
drain on the money. 
 
So with that, with this particular Bill, I would like to send it out 
to some towns. And I know that other MLAs would probably 
like to talk on this particular Bill because it, like I say, it affects 
every town and village and major city in Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would adjourn debate 
on this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill 63, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
This Bill incorporates the recommendations of the Vicq 
commission that was previously commissioned by the 
government and incorporates those incentives that I had 
indicated in the budget speech. Specifically this Bill undertakes 
so that effective July 1, 2006, the corporation capital tax rate 
will be reduced by one-half to 0.3 per cent; on July 1, 2007 the 
rate will be reduced to 0.15 per cent; on July 1, 2008 the tax 
will be eliminated. 
 
While the corporation capital tax will still apply to financial 
institutions and Crown corporations, the tax will be eliminated 
on all new capital investment as of July 1 of this year, 
impacting approximately 1,100 private sector corporations 
should they decide to take advantage of the changes. 
 
In addition to implementing Vicq, the government has also 
gone one step further, as I had indicated that we had undertaken 
to make sure new capital was exempt from the corporate capital 
tax as of July 1. 
 
In conjunction with the phased elimination of the general 
corporate capital tax rate, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill 
reduces the corporate capital tax resource surcharges rates 
levied on resource production. 
 
These changes, although not initially contained in the Vicq 
commission report, were embarked upon as a result of 
discussions with the resource sector. These changes will reduce 
in total the corporate capital tax revenue by 48.8 million in this 
fiscal year. And when fully implemented, the corporate capital 
tax reforms will reduce revenue by approximately $120.2 
million. 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

Over the next four years we anticipate this, combined with the 
corporate income tax reforms, will see an incentive to business 
of approximately $620 million. In so doing we believe that 
these changes will help make Saskatchewan businesses more 
competitive. They will help attract new investment and new 
jobs. And they will help ensure that Saskatchewan is the best 
place in Canada to live, to work, and to raise a family. 
 
As such I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance. I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on second reading of An Act 
to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that this piece of legislation has 
been a piece of legislation that has been looked forward to for 
some time in this province as we struggle to become 
competitive with neighbouring jurisdictions. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I think that this particular legislation indeed is, from 
my reading of it, implementing the recommendations of the 
Vicq report which reviewed the corporate tax regime in this 
province and made these recommendations very clear. 
 
I also am mindful of the fact that the opposition Finance critic 
was the first presenter to the Vicq commission and highlighted 
the fact that this type of competitive changes had to be made in 
order to make our jurisdiction able to compete with our 
neighbours on both sides and indeed internationally. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we are quite confident that the 
business sector is going to welcome these changes, and we 
would like to communicate directly with them to judge the 
specific impact that these changes are going to have. And in 
order for that to happen, at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Debate adjourned on this motion. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 60 — The 
Evidence Act/Loi sur la prevue be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we have had the 

opportunity to review this Bill and to do some preliminary 
consultation with regard to this Bill. 
 
We recognize that our evidence Act in its present form has not 
been amended in any significant form for nearly a century. It 
was an old Act when I was in law school, and it’s been little 
changed since. We recognize the need to move forward with 
this type of legislation and to have this type of legislation made 
consistent and compatible with our federal legislation because 
often proceedings in courts and tribunals will pass through 
courts where both federal and provincial laws are applicable. So 
for that reason, we are supportive of this Bill going forward. 
 
We note as well that this Bill deals with updated technologies 
and allows for a recognition that documents will be presented in 
electronic format or that tape recordings may be presented as 
well as a variety of other things. It will be necessary, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, as this type of technology continues to grow, 
that we continue to review our legislation and make changes 
that will ensure that the legislation maintain an up-to-date 
compliance with all the various current technology as it comes 
in. And we also have to recognize that technology is growing at 
an exponential rate, so the work for legislators and the work for 
people in the Department of Justice will continue to grow in 
that area. 
 
We note as well that this Bill contains recognition of the change 
in society, that we have a large number of couples that are not 
living in a traditional marital relationship. We now have a 
number of pieces of legislation that recognize common law 
relationships. And this Bill will go to dealing with the 
competence and compellability of witnesses that are involved in 
common law relationships, and specifically addresses issues of 
spousal violence and issues where somebody may be required 
to testify either for or against a common law spouse, which is 
clearly a recognition of where our society is at today’s date. 
 
We recognize that a codification of a lot of common law is now 
embedded in this statute, and this will make work easier for our 
police officers and for our Crown prosecutors. It’s appropriate 
at this time to recognize the hard work that is done by our 
Crown prosecutors and by our police officers. And legislation 
that makes their work easier or easier to identify things that 
have to be done is certainly a necessary step in the right 
direction. And we support that aspect of the legislation. 
 
We note as well, Madam Deputy Speaker, that it contains 
provisions to allow underage witnesses or witnesses under 14 to 
testify, or witnesses that have diminished mental capacity, and 
deals with video recordings or recordings where they’re able to 
provide evidence from afar. It deals with credibility and 
identification of individuals and a large number of things that 
represent current or more up-to-date practices in law 
enforcement. 
 
It also recognizes that evidence is given in a sworn form before 
a variety of administrative and other tribunals and makes 
revisions to allow where that evidence can be used or where it 
cannot be used in dealing with other matters. So it is a 
recognition that our society has now progressed beyond merely 
the Court of Queen’s Bench and other adversarial court 
processes but that we’ve now embodied a number of other 
administrative tribunals. And it deals with the applicability and 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

how evidence is brought before those tribunals, and it also deals 
with how that evidence may be used in other tribunals. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the opposition is prepared to let this 
Bill go to committee. In committee we will have a number of 
questions for the minister, and I may just as well use this 
opportunity to give him and his department officials a heads up 
on this. We will have specific questions regarding the 
consultation process that took place between members of the 
Law Society, the Canadian Bar Association, and law 
enforcement officials. 
 
So for whatever benefit that gives the minister, it may make 
things easier as this Bill goes through committee. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we’re prepared to vote on this Bill at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 60, The 
Evidence Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 60, The Evidence 
Act be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 60, The Evidence Act be now referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 61 — The 
Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is the 
companion legislation to Bill No. 60. It deals with the changes 
that are necessary to ensure that this Bill can be available and 
used in both official languages. As such it should be moved 
through committee in tandem with the main Bill, No. 60, and as 

such we are prepared to let that Bill be voted into committee as 
well. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 61, The 
Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 61, The Evidence 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 61, The Evidence Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
[15:45] 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 50 — The 
Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 
2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 
Reine (médiation) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there is a saying that 
a poor negotiated settlement is still better than a well-litigated 
judgment. I’m not sure that I entirely agree with that statement. 
However there is no doubt that we are at a point in our society 
where we recognize mediation and where we recognize other 
alternate dispute resolution methods of dealing with disputes 
between people. This Bill addresses some of those issues and 
tries to put into legislation the ability to have disputes mediated 
rather than to go forward with litigation. 
 
Some years ago, in 1998, pilot projects were implemented that 
required mandatory mediation to take place in Queen’s Bench 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

matters at the close of pleadings and before examinations for 
discovery took place. That experiment, through the hard work 
of people like Ken Acton who is the designated head mediator 
for the province, proved to be enormously successful. 
 
I think I’d like to add at this time that the success of that 
depends a lot on the nature of the litigants and the type of 
encouragement that’s given to them by their lawyers before 
they participate in the mediation process. 
 
In any event, Madam Deputy Speaker, the successes that took 
place as a result of that pilot project caused the legislation to be 
amended in 1998, and now mandatory mediation takes place 
throughout the province. As well as that, the Small Claims 
Court has got a mandatory mediation meeting or a early 
settlement date where the litigants meet with the judge as soon 
as the claim is being filed. 
 
This process has proved to be enormously successful. It brings 
people together. It puts a human face on the negotiation and on 
the process and allows people to explore possibilities for 
settlement before the cost and expense of litigation precludes 
settlement going forward. One of the changes that will take 
place is that now, if parties are willing, they can go to a 
mediation before the claim has even been filed or served, which 
is another step forward to try to reduce the expense of litigation 
and to explore every possible settlement process or option that’s 
available. 
 
The process is a fairly straightforward process. You meet 
separately with the mediator, then a joint meeting together, and 
the mediator tries to explore options without being judgmental, 
induces some discussion and some information sharing and tries 
to see whether there is common ground. In some cases where a 
settlement isn’t negotiated at the mediation, often the seeds of a 
settlement are sown, and the settlement will take place later on. 
As part of the process and part of the legislation, the 
information that’s shared and the without-prejudice comments 
that are made cannot be used or cannot be brought up in a court 
later on if the matter is unsuccessful in being settled. 
 
We recognize the complexity and the expensive nature of legal 
proceedings. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill will go a 
long ways to try and reduce that for litigants. It is not solely 
because of the nature of the Bill, but it is also because of the 
competence, professional nature of the people that work in 
mediation services. 
 
We feel it’s appropriate to recognize as well not just mediation 
services but the various processes that are available in place of 
litigation. There’s a number of alternate dispute resolutions. 
The Law Society has for a number of years made courses 
available so that lawyers can be designated as mediators and 
undertake a mediation process as well. And for the last 15 to 20 
years, lawyers have been undertaking mediation with some 
significant degree of success, particularly in the area of 
matrimonial dispute where people come to the process with a 
great of emotional turmoil in their lives. 
 
As well, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the more interesting 
things that has come forward and being used is the collaborative 
law process. There is groups of lawyers that are now 
participating in the collaborative law process. One of the 

interesting aspects of that is that the lawyers actually become 
parties to the contract and sign an agreement before they start 
— that if the process is not successful that they will not 
represent either party in the event that the litigation goes 
forward. So the lawyers in fact actually have a vested interest in 
seeing and ensuring that settlement goes forward. 
 
Lawyers such as Brad Hunter in Regina and Kathryn Ford in 
Saskatoon have been leading the charge on this, and there is 
now a collaborative lawyers’ group. They meet regularly and 
have done a lot of work to try and expand that process. People 
that are going through matrimonial or other disputes are usually 
at a time in their life where they are burdened with a great deal 
of emotional baggage, going through an exceptional amount of 
turmoil. And having a collaborative process is far better than 
going through a process of family law court. 
 
And I say that with greatest respect to our family law judges, 
but it’s certainly better to sit down and try to put your position 
forward, negotiate, and work with the things that are there. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we are supportive of the provisions of 
this Bill. We’ve had some opportunity to discuss and do some 
consultation and are certainly prepared to see this Bill proceed 
to committee. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 50, The 
Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. To which committee shall 
this Bill be referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 50, The Queen’s 
Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 50, The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) 
Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 54 — The Cancer 
Agency Act be now read a second time.] 
 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to speak to Bill 54, The Cancer Agency Act. It’s a very 
timely Bill to be able to get up and speak about those types of 
health care items that we are experiencing in this province. And 
as we are well aware of the cancers, really the plague of 
humanity that is going through people’s lives. And we all have 
relatives and friends and neighbours who have or have had 
cancer. 
 
And it certainly is a terrible disease and also a disease, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that has many different forms. It’s certainly 
not a disease that has one type of characteristics and it certainly 
takes a different type of treatment to cover all the different 
cancers that are out there in society. 
 
This Bill, as the minister outlined, mainly has changes to the 
governance. We understand it repeals The Cancer Foundation 
Act and replaces it with The Cancer Agency Act which I 
understand is supposed to be an update to how the system is 
working right now or in some cases is not working in this 
province. It goes on to say that the changes in governance and 
accountability to bring the cancer agency in line with 
requirements of the regional health authorities. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it encourages the regional health 
authorities to work with the cancer agency for delivery of 
cancer care, as well as to help evaluate cancer care in the 
province. And the Bill is supposed to bring greater expectations 
in terms of accountability and transparency, as far as the 
legislature for tracking and reporting of the various aspects of 
treatment and so forth. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, it certainly is very important to 
see how this Bill will work in conjunction with the amendments 
to The Regional Health Services Act, a Bill that is coming up 
shortly. And we understand that there’s been a major review of 
the cancer agency in the province. And you can certainly 
understand we have many questions for the minister as to 
whether these legislative changes are a result of that review, and 
we certainly will speak to all the stakeholders concerning this 
Bill. And the Bill is a fairly extensive piece of legislation that 
requires careful review, and we certainly will, as the official 
opposition, do that. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, when we speak of cancer and 
the cancer agency and the regional health authorities, one of the 
obvious things are waiting lists and the shortages of 
oncologists. Those are two very, very important areas that has 
to be discussed. In Saskatchewan there’s currently two times 
. . . has two times the national average to see an oncologist for 
the first time and that was before the province lost three 
oncologists. And the waiting lists have increased ever since. 
 
And as we know in this province, as more and more of our 
young people leave the province for better job opportunities and 
futures in other parts of the country, our demographics are 
aging, and so that will continue to be an increasing demand on 
our health care system. As we know, as more people leave the 
province that’s less tax revenue to come into the province 
coffers, and so there’s going to be a continuing demand on our 
budget to fund and look after the health care of our 

ever-increasing aging population. 
 
We have brought up, the Saskatchewan Party has brought up a 
number of cases recently concerning waiting lists. And as 
recently as this week we spoke about Emily Morley, who was 
told that they were . . . this person was on a three-month waiting 
list to see an oncologist for the first time after a secondary 
cancer was found. So those types of issues are certainly very 
disturbing to see. People that have cancer certainly want to get 
the treatment started. It’s well known that the earlier the 
treatment, the better results for cancer treatment. And people 
are finding themselves waiting on waiting lists in this province 
for treatment, for all sorts of treatments but in particular cancer 
treatment. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have spoken about the cancer drug 
Avastin, presented many petitions in this province concerning 
the government not funding Avastin. This is a very expensive 
drug and people that have serious types of cancer that the . . . 
prostate cancer I understand, that the drug treats, these people 
are really looking to this Avastin as a last resort. And to date the 
government is not funding the use of Avastin in this province. 
 
So there are many aspects of health care that are quite 
disturbing. And so we hope that this Bill will address some of 
those concerns. We see that government laws and regulations 
certainly haven’t improved the health care system in the past. 
Throwing money at the health care system obviously hasn’t 
improved or fixed the problems in the health care system in 
Saskatchewan. So there certainly has to be other methods, other 
types of thinking that needs to take place in order to get this 
health care system that Saskatchewan people are . . . in the past 
were very proud of and really, well a world leader in the health 
care field in past decades. 
 
But certainly nowadays we see that the Saskatchewan health 
care has many, many problems in it. We are falling behind other 
jurisdictions in Canada and certainly are falling behind in the 
rest of the world. And we just looked at the extraordinary 
waiting list that people in Saskatchewan have to wait on before 
they can get treatment of all sorts of medical procedures. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we will certainly, as the official 
opposition, we will be doing our due diligence and doing our 
work. We will be speaking to all the stakeholders involved 
concerning this Bill 54, cancer agency Act, and we will review 
it very carefully. But at this time, Deputy Speaker, we would 
like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Biggar has moved adjournment of debate. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 
[16:00] 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 51 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. It’s a pleasure to speak to The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006, mister deputy 
deputy. I would like to speak about some more aspects of the 
health care system in the province. As we all know, in this 
province has been constant changes to the regional health 
authorities. We have gone from 32 regions down to 12. And the 
question everyone is asking is, is our health care system any 
better off today than it was before all those changes? 
 
And I think many, many people in this province say that this 
health care system in Saskatchewan is not better off any more. 
There has not been any improvements. Certainly many, many 
procedures are now centralized in the larger centres, where we 
have very long waiting lists. And out in the regions, in the rural 
areas we lack, in many cases, just the basic health care in many 
communities. So it certainly has not improved the health care to 
many people in this province. 
 
And we see that there’s a continuing communication barrier 
between regions. There’s shorter waiting lists for some 
procedures in other regions. And there doesn’t seem to be any 
communication between the two regions where people can 
move from one region to another to get more timely treatment 
and operations and procedures that are needed. 
 
Now this Bill I understand is focused on rearranging the 
regional health authorities and it initially left out the cancer 
authority from the mix until this previous Bill was introduced. 
 
This Bill is supposed to bring accountability measures to the 
cancer agency which will be the same as the regional health 
authorities. And the government and the minister claim that 
there’ll be direct accountability to the minister, greater public 
access to the decision-making process, and a clear delineation 
between responsibilities of board and management. But there 
are many, many questions remain concerning the operation of 
our health care system in this province and in particular the 
regional health authority. 
 
We only need to look to the Provincial Auditor, the reports that 
the regional health authorities need improved reporting and 
accountability. Of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this begs the 
question, does the current model that is supposed to bring 
accountability and transparency to the regional health 
authorities work? And I think most people in this province 
would say it does not. You know, if people are not involved at 
every level, if it’s not transparent, there doesn’t seem to be any 
accountability — well the system will not be working. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Provincial Auditor claims that 
there needs to be clear performance goals. He lists a number of 
items that is needed: tighter control over bank accounts, 
improvements to the equipment and inventory and records. 
Health care dollars that are precious, there needs to be a more 
clear understanding where the money needs to be directed to as 
far as patient care, and again, you know, really transparency and 

accountability in general. 
 
It’s interesting to see that some regional health authorities don’t 
have a clear understanding as far as inventory of equipment in 
their own facilities — can’t understand how an organization 
could operate, could give the services to patients when they 
don’t even have a knowledge of what type of equipment they 
have in inventory. Obviously the records are not being kept 
very well. 
 
When we look to changes in the regional health authority we 
certainly, as a Saskatchewan Party, we have brought up a 
number of concerns very recently. Look to the situation where 
there was the emergency room was actually closed. There was a 
patient that was outside on the street waiting for the emergency 
to open. People had to call an ambulance to come to basically 
stabilize this individual until the emergency room opened, 
which is bad enough, but this fellow also got a bill to pay for 
the ambulance to come to look after him while they were 
waiting for the emergency room to open. Those types of things 
are totally unacceptable in this province. 
 
Another example is phoning in on a hotline to see where a 
person, a patient is on a waiting list and to get a recorded 
announcement saying that they — the hotline — will phone 
back in a number of days because there’s a waiting list on the 
waiting list hotline for information. Totally, totally 
unacceptable again. 
 
And then of course the very tragic case of baby Paige where 
treatment was not given on a timely basis to that young child, 
where the parents finally had to, in frustration, take it upon 
themselves to take their young baby to Edmonton for treatment 
which raises all sorts of questions about referrals, who is 
picking up the cost of procedures. I think it’s generally accepted 
in this province that a patient had to be referred by a doctor 
from Saskatchewan to go out of province to get treatment and 
be paid by the government. And now we hear . . . we 
understand that that has not been the case. But it’s not widely 
known, so people have been really waiting on these waiting lists 
a long time and not knowing they had other alternatives. 
 
And certainly in this baby Paige situation where the minister’s 
own assistants did not know that this was the case and did not 
recommend to the MLA that phoned — the member from 
Humboldt — and to the patient, parents that yes, they could go 
to Edmonton on their own and get treatment for their child and 
the government would pick it up, pick up the costs. So these are 
very, very disturbing situations where people’s health are put at 
risk because of how the health care system is working or not 
working in this province. 
 
And the CEO of the Saskatoon Health District on the radio has 
said, quite frankly admitted that this is not a one-off situation, 
that it does happen and it does happen every now and then. And 
this situation is totally unacceptable that people’s . . . really 
their lives are put at risk because of the health care system 
really breaking down. 
 
We talked to doctors and nurses who are doing great work. 
They’re overworked. They’re working long shifts. There’s a 
shortage of nurses, other health care professionals, and this is 
putting a great strain on those health care professionals. We 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

only have to look at the situation that I brought up from a 
mother of a young nurse that had just graduated that’s working 
in Regina, that she’s only been working as a nurse for a few 
months and is already burnt out. These types of situations 
cannot go on where the front line health care workers are under 
that tremendous workload and stress and still expect to give 
quality health care to individuals. 
 
So there’s signs in the health care system that it’s not working, 
that it’s breaking down, and the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve better. So certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be 
speaking to many people concerning the Bill 51, regional health 
authority Act. We will speak to the stakeholders. And so at this 
time, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
hon. member for Biggar that debate on Bill No. 51 be 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 53 — The 
Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, mister deputy deputy 
speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise today to speak to The Economic 
and Co-operative Development Act and the amendments to that 
Act, although in reading through the Bill, I find very little 
reference to either economic or co-operative development, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This Act in fact is dealing with the Information Technology 
Office. And it does mention economic growth, but when you 
look at the Bill, the only segment of the economy that will be 
growing under these changes to this Act is the Information 
Technology Office which is a government agency. There’s no 
real economic development here for anyone else other than the 
government. And so I’m not exactly sure how you count that as 
economic and co-operative development, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because this is about growing the Information Technology 
Office. 
 
You know, in the original Act, in the statutes it explains what 
the terminology and the interpretations are of certain words. 
And it talks about what a department is. It talks about what a 
government department is. It has a slightly different 
terminology for that. And it talks about the minister. So this Act 
applies to departments and government departments and the 
minister. 
 
But now under this amendment they’re adding a whole new 
area that has not been applied to ITO [Information Technology 
Office] before. It applies to the definitions of a prescribed 

public agency. It means a public agency that is prescribed in the 
regulations for the purposes of this Act. So that means that the 
minister can make changes from time to time without ever 
coming to the legislature, without people finding out what the 
Act means, the changes to the Act, the regulations, until they’re 
implemented. 
 
It goes on to interpret what the meaning of a public agency is. 
And that means the Legislative Assembly Service and the office 
of any officer of the legislature. You know, that’s this building 
and the Law Clerk and the Clerk’s office and, you know, the 
child Ombudsman, the Child Advocate, the Electoral office — 
those kind of agencies — which is not a problem because 
they’re all directly funded by the taxpayer through the auspices 
of this legislature. So in essence while they’re independent 
officers and independent office of the legislature, they’re still 
part of the government. 
 
It talks about a Treasury Board Crown corporation or 
designated Treasury Board Crown corporations as defined in 
The Crown Corporations Act of 1993. So now we include under 
the definitions of this Act, the things that this Act applies to is 
all of the Crown corporations as well. 
 
Now we have seen the huge amount of money that was spent on 
Information Services Corporation, ISC. The original budget for 
that, I believe, was supposed to be $20 million, and it grew over 
time to over $107 million. Finally that corporation — after I 
think it is seven years — has finally actually turned a profit for 
once which is a good thing, but they have a huge IT 
[information technology] service. 
 
Does that mean that ITO, Information Technology Office, is 
going to take over now the operation of ISC? I don’t think it 
does, but this Bill gives them the ability to do so. Not likely to 
happen, but the potential is there. But in a lot of other areas, that 
potential may very well be realized because it says, part (iii): 
“. . . any . . . board, commission, institution, body or person that 
derives its . . . [funding] in whole or in part from the 
Government of Saskatchewan.” 

 
You know, in the province of Saskatchewan where the 
economy is 45 per cent government controlled, that takes in just 
about everybody. So the ITO has the ability to be involved in 
the lives directly of 45 per cent of the economy. And not only 
just the economy because it says, anybody who derives funds in 
whole or in part. So that includes any municipality that would 
receive a government grant. That means any school board that 
would receive a government grant. 
 
And as we have just seen under the school board 
amalgamations, this year every school board is receiving 
government grants through the foundation grant system. Next 
year that’ll likely change; there’ll be one school board that does 
not. But every other school board would fall into this category. 
 
It means every health board. It means potentially every First 
Nation because First Nations receive funding from the 
provincial government. It means the Métis Nation. It means a 
good many of the non-governmental organizations of this 
province that receive any government funding. It means the rec 
boards in every community if they receive a government grant 
of any sort. The museums or anybody else who receives a 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

government grant could fall under this category. It also means 
— because it says persons — anybody who gets a pay cheque 
from the government could also qualify. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So this gives ITO a very, very broad scope of involvement in 
the provincial economy when it talks about economic 
development co-operation. You know, if you want to develop a 
high-tech industry in this province, an information-based 
industry, you want as many diverse sources bringing their ideas 
forward. It’s not by having one single stream that you can 
maximize the opportunities in high tech. It’s by having that 
huge mass of ideas. And some of them will percolate up and be 
winners. And some will be mediocres . And some of them will 
fail. But if you develop one huge department, one huge source 
of ideas in this province, then you end up with one idea. 
 
You need to have the diversity. And this piece of legislation has 
the ability to limit the opportunities for high-tech industries in 
this province because obviously when the government economy 
is 45 per cent of the revenue generation in this province and one 
entity has the entire resource of accessing that 45 per cent, then 
you stifle the rest of the economy, the ability of the rest of the 
economy to grow and to percolate. 
 
And I see this particular piece of legislation very much having 
that ability. You know, it does have . . . somebody mentioned 
here just now, one of my colleagues, that it does very much 
have the smell and feel of George Orwell’s 1984 where Big 
Brother is watching everything you do because this Bill — ITO 
under this possible interpretation — has the ability to access 
virtually every piece of personal information you have. 
 
You know, if let’s say the government went into some sort of a 
partnership to develop a piece of technology with the credit 
union system, now ITO has a hook onto the credit union 
system. Doesn’t mean that the credit union system has to take 
ITO services, but they now have the ability to do so. And so, 
you know, what can happen? Well we’ve seen ministers in this 
House not provide the House with the whole information. 
 
We saw it today with the Minister of Health saying that the 
public has the right to go outside of the province of 
Saskatchewan to another province to access health care with 
three exceptions — those being MRIs, being cataract surgery 
and bone density. And that’s what he was saying last night in 
estimates on Health; that’s what he said early on in question 
period today. And then later on in question period, he started 
qualifying. Not just those three items, but he started qualifying 
other things why you may not be able to go out of the province. 
 
So, you know, an assurance from a member opposite saying oh 
no, no, this is all voluntary . . . Excuse me, but I’m a little 
apprehensive because we don’t always get the information . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . My colleague again has a good idea 
there — school board amalgamations. 
 
The government offered I believe it was $150,000 to two school 
boards that might wish to amalgamate. If they wanted to do 
that, they would give them some seed money of $150,000 to 
help them over the costs of amalgamation. Well that went on 
for a few years; there was a few people, a few of the school 

boards that took it up. My own was one of them. Then all of a 
sudden it wasn’t going fast enough for the government, and 
they forced everybody, all the school boards — rural school 
boards I should point out, not urban school boards — rural 
school boards to amalgamate. 
 
Although, although it’s interesting to note — and the current 
Minister of Finance was the minister of Education at the time 
— that there was one rural school board that did not, was not 
forced to amalgamate. And I believe that was the La Loche 
school board. And when I asked the minister, well if there’s 
cost savings to be had from administration and other areas with 
all of the other school boards, why wasn’t there any cost 
savings to be had from that particular school board? And he had 
no answers, but they were not going to amalgamate that school 
board. 
 
Well politically we know why that was. Because the minister 
for that constituency, that’s his home community, and didn’t 
want it to happen. So it didn’t happen. It had nothing to do with 
the economics of any of the school boards. It was all about 
politics in that particular case. And Mr. . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And where’s the relevance in that? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The relevance to the Bill, to answer the 
member from Regina Dewdney there, is you can’t necessarily 
trust what any one of those ministers has to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s the relevance to the Bill. 
 
If the members opposite would answer the questions properly 
instead of simply giving nonsensical sentences even to written 
questions then perhaps there would be some trust in . . . But 
there is no trust because those members don’t answer even the 
simplest of questions. That’s the relevance to this Bill. The fact 
that ITO is being put into a position of being able to take the 
information from each and every one of us and centralize it into 
one location controlled by one entity I think is a reason for 
apprehension in this province, particularly given the actions of 
some of the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill also goes on to give 
the minister some responsibilities when it comes to 
expenditures that will be taking place within ITO. So, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is again an expansion of what is in the 
original Act. And again we have to wonder why it’s taking 
place and why it’s being allowed. 
 
To also talk about, comment on the member from Regina 
Dewdney’s comments from the other side of the House, in the 
explanation notes that are sent out with any Bill, clause no. 4 
talks about existing provisions and it lists as the title here, 
responsibilities of ministers. The minister is responsible. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my 15 years in the House, I have only 
known one government NDP member to accept responsibility 
for himself or his department, and that was Bob Mitchell a 
number of years ago. Everyone else has the universal NDP sign 
of this, which means not me; it’s the other guy’s responsibility. 
 
And they do that day in and day out, Mr. Speaker. We see it 
with the Minister of Health. It’s not his responsibility, it’s the 
district health board in Saskatoon. It’s not the minister of 
Education’s responsibility, it’s the school boards’. It’s always 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

somebody else’s responsibility. So when you include in the 
explanation notes that the minister is responsible, it’s a 
misnomer and a travesty because no minister on that side of the 
House other than Bob Mitchell has ever accepted any 
responsibility for their own actions or that of their departments. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there’s a good number of 
questions yet to be asked about this. I think the government 
needs to take a serious look at where they’re going with this, 
that they don’t stifle the innovation and growth of high-tech 
industries in this province simply to build one huge department 
within government. Therefore I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cannington has moved that debate on Bill No. 53 be adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 52 — The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be able to enter into debate on 
Bill No. 52, an Act that amends The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act. There are a number of issues in this Bill but 
some of it is merely updating the Act to modernize it. There’s 
references to Acts, other Acts, that are no longer in existence 
because they have been amended, so that is somewhat of the 
housekeeping nature of the Bill. 
 
There’s also references to additional land that will be included 
and come under the authority of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, Mr. Speaker. The provisions within the Bill, even 
though it was just introduced fairly recently in the legislative 
process, I believe that we can have most of our concerns that we 
may have with the Bill answered in committee provided that the 
minister’s prepared to provide us with the maps to show us 
exactly where . . . you know what land is being brought under 
the authority of the Meewasin Valley Authority and so on. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I move this Bill to committee I 
would just like to say a few things about the valley that runs 
through Saskatoon and the good job that the authority is doing 
with managing the resources of the Saskatchewan River Valley 
and the very positive attributes of the valley that adds to the city 
of Saskatoon. I think anyone who has taken the time to walk 
along the river’s bank and take time to, as the saying goes, to 
smell the roses, certainly appreciates the good work that the 
Meewasin Valley Authority is doing in regulating development 
along the river valley and making it a real plus and a real asset 
to the citizens of Saskatoon, and in fact all citizens of the 
province. And it’s something that we truly can be proud of. 

So and as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think those additional 
questions and concerns that we do have, I think we can have 
them answered in committee. So I would move that this Bill 
proceeds to committee. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Thank you. The 
question before the Assembly is a motion by the Minister 
Responsible for the Meewasin Valley Authority that Bill No. 
52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — To which committee 
shall this Bill be referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill No. 52, The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It has been moved by 
the Minister Responsible for the Meewasin Valley Authority 
that Bill No. 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment 
Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
Bill stands referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 48 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
get up to talk to this particular Bill dealing with the parks and 
leases and fees. This is another Bill that affects a lot of people. 
Affects the people that use the parks but also probably affects 
the people more than anything, are the people that are in the 
parks, whether it’s owners, cabin owners. There’s businesses 
that operate within the parks. There is golf courses that operate 
inside the parks. There is also leases. A guy I know . . . 
Different cattlemen will lease land from some parks to use for 
business at that end of it. 
 
So this particular Bill, and it addresses . . . it can affect a lot of 
people. It can affect every one of these persons that I 
mentioned. And some of the ones that look at this, on the 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

explanation, it says, “. . . a service fee determined by the 
minister . . .” And also, “. . . a land lease fee . . . [to be] 
determined by the minister . . .” 
 
Well when you read that, with this particular government . . . 
Because I can remember a couple of years ago there was quite 
an uproar in a lot of the parks about the service fees that they 
were charging at that particular end and that they felt they 
weren’t getting services for the fees that they were being 
charged. 
 
I think a lot of parks, there were some down south that some of 
the fees were going up that people were paying for leases were 
doubling or even tripling. And at that particular time they 
weren’t even given assurances that they would . . . these were 
long-term leases. They were year-by-year. They could be taken 
from them. 
 
So there is a huge concern out there with people that are leasing 
within the parks and I think this is what this particular Bill deals 
with. I know that it also deals with possibly some fees that 
people that are using it . . . I can remember it wasn’t that long 
ago when this government weren’t going to even open the parks 
till June at that particular time. It raised quite an uproar at that 
end of it and they finally came to their senses and finally 
opened at the right time at that particular time. 
 
And then let’s not forget the wiener roast tax that came on that 
this government put on people that wanted to use the tax. I 
thought, you know, people were under the impression that the 
parks were there for their use, that they paid taxes, that they 
don’t have to pay every little fee any time they want to go burn 
some wood or even for any little service the department 
provides. 
 
And I know at the golf course I’ve got a particular one or two 
. . . I’ve got one golf course in my own constituency that leases 
from the park and I know they weren’t very happy with the 
government arrangements that was going there. He didn’t mind 
what they were charging but he said there was no . . . they were 
getting no service, no update. It was up to the government to 
actually fix the roads. 
 
The roads are so bad coming in that the golf carts coming into 
the trail were driving in the ditch because they couldn’t drive on 
the road coming in. There was holes at least this size in there 
coming in to the park. As they came in and as the road winds 
through the golf course they . . . And that is maintained by the 
government. And do you think that they would spend a nickel 
on them roads? And you know how much that they were 
charging that particular golf course owner for a lease on that 
particular time? I think it was around that $50,000 mark. It was 
a huge amount of money that they were paying there at the lease 
on that particular thing. 
 
It’s something this government does constantly, is very good at 
taking money but not very good at fixing anything, especially 
when it comes out to rural Saskatchewan. And it’s even 
showing now on their parks that I know that we’ve had stories 
of other parks being run down, unfortunately. You know, we 
have beautiful parks but yet the buildings aren’t being 
maintained. And you know why? Because these guys are 
cutting staff like they usually do. They cut front line staff. Do 

they ever look at the upper administration in Regina here? No 
they’d never touch that, but they will cut staff. 
 
I can remember there was another park and I think that was a 
northern park, wasn’t it, where they ripped up some flowers. 
They ripped up some flowers. I remember that was a couple of 
years ago. It was another uproar in the paper that the people that 
planted, volunteer people had planted in this particular park and 
that they came and tore them up because they said, oh we can’t 
maintain them because we don’t have the staff, you know. 
 
And they wonder why people are kind of dissatisfied with the 
way things are being run. And with this particular Bill, when 
you start saying that a service fee is determined by the minister, 
it makes the people, the business owners in them parks, nervous 
because I know that they’ve had a lot of disagreements. 
 
I’ll get back to the golf course owner. That was never resolved. 
He said, you know, if they provide me, I don’t mind paying a 
good lease money but he says, provide me with some service in 
that area. He said, first of all, the road through the park was no 
good and then the highway coming up to the park was beat, was 
all beat up with holes and people couldn’t even pull their boats 
down there any more. He was basically losing business at that 
end of it. And what’s this government do to address it? You 
know, nothing. 
 
You know, when it comes to business owners in this province 
or it comes to people leasing land, this government seems to 
ride rough over them any way they can because basically this 
government has an attitude that if they don’t own it that they’re 
not interested in it. They probably feel that every business in the 
park should be owned by the government when it comes right 
down to it, at that end of it. 
 
This government always seems to go back to their socialist 
roots at times especially when it comes to business. And let’s 
not mistake that this government has a heavy socialist roots 
game of . . . I would even go back to as far as originally starting 
even with a little bit of communism even starting in, when they 
started with that old CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation], and then they kind of smooth it over. But they were 
still heavy socialists at that end of it. 
 
And it seems like they’re not in favour of really working with 
the businesses out there in them parks that are maintaining and 
providing services, whether it’s cooking food or golf carts or 
just different services out there. I know that they haven’t been 
providing any help for that. 
 
You know, just like in rural Saskatchewan it seems like 
everything they do, I think they’ve lost contact so much with 
rural Saskatchewan that they have no idea what’s going on out 
there any more. They have no idea the population loss that’s 
going out there. They have no idea of the job loss that’s going 
out there and the hurt that’s going out there, never mind in the 
ag community but just in all the towns. Because I don’t know if 
they check the census, but they’re all losing. You know, the 
parks are going to be probably, unfortunately, even down for 
use because we’re just losing people. We have a beautiful 
province and the government over there can’t even look after 
the parks or provide good service at that end of it. 
 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, with this particular Bill, 
with the regulations, I think we definitely have to talk to 
business owners and lease owners at that, to find out if they’re 
happy with some of the changes on this particular Bill. So with 
that I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 55 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. It’s a 
pleasure to speak to this particular piece of legislation this 
afternoon. I have to admit that my interest in this Bill was 
prompted by the minister’s comments. I only heard some of 
what he had to say in his introductory comments when the Bill 
was brought to the House, but he used a few words that caught 
my attention. 
 
And unfortunately the attention that I thought he was paying in 
this particular piece of legislation was to a different area than 
what I had assumed, but he had talked about the uniform legal 
framework for returning Crown land held under surface lease 
back to the province. And of course, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
don’t think anybody in the province has more Crown land that 
is leased to people — individual operations and ranchers — 
than I do in the Cypress Hills. But in this particular case the 
Crown lease that the minister was talking about had to do with 
mineral leases and mining operations in the province. 
 
Now having read the legislation, having read the minister’s 
comments, having looked at the supplementary notes provided 
on the legislation, it’s pretty clear that this minister has 
introduced legislation that hopefully will serve an important and 
practical purpose going forward. But I think there’s some 
serious questions that need to be asked about this particular Bill 
and what its implications will be for not just the province, not 
just for the environment, but for the mining industry. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that brings 
into being quite a series of legislative frameworks and a whole 
new bureaucracy, frankly. I would like to just go though the Bill 
briefly. It’s cited as The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act, and this 
is some of the activity that this particular piece of legislation 
will accomplish. It will define and identify a closed site. Now 
for the purposes of this particular piece of legislation a closed 
site is an industrial site at which all decommissioning, 
remediation, and reclamation measures have been carried out 
and transitional phase monitoring has been completed. 
 
This legislation introduces the Institutional Control Monitoring 
and Maintenance Fund. It introduces the institutional control 

program. It also introduces the institutional control registry, the 
Institutional Control Unforeseen Events Fund, and some other 
miscellaneous items as we go through the legislation. What we 
have here are two new and separate initiatives, the institutional 
control program and the registry that accompanies that program. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s common knowledge 
and widely accepted that Saskatchewan has a very strong 
presence in the mining industry. We are a key player. We’ve 
seen an extensive amount of mineral development in this 
province; some fairly recently, some in years past. But there is 
tremendous potential going forward. 
 
And I think we want to make sure that that industry is 
developed in a manner in which the province can enjoy the 
benefits, that the companies that make the initial investment can 
profit and prosper in this province, that the people of the 
province will have the assurance that the activities undertaken 
by the mining industry are done in accordance with acceptable 
environmental standards and so forth. 
 
So there’s no debate about whether or not this type of 
legislation might have some merit. But what we’re not sure 
about, Madam Deputy Speaker, is how this particular piece of 
legislation will be implemented and how it will be used in the 
future to the benefit and/or detriment of the industry and the 
province as a whole. 
 
I noticed the minister in his remarks, when he introduced the 
legislation, tried to give the House the assurance — and the 
people of Saskatchewan by extension — that this particular 
piece of legislation had been developed as a co-operative 
venture with several government departments involved, as well 
as the complete input and participation by the mining industry. 
In fact he says it was developed with their input and advice 
every step of the way. On the surface of it, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that’s pretty reassuring. And I’m sure that that’s what 
the minister intended. 
 
However as was suggested by one of my colleagues earlier, 
we’re not sure on this side of the House that we can take that at 
face value. We’ve heard this government give assurances of full 
co-operation and of stakeholder input and full consultation on 
so many pieces of legislation over the last number of years that 
have proved to be somewhat less complete than the government 
had indicated. 
 
And as a matter of fact, I think the important concern of the 
official opposition with this particular piece of legislation is to 
verify that the minister and the government departments 
involved in bringing this piece of legislation forward, that the 
industry really did play that consultative role, that co-operative 
role, that full, participatory role that the minister alluded to 
when he introduced this legislation. 
 
And I think we will be very interested to talk to the industry in 
the next number of days and weeks to determine their level of 
interest and support for this piece of legislation or whether in 
fact they might have concerns and whether their input was 
actually found its way into this piece of legislation, whether in 
fact their input is recognized in this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

Madam Deputy Speaker, as I indicated at the outset, this Bill 
allows for the creation of two different funds. And if I 
understand the legislation correctly, when a mine site or an 
industrial site is decommissioned, there are going to be certain 
requirements of the owner and operator of that site. And if those 
rules and regulations that are in place today are met by the 
owner/operator of that mine site, they would be given approval 
to participate in this registry program. But not only do they get 
the opportunity to be registered and a participant in the registry; 
they have to pay for the privilege. 
 
Now one of the things that I find interesting at this point is that 
no indication anywhere exists in this Bill as to what those 
financial obligations might be on behalf of the players. What 
will the expected cost be to the participants in this registry to 
have their mine site registered as part of this process? How 
wide is the variance? What is the total cost? Is the cost worth 
the price to be paid by these players, by these mining 
companies? 
 
There is one fund that will be developed as a result of the 
registry and the fees charged to be part of the registry. And 
there will be other charges associated with the second fund 
which is for unforeseen events. And this will allow the 
government to have access to revenues to deal with problems 
that arise quite unexpectedly long after the site has been 
abandoned by the original owner. 
 
I don’t think anybody would necessarily disagree with the 
merits or the intent of this kind of legislation. I think there is 
justifiable concern on the part of the public that reclamation 
projects be done appropriately and that there be no long-term 
negative impact to the environment and to society as a whole. 
But I think they have reason to wonder whether or not this is the 
appropriate and necessary way to achieve that. 
 
[16:45] 
 
There is no precedent, as I understand, for this piece of 
legislation. The minister said that this is the first of its kind in 
the country. I don’t know if he drew on the experience of 
jurisdictions elsewhere around the world that may or may not 
have tried to undertake this type of registry program, but I think 
the jury is certainly out on this particular piece of legislation, 
whether or not it will work. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think there are a lot of questions 
that need to be answered, and I think that the intent of the 
official opposition is to try and seek some of those answers. 
And in the time frame we’ve had to date, in the short time 
we’ve had this piece of legislation available to us, that hasn’t 
been possible. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Quennell that Bill No. 56 — The 
Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is 
codification and an update of the existing legislation. It brings 
into the Bill and incorporates a lot of changes that are now sort 
of common law based on what the Rentalsman practices are 
using. 
 
I think we should recognize the hard work and competence that 
the Office of the Rentalsman has. As MLAs we receive 
complaints and issues of concern about a variety of different 
government agencies. And fortunately for us the Office of the 
Rentalsman produces very few complaints. When you delve 
into them, usually complaints are unfounded so we’re . . . it’s 
one of the agencies that we’re well pleased with the work. 
There’s hard-working, competent individuals in the Saskatoon 
office that I’ve recently had dealings with, Jodi Bernath and 
Darlene Wiwchar, both extremely competent, professional 
people that take their job very seriously. 
 
The Office of the Rentalsman provides a low-cost, expeditious 
remedy for both landlords and for tenants. The concerns that we 
have heard about this Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker, are the 
issues dealing with not providing . . . or providing more reasons 
before a tenancy can be terminated by a landlord and whether 
that’s going to create a new body of law or problems for 
landlords. 
 
We also continue to have concerns. I hear complaints from 
landlords about the amount of the damage deposit and the 
enforceability of damage deposit claims. We will probably want 
to speak to this more and deal with this as this Bill proceeds 
through committee. We’re prepared now to allow this Bill to 
proceed to committee and vote for it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 56, The 
Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 56, The 
Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 56, The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 57 — The 
Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 
2006/Loi de 2006 portant modification corrélative à la loi 
intitulée The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — It’s all right. It’s just a matter of time. Thank 
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Appreciate the kind offer but 
we’ll wait until after the next election, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
This Bill is a consequential Bill dealing with the Bill No. 56. It 
deals with the various housing co-operatives that are providing 
low-cost and affordable housing and allowing people to 
participate in acquiring housing at lower income levels than 
they might have in the past. It is a Bill that should proceed 
through committee in tandem with and in conjunction with Bill 
No. 56. And as such, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would be 
prepared to use my ministerial waiver to allow this Bill to 
proceed to committee. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 57, The 
Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 
referred? Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 57, The 

Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 57, The Residential Tenancies 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2006, be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 59 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I am a little bit hurt that you didn’t refer to me as 
minister in deference to the fact I’ve been here a lot longer than 
my colleague. 
 
However, I am pleased to be able to speak to the Act to amend 
The Education Act, 1995, and to make a few points. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are two main components to this 
legislation and both of them are very important. The one 
component addresses a long-standing request by the school 
boards association to make the school fiscal calendar 
coterminous with the school year. And so as part of this 
legislation, school boards will prepare, in this adjustment period 
of time, budgets for eight months and then for a further 12 
months beginning with the fall. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that certainly is a worthwhile endeavour for this to happen. 
 
The other issue that is very important in this legislation is the 
creation of local school advisory committees. As we recall, with 
the amalgamation of school districts there was a great deal of 
concern about local accountability and local involvement with 
the future of their schools with the districts becoming very 
large, and that there would be potentially a disconnect between 
the governing school board and the community schools. 
 
And so the department conducted a study by Craig Melvin who 
went around and looked for a methodology and made some 
recommendations to the department in regard to creating a 
body, if you like, that would properly reflect the aspirations and 
needs of the schools in communities and the much larger boards 
of education. 
 
And out of that, we get the recommendation for these new local 
school advisory committees. And there’s a couple of points that 
I think have to be made in the principle of this before we go to 
committee when we can explore the details. 
 
And the first principle is that there has to be a connection 
between these local school advisory councils and the boards of 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

education. They can’t be disconnected and they can’t function 
outside of the collaborative process and the ultimate 
responsibilities that are held by the boards of education. I don’t 
think it is meant in any way to take away from the 
responsibilities of the local school advisory committees, but 
their mandate is much more broad and much more involved 
with the whole life of the school than there used to be with 
various organizations. That would be parent-teacher local 
boards, or whatever was the format for them in the past. And so 
when these bodies are created they have to be done in 
collaboration with the mandate of boards of education, and I 
think that it’s very important that that is clarified. 
 
The second thing is, is that we should have some flexibility, 
particularly since this is new, not only to the rural boards but 
also to the urban boards. In the rural centres, communities are 
very involved with likely a single school in their community. 
And that makes sense for there to be the school advisory 
committee in that community to advise on the future needs of 
the school, and in most instances it’s a K to 8 [kindergarten to 
grade 8] or K to 12 school. And that makes sense. 
 
In the urban locations it might not make as simple a sense as to 
have one of these advisory committees for each individual 
school facility. And I think that under this legislation, as I 
understand it, there is a possibility for local schools to 
amalgamate, if you like, their community advisory councils but 
it has to be approved by the minister of Education before this 
can happen. I would hope that we could have a less onerous 
kind of a process that might be the simple approval of the local 
board of education, who are much closer to the issue. And once 
they make that approval that they advise the minister of the fact 
they’ve approved that these three schools, for example, in an 
urban setting in a community neighbourhood, are actually going 
to work together with one school advisory committee instead of 
three. And so I think there has to be that common sense 
practicality that is exhibited in the creation of these bodies. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we know that the minister will be very 
willing to address some of these issues and concerns, and if 
need be entertain some amendments in terms of clarifying these 
responsibilities in this legislation when we go to committee. We 
certainly think that by and large this legislation is important and 
needed in order for this amalgamation process to continue. 
Boards of education have by and large contacted us and say, we 
need this change in the fiscal framework so that we can have the 
calendars coterminous with the school year. That’s an important 
initiative. The assumption has been made already and they’re 
planning for this, so that this needs to be mandated by the 
passing of this legislation. 
 
And certainly we approve and support the concept of the local 
school advisory committees. We have some of these technical 
issues that we would like clarification on, but we would 
certainly support that that would happen in committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which church does the minister 
belong? The hon. member has moved that we would be ready 
for the question. Is it the agreement of the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The question before the 
Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 
59, The Education Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 59, The Education 
Act be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 59, The Education Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
referred to the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I now leave 
the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — It now being the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
committee stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
[The committee recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1325 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1327 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1327 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................1328, 1329 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering the Holocaust 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
 National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
 Saskatchewan Party Nomination in The Battlefords 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
 Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Joins Top 20 Employers 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
 Cancellation of Premier’s Dinner 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1331 
 Kraft Hockeyville 2006 Competition 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Out-of-Province Medical Services 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
 Access to Emergency Room Services 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
 Quality of Health Care 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1336 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1338 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1342 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 65 — The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 1) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1342 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 62 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1343 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1344 
 Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1344 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la prevue 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1346 
 Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1346 
 Bill No. 50 — The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine (médiation) 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1347 
 Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1348 
 Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1349 
 Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 2006 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1350 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1352 
  Forbes (referral to committee)...............................................................................................................................................1352 
 Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1352 
 Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1354 
 Bill No. 56 — The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1355 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1355 
 Bill No. 57 — The Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1356 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1356 
 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1356 
  Higgins (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................1357 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


