






















































Hansard: April 28, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 49A  FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1411 
 April 28, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, at this time I wish to table the 
annual report for the year 2005 from the Office of the 
Ombudsman, Kevin Fenwick. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition that returns to a subject that’s not only been 
consistent in the days past but is of very significant importance 
to the people of the Leader to Cabri stretch of Highway 32. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Alberta 
as well as the community of Cabri. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about Highway No. 310. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Kuroki and 
Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I return to 
several pages of a petition with citizens concerned about the 
safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Colonsay, Meacham, 

Saskatoon, Watson, St. Denis, Kamsack, Preeceville, 
Humboldt, Muenster, and Aberdeen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of residents across 
Saskatchewan that are concerned that Saskatchewan and PEI 
[Prince Edward Island] are the only provinces that do not have a 
dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, and 
Sutherland in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are all from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Department of Highways 
section shop in Watrous remain open so as to ensure the 
safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan highway employees 
who would be affected by such a possible closure. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous and Simpson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again in the legislature 
today to present a petition regarding the funding of the cancer 
drug Avastin. I will read from the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens concerned about 
their health system from the constituencies of Saskatoon 
Meewasin, Saskatoon Eastview, and Saskatoon Greystone. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 8 and 644. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill 32, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 32 be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant 

la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 32 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 
COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 37, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 37 be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 

Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 37 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 36, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2) without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 36 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation 

et assurance au profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) 
de 2006 (n° 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 31, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 31 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 31 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed to report Bill No. 
41, The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 41 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 41 be read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 35, The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2006 without amendment. 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

The Speaker: — When shall Bill 35 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 

de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 35, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 
Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act and to 
recommend to the Assembly that this Bill be ordered for second 
reading. 
 
This report is of historical significance as it marks the first 
report from a standing committee of the legislature to hold 
public hearings on a Bill following first reading. Your 
committee agreed to meet on February 20 and 22, 2006 to 
obtain views on Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005. Stakeholders and members of the public 
were invited to make their views known to the committee either 
orally, in writing, or both. 
 
Your committee held its hearings on February 20 and 22, 2006 
in Regina in the Legislative Building. Your committee wishes 
to thank the Minister of Justice and his officials for their 
co-operation and the individuals and organizations who 
appeared before your committee. 
 
This new committee process is an important step in ensuring 

that there is an increased public input into the legislative 
process and development of public policy. Committees can hear 
the view of stakeholders and the public about the subject matter 
contained in the legislation. Your committee received positive 
feedback from those involved in this process. 
 
In fact Mr. David Hardy, president of Fitness Industry Canada, 
stated, and I quote, “As an industry association, we appreciate 
the new-found openness of the committee process.” 
 
Your committee looks forward to continuing to use this new 
process in obtaining public input. I now move, seconded by the 
member from Cypress Hills, and table the report. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services on Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills, that the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Standing Committee on Human Services has just made 
legislative history in this province. Over the past several months 
we have participated in a process that has given elected 
members the opportunity to consider proposed legislation, to 
hold public hearings on that legislation, and to respond to that 
public input with what the committee members deem to be 
appropriate recommendations for changes to the legislation. 
 
The success of this precedent-setting process has required 
considerable hard work and good faith on the part of the 
committee that has had a clear partisan divide. But the 
recommendations that came out of this process were clearly of a 
bipartisan nature. This conclusion bodes well for the future of 
legislative performance and has the potential to democratize the 
process to the benefit of all citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As Deputy Chair, I am hopeful that the precedent established by 
this standing committee will be repeated by other committees of 
this legislature in the days to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Eastview, 
seconded by the member for Cypress Hills, that the fifth report 
of the Standing Committee on Human Services be now 
concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried, and I congratulate the 
members of the committee on the historical precedent they have 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

set here today. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly today, I am 
pleased and honoured to introduce a group of grade 7 students 
from the Shellbrook High School from Shellbrook. They’ve 
come a long way to their Assembly and I’m pleased to see them 
here today. There are 37 students. There’s two teachers, Wade 
Reddekopp and Diane Popovitch. They’re also assisted by two 
chaperone, teachers’ aides, Brenda LeComte and Stephanie 
Kennedy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t often have a lot of school groups 
coming down to their Legislative Assembly because of the 
distance, but I’m glad to see Shellbrook has come down. And I 
would ask all members to help me welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly someone who of course requires no 
introduction to members of the Assembly and that is our 
Ombudsman, Kevin Fenwick, who is here on the occasion of 
the tabling I think of his first report since being appointed a 
legislative officer. I believe — and I’ve known Mr. Fenwick for 
many, many years before he was in this position — that the 
legislature is very fortunate in this legislative officer and very 
wise to have selected him. And I hope that all members will 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the Minister of Justice in welcoming our 
Ombudsman, Mr. Fenwick. He is a constituent of mine. And I 
would certainly on behalf of the opposition like to welcome him 
and thank him for all his good works, and we look forward to 
reading his report. And I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce two young people who have joined us in the west 
gallery. Mr. Speaker, these two young people both work for BP. 
One, Dan Tomczak — maybe he’ll give a bit of a wave — Dan 

is an employee of BP from Estevan. He’s currently in Estevan. 
He’s originally from Regina and is a graduate of the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] chemical engineering program. 
And so we’re grateful that he’s not only here in the Assembly 
but here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe that same fate awaits Kristen Klenzendorf who’s also 
here. She’s also a BP employee right now in Houston, Texas. 
Maybe one day soon she’ll also be here in Saskatchewan and 
we would welcome that fact. But we want to ask all members to 
help us welcome them to this Legislative Assembly. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure as 
well to introduce to you today two people who have arrived in 
Regina here from Vegreville, Alberta. They’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. These people are Natalie Cyba and her 
partner, Randy Cyba. Now Natalie is my first cousin once 
removed. And she is here to attend the wedding of AnnaMarie 
who is also my first cousin once removed. Now not to create 
any confusion, but Natalie’s mother, Carol, is a sister to 
AnnaMarie’s father which makes AnnaMarie and Carol first 
cousins, nothing being removed. 
 
Please welcome Natalie and Randy to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

National Day of Mourning for Workers 
Killed or Injured on the Job 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 18 years 
ago Saskatchewan became the first jurisdiction in all of Canada 
to declare April 28 a statutory Day of Mourning for those killed 
or injured on the job. Eighteen years ago the member from 
Moose Jaw North introduced a Bill at the request of former 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour president, Nadine Hunt, 
proposing the observance of this day. The Bill passed 
unanimously. The Day of Mourning is now recognized across 
the nation and across the globe. 
 
April marks an anniversary very special to the working people 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. In April 1972 Saskatchewan 
introduced the most comprehensive health and safety legislation 
in North America, the occupational health Act, to protect the 
safety of workers. April 28 is a day both to recognize those who 
have suffered at work and to renew our commitment to 
workers’ safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last year 33 Saskatchewan people died as a 
result of their work. Thirty-one of these deaths occurred within 
our province. More than 10,000 were injured. These workers 
are Saskatchewan’s sons and daughters, mothers and fathers, 
brothers and sisters. Workers, Mr. Speaker, set out every day 
for their jobs to provide for their families, not to suffer 
debilitating injury and not to die. 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to pledge their 
commitment to keeping occupational health and safety 
legislation strong and to maintain a process of continual 
renewal to address changing needs. In the name of those 
workers who have been killed or injured, Mr. Speaker, and in 
the name of the thousands of men and women who go to work 
each day, we must do no less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the member opposite in recognizing this day. 
It’s a day when all Canadians commemorate workers who have 
been injured, suffered an illness, or lost their lives due to 
hazards and accidents in the workplace. Officially recognized 
with the passing of the Workers Mourning Day Act in 1990, 
this day has been commemorated by various events across the 
country to pay respect to those victims of workplace accidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been many improvements in 
occupational health and safety regulations since that first 
National Mourning Day, but we realize that there is much work 
left to be done. On the average, four Canadians lose their lives 
on the job every day. Mr. Speaker, that is four Canadians that 
do not come home at the end of the day to their loved ones. 
 
Our National Day of Mourning gives all Canadians the 
opportunity to remember those who have lost their lives in the 
course of their employment. And we offer our support and 
prayers to the family, friends, and co-workers of those who 
have lost their loved ones in the workplace. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Estevan School Wins Award for Green Schoolyard 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Wednesday I attended the presentation of the John Phillip 
Fisher Memorial Award to Sacred Heart School in Estevan. 
This national award recognizes the greening of school grounds 
to the benefit of our health and environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the staff and students of Sacred Heart School, 
along with the parents and local contractors, have worked 
extremely hard to bring their dream of a Garden of the Heart to 
reality. Areas of the schoolyard that were once asphalt have 
been made into perennial flower beds, and many trees have 
been planted along with two peace poles. Mr. Speaker, this 
creates an atmosphere of serenity which is perfect for their 
outdoor classroom, which they use quite often. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the award ceremony was wonderful. The children 
gave exceptional performances, and it was a beautiful, warm 
day. Congratulations to the Sacred Heart School, and thank you 
to Hanna Keating for including me in their celebrations. Thank 
you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Terriers Win Anavet Cup 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the terriers are a remarkable type of dog, known to 
be agile, intelligent, athletic, hard-working, and — most of all 
— very determined. And I’d like to tell you today about the 
most determined type of terrier of all, Mr. Speaker: the Yorkton 
Terrier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they are a focused team, Mr. Speaker. Just ask the 
members from North Battleford and the member from Indian 
Head and the fans of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The final series opened a week ago today and the Terriers 
defeating the Winnipeg South Blues in Yorkton. Over 3,000 
fans, Mr. Speaker; standing room only. They won the next two 
games and it looked like they had their eye on the sweep over 
the Winnipeg team, only to be scored in the final moments. And 
last night the Terriers claimed the trophy, the Anavet Cup, by 
defeating the home-ice Winnipeg South Blues 5-3 in game five 
of a seven-game series. 
 
And it comes as no surprise, Mr. Speaker, because 25 of the last 
32 Anavet Cups have been won by Saskatchewan teams. 
 
And those who watched last night’s game and listened were 
treated to an outstanding performance by Chris Korchinski, 
named the most valuable player. And the Terriers are now on 
their way to the Royal Bank, Brampton, Ontario to face the 
Streetsville Derbys. 
 
And I want to remind the colleague from Battleford and Indian 
Head and the fans of Weyburn, it’s no shame to be on the side 
of the Yorkton Terriers and the side of champions. And I’d like 
the members of this Assembly to join me in a few moments in 
congratulating the Terriers. 
 
And for the past month the city of Yorkton has been buzzing, 
Mr. Speaker, with excitement. The entire city is covered with 
Terrier signs and logos, and the tiger of the East is experiencing 
Terrier fever. And I want, Mr. Speaker, today to say and ask all 
members of the legislature to join me and wish them well and 
say: go, Terriers, go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Royal Care Fundraising Goal Surpassed 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there was a celebration in Saskatoon on Wednesday when the 
Royal Care campaign fundraising goal was met and surpassed. 
A $400,000 donation from Tim Gitzel, executive vice-president 
of the company AREVA, pushed the campaign over the top. 
The $15 million raised for the Royal University Hospital 
Foundation makes it the most money ever raised by a 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Saskatchewan hospital foundation. 
 
Tim Gitzel and the fellow Royal Care campaign coordinators 
Doug Hodson and Jerry Grandey have committed their time and 
expertise to delivering a new vision for health care in 
Saskatchewan. Together they envisioned raising enough money 
to provide patients with better access to health care, to support 
research, and to attract and keep health care professionals in the 
province. Some of the money raised has already been used to 
create seven new fellowship positions. 
 
The wish fund will grant wishes for patients’ care and comfort 
and some of the important extras that aren’t always provided in 
a hospital budget. Royal University Hospital Foundation Chair, 
Tom McClocklin, noted that the $15 million may just be a 
stepping stone because hospitals will always need more money 
to provide patients with the best possible care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see the Royal Care campaign reach 
this important milestone and ask you and all my colleagues to 
acknowledge the businesses and individuals who donated, and 
the hard work done by the campaign coordinators and the entire 
Royal University Hospital Foundation. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

National Water Polo Championships in Regina 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, beginning yesterday and over the 
course of the next few days the Speedo 2006 Cadet Boys 
National Water Polo Championships will be going on here in 
Regina at the Lawson Aquatic Centre. 
 
The cadet national championships are for players under the age 
of 16 and are one of the premier events on the Canadian water 
polo calendar. The event is being co-hosted by Water Polo 
Canada and the Regina Water Polo Association. 
 
This event will see 13 of Canada’s top cadet boys’ teams 
coming from Ontario, Quebec, Manitoba, Alberta, British 
Columbia, and Saskatchewan to compete for the right to call 
themselves national team champions. 
 
In addition to the tournament, this weekend will also see two 
Canadian National Water Polo League men’s games between 
the Regina Squids and the Calgary Torpedoes. All in all it 
promises to be four days filled with sportsmanship, hospitality, 
fun, and high-performance water polo. 
 
Later today it will be my privilege to say a few words at the 
opening ceremonies for the national championships. And of 
course I will be encouraging the visiting players, coaches, and 
fans to take the opportunity to see the sights and enjoy Regina’s 
fine hospitality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge all those involved in the 
Regina Water Polo Association in organizing the event. 
Tournament Co-Chairs Jim Graham and Carole Hutchinson, 
together with their big, talented team of staff and volunteers 
have done a tremendous job of putting on a top-notch national 
event. And while I wish all the teams every success over the 

course of the weekend, I am sure people will understand if I 
wish the Regina Squids just a lot more success than all the rest. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Deputy Premier’s Role 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it seems that the Deputy Premier has taken on a new 
cabinet responsibility — the minister of NDP [New Democratic 
Party] enforcement. Mr. Speaker, it seems that every time 
someone in the province criticizes that government or that 
Premier, they’re bound to get a call in some form from the 
Deputy Premier — whether it was the verbal berating he gave 
Chief Bird for attending the Saskatchewan Party convention or 
telling Weyburn voters they would be ignored if they were to 
vote for someone other than the NDP. And now we see the 
enforcer setting his sights on members of the radio media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan residents would be much 
better off if the Deputy Premier would devote all of his energy 
that he has spent trying to be the commissar of public 
expression, and start working to fix even one of the problems 
that Saskatchewan people are being burdened with by this NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Review of Medical Services Delivery 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Minister of 
Health promised a review into the unfortunate circumstances 
surrounding baby Paige’s inability to get timely treatment in 
Saskatchewan. Baby Paige had already spent three weeks in the 
Saskatoon health care system when her family was told that it 
would be another three weeks before diagnosis could be made. 
As we know, out of sheer frustration, Mike and Michelle 
Hansen took their daughter to Edmonton where she was 
diagnosed with leukemia within 24 hours of being admitted into 
the Stollery Children’s Hospital. 
 
Can the minister tell this Assembly today what the review has 
found in terms of why Paige couldn’t get timely treatment here 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to answer questions on this at the 
beginning of question period today. The last 72 hours have been 
very intensive within the Saskatoon Health Region and within 
the Department of Health. A large number of interviews have 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

been conducted. There’s been a tremendous amount of 
co-operation from a large number of people with regards to this 
case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health, the Saskatoon Health 
Region are very much concerned and interested in the long-term 
health of baby Paige. And we are very pleased to know that she 
is doing well and has a continuum of care now put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the preliminary report of the provincial 
coordinator will be provided to me before the end of this day. I 
have had a briefing this morning and am in a position to discuss 
a couple of things with members of the opposition and the 
media today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we know that Paige’s family 
had been told that they would need to wait up to three weeks for 
a bone scan at the Royal University Hospital. But surely the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority is not the only region that 
can conduct a bone scan. We believe that if timely treatment 
isn’t available in one health region, then it’s up to the region to 
see what’s available in the other health regions in the province. 
This case notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us 
if there will be significant improvements of communication 
within the health regions so that people can receive timely 
health care? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One 
of the things that the review that has taken place so far has 
indicated to us is that there are three areas that do require 
additional work, both with efforts focused on this particular 
case but province-wide, Mr. Speaker. Those areas include 
communication, coordination, and access. And we will, in the 
coming days and weeks, Mr. Speaker, be putting more effort 
and more time into those areas: communication, coordination, 
and access. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in addition, in this case 
Michelle Hansen was told that baby Paige would require an 
MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] but that the MRI was out of 
service. Did the review show that the MRI was indeed out of 
service? And if that was the case, can the minister tell the 
Assembly what kind of contingency plan is now in place when 
an essential diagnostic equipment fails? And will we see 
improvements to that plan in the future? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
could indicate that the multi-disciplinary approach that has been 
taken in the review so far has taken a look at a root cause, 

analysis of contributing factors, and is working on identifying 
corrective measures for those things that may have been found 
not to have been absolutely correct within the system. 
 
I do not have an answer for the member today with regards to 
the MRI. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the MRIs do have 
specific schedules in which they are working. Just like your car 
at home, Mr. Speaker, sometimes they’re taken out of service 
for servicing to ensure that they are working at optimum 
capacity. Mr. Speaker, there are always backup plans in every 
case when you pull one MRI out of the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is indeed part of the review but the review 
goes beyond specifics. It goes to the provincial system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the first 
question, the minister indicated that there will be a preliminary 
report before the end of the day. The opposition party has been 
asking for that report to be public, and so my question is this: 
will that report in its entirety be made public, and will it be 
available before Monday? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, what will be provided to me 
before the end of today is a clinical report done internally with 
the Saskatchewan health region. The preliminary report as it 
stands right now is not part of the public disclosure process. Mr. 
Speaker, I will respect the privacy of those who have 
contributed information to the internal clinical report process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are still parts of this investigation that have 
not been completed. Number one, we have not had a formal 
interview with the family, and we will not release information 
until the family’s interests have been respected. Secondly, we 
have not yet had a formal investigation of any of the advice that 
was provided from anyone outside the health system. And 
thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we have not concluded the investigation 
into the care and service and information provided from outside 
the province. That’s a part of the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
couple weeks ago I was asking the Minister of Health about 
some of the longest waiting lists in Canada. But in particular, 
what I was asking about was the length of time the patient have 
to wait after a physician’s referral to see an oncologist — first 
visit to oncologist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the national average for the first 
visit to an oncologist is four to five weeks. A couple of weeks 
ago on April 19 the minister responded though. He said “The 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

optimum wait time from physician referral to oncologist seeing 
was about 9.5 weeks.” If it was 9.5 weeks a couple of weeks 
ago or months ago, can he tell us what the optimum wait time in 
the province is now? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member opposite knows, wait times are the subject of every 
provincial and federal Minister of Health in Canada. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, wait times are the priority of the federal Minister of 
Health and will be subject of considerable continued discussion 
at the ministers of Health table. Mr. Speaker, we know that 
because of recruitment and retention issues, particularly in 
Saskatoon, that the wait times with regards to referrals for 
oncology work are longer today than optimum and that . . . 
compared to what’s going on in other provinces. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we have provided 
additional resources to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency this 
year. They have established a internal taskforce to be working 
on this very issue. And, Mr. Speaker, we intend to, as we have 
been doing prior to this question, working on the wait times for 
referral to oncologist . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a Leader-Post 
article yesterday, a representative from the Saskatoon Cancer 
Centre said no patients had been referred outside this province 
in the last month. That begs the question, why not? She goes on 
to say that despite the goal of seeing everyone as soon as 
possible, they simply cannot meet the targets set out by the 
national standard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve just learned about 62-year-old Margaret 
Sundquist from Watrous. Her case file was sent to the 
Saskatoon cancer clinic on April 7. She was told that there 
would be a minimum of a 12-week wait for her first visit to an 
oncologist. The family wants to know where they should go or 
what they should do. Can the minister tell them? Should they 
have to wait 12 weeks for first visit to an oncologist in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, again thank you very much. 
I appreciate the question. Certainly the individual referred to in 
this question . . . I’m not aware of this particular case, but I 
would certainly urge the member opposite to do what he should 
be doing in cases like that. And it’s referring the case to the 
quality of care coordinator at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
or within the health region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member should know that the new 
patient office with the Saskatchewan cancer care agency is 
currently seeing 19 new patients every day on consultations. 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is reviewing appointments; 

137 patients are reviewed every day. 
 
In terms of treatment, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is 
doing radiation treatments on 154 patients every day and 
chemotherapy treatments on 66 patients every day. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is people for first 
visits to oncologists in this province, for the last couple of 
weeks that we’re learning from, is 12 weeks. That’s three times 
the national average. Is that acceptable in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
implication, the member opposite is saying that the people, the 
good people working at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency are 
not doing their job in trying to recruit and retain oncologists to 
be able to help reduce the waiting list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people are doing a tremendous job. The new 
patient office is functioning. The recruitment and retention 
efforts are having some success, Mr. Speaker. And that waiting 
list will drop as the good people at the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency do the job that they’ve been asked to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since we raised 
the case of Emily Morley, the Canadian Cancer Society’s 
cancer advocate has been absolutely flooded with phone calls. 
She used to receive a total of one to maybe four phone calls a 
day. Last week or this week, we met with representatives of the 
society, and they were telling us before they left the office she 
had received 36 phone calls that morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cancer patients are wanting to know how they can 
access this treatment quicker. Mr. Speaker, waiting 12 weeks is 
unacceptable. When will the minister start notifying patients to 
start looking out of province as an option early in the process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite also questions the commitment of this 
government to cancer patients in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, no one is more committed to reducing those waiting 
lists and getting people seen by the professionals sooner than 
myself, Mr. Speaker. We are absolutely committed. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, earlier this year, earlier this month, 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

we presented a budget that provides an additional $17 million to 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, a 10.2 per cent increase in its 
budget, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite voted against that 
increase. They voted against the allocation to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I ask the member opposite, how much 
funding would the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency have got had 
they been elected and implemented their freeze, the health 
funding promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Saskatchewan Public Service Employee Survey 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to bring to your attention today a workplace situation that is 
occurring at the Department of Community Resources. 
Yesterday in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, there was an article 
with the following headline, “Gov’t workers protest 
conditions.” The article goes on to talk about 70 workers who 
are protesting what they see as harassment from management. 
I’d like to quote from the article, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . management has made the workplace a “toxic” 
environment. “It’s beyond dysfunctional.” 
 

To the minister, what has the government done to solve this 
problem and address the concerns of their own department 
employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
These are always very difficult issues. And as we’ve indicated, 
from time and time again, that we value our employees and 
there are processes that employees and management work their 
way through. These are very sensitive matters that we allow 
management and their teams to go through as we want to 
respect the employees as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, DCR [Department of Community Resources] has 
some great and very dedicated employees. We value all the 
employees, but we again assure folks that these sensitive issues 
are handled through proper procedures and processes and will 
continue to admire that and certainly respect that process. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from The 
StarPhoenix article once again. It went on to say: 
 

“If you . . . stand up and challenge this employer, you’re 

black-balled, black-listed,” . . . “You will not get any 
future opportunities or promotions.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one symptom of a larger problem. In 
the 2005 Saskatchewan public service employee survey, less 
than half of those surveyed responded favourably to the 
following statement: “All in all, my Department is effectively 
managed and well-run.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing to ensure government 
workers are being treated fairly and with respect? What is this 
minister doing to ensure worker concerns are heard and acted 
upon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated we 
sincerely value all of our employees. Mr. Speaker, we also 
sincerely value all our managers. And there are processes that 
have been negotiated and processes that have been renegotiated. 
And these will continue being thought at in terms of looking for 
some solutions and resolutions to all the employees’ issues in 
concert with some of the challenges that management has. 
 
Again I will point out that we value all the employees, but we 
respect the process in which an employee has a grievance. And 
we certainly encourage management to work with them. And 
those processes certainly, again as I mentioned before, will be 
fair, and it’ll be thorough, and they’ll be not subjected to 
political interference. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, according to press reports, the 
government workers are less impressed with this government’s 
activities in behalf of their process than the minister would 
indicate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of government workers provide 
exemplary service and deserve support and respect. Now this 
survey that I just referred to a moment ago, goes on to say that 
every department . . . it goes to every department rather, and 
represents the opinions of workers as a whole in the public 
service. Mr. Speaker, the results of this employee survey need 
to be taken seriously because some of them are really quite 
disturbing. 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker. Only one-third of 
those surveyed agreed with the statement, “Your Department is 
informing employees about reasons behind decisions which 
affect them.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, less than a third of the employees agreed with this 
statement: “Your present job provides a chance to have your 
ideas . . . [accepted] and put into use.” 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, 60 per cent of employees responded 
unfavourably or had a neutral reaction to this statement: “When 
things go well in your job, your contributions are usually 
recognized.” 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what has the minister done to address the 
glaring problems revealed in this public service survey? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, as 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Once again the Minister 
for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the members will know, this is the second employees’ survey 
that’s been conducted by the Public Service Commission in the 
province of Saskatchewan. There are a number of strengths that 
have been noted in that survey, particularly — particularly — 
the government’s approach to balancing work and family life, 
which is usually appreciated by the public service in this 
province. And in fact that has been acknowledged across the 
country that we are a key employer in terms of promoting the 
balance of work life and family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some challenges that have become 
evident in the survey, and there are some things that the 
province needs to work on. The deputy ministers of each 
government department are aware of the results within each 
department. And they have been charged with ensuring that two 
years from now, when the survey is conducted again, that there 
will be some significant increase in employee satisfaction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Government Spending 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the 
Premier again of what he said about wasteful government 
spending when he was in opposition. Have they cut funding to 
their own political staffs? Have they cut anything from their 
self-serving advertising budgets? Have they cut from their 
lavish personal expenditures and trips on government aircraft? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the Premier’s own record in these 
areas, he’s 0 for 3. He increased his own political staff. He just 
ran a half-a-million-dollar, self-serving advertising campaign. 
And we just learned the cost of flights by NDP ministers 
jumped by 13 per cent to over a half a million dollars. Mr. 
Speaker, these are areas the Premier promised to cut. Why is he 
breaking his word and increasing spending in all three areas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Sask 
Property Management. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. The Minister for SPM 
[Saskatchewan Property Management]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 
members opposite that the flight service that is provided to 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] is provided to all 
MLAs — not just cabinet ministers, but private members as 
well, in an attempt to allow them to do their jobs and to be able 
to return, when the session is on, to their ridings to serve their 
constituents. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s a 
reasonable service that is provided. What that member doesn’t 
say is the number of miles has gone down, air miles that have 
flown has in fact gone down. Mr. Speaker, I want that member 
to understand that. 
 
But what I also want the people of Saskatchewan to understand 
is what this is all about. This is about that member and the 
Leader of the Opposition who plan to privatize the air service, 
put it out to private air carriers. And that’s fine. And if that’s 
their policy, they should say so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I’d like to thank the new premier 
for that non-answer. But, Mr. Speaker, when the real Premier 
was in opposition, the Premier said the government should look 
at saving money by cutting its own political staff. 
 
Well last year what happened? He hired six new staff in his 
own office. He increased his own communications budget by a 
half a million dollars. This year he increased his own 
communications budget nearly $300,000 more. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s an increase of nearly $800,000 or 73 per cent in just two 
years. Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier justify this massive 
increase in his own office? And how does this square with the 
commitment to cut political staffs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell that member 
and all members opposite what’s increased in the last year. The 
gross domestic product in the province of Saskatchewan is 
increased 3.2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s what’s increased in the last year, 
Mr. Speaker. That confused and cranky caucus over there, Mr. 
Speaker, should just pick up today’s newspaper. It’s of some 
interest, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to talk about today’s 
newspaper. They want to talk about the 1980s when their own 
leader was at work upstairs here. They don’t want to talk about 
today’s newspaper because, Mr. Speaker, what does today’s 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

newspaper say in banner headlines? “Life is very good here” in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the quality of life, that’s 
what’s going up in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, like to talk a little bit about integrity and credibility. 
Here we have the Premier said his government should cut 
political staff. Then he increased political staff. Where’s the 
credibility in that? That’s strike one against that Premier. 
 
The Premier said government should cut its own self-serving 
advertising budget. What happened? He increased the NDP 
self-serving advertising budget. Where is the credibility and the 
integrity of that Premier in that aspect? 
 
Then he said, then he said the ministers should cut down on 
trips on government aircraft — strike three, Mr. Speaker. Last 
year the cost of flights by ministers was up over a half a million 
dollars, an increase of 13 per cent. How does this Premier 
justify the increase, these increases? How does he justify saying 
one thing and then doing the exact opposite? Where is the 
credibility and where is the integrity of that Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It’s interesting. The members opposite, 
today they’d like to talk about the 1980s. 
 
Well we’d like to talk about the 1980s too because the Leader 
of the Opposition, he’s erased the 1980s right off his website, 
right off his website, Mr. Speaker, right off his website, seven 
missing years. He doesn’t want to talk about the 1980s when he 
was at work upstairs here. 
 
But the member over there from Wood River wants to talk 
about the 1980s. Well, Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about 
expenditures. He wants to talk about expenditures in 
advertising, Mr. Speaker. Well let me tell you this, and I’ll tell 
the people of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan today is a great 
news story, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is a great news story. 
 
“Life is very good here” in the province of Saskatchewan. GDP 
[gross domestic product] growth up 3.2 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
and we are going to tell that story. We’re going to tell it to the 
young people of Saskatchewan. We’re going to tell it to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. We’re going to tell it to the nation, 
and we’re going to tell it to the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are going to tell the good news story of Saskatchewan 
because that cranky, confused operation over there is casting a 
pall on the province. We are going to tell the world about the 
good news of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise and ask leave of the 
Assembly to make a statement of importance to Saskatchewan 
workers. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Labour. 
 

Day of Mourning for Workers 
Killed or Injured on the Job 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is the National Day of Mourning for workers killed or 
injured on the job. In Canada an average of two or three people 
are killed on the job every day of the year, and nearly 900,000 
Canadian workers are injured each year, many of them 
permanently. The magnitude of the suffering and grief of these 
deaths and injuries leave in their wake cannot be measured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we mourn all those who have lost their lives 
or suffered injury as part of the effort to build our province and 
our country. Every worker killed is someone’s son or daughter, 
mother or father, brother or sister. Today our thoughts and 
prayers are with the grieving families left behind, with all those 
who every day must bear the pain of knowing their loved one is 
never coming home again. 
 
We cannot undo the terrible damage that has been done. And 
we can’t make grieving families whole again, but we can spare 
other families that same anguish by doing everything we can to 
prevent such workplace tragedies. 
 
So as well as a day of mourning, today is also a day of renewed 
commitment — a renewed commitment to safety in the 
workplace; a renewed commitment to further reducing 
workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities. Since the last day of 
mourning, the Workers’ Compensation Board has recognized 
the death of more than 30 people in our province from illnesses 
or injuries sustained on the job. More than 10,000 others were 
injured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to rise as I read into the 
record the names of those 33 men and women. I also ask to 
observe a moment of silence to honour their memory when I 
have finished. 
 
Ricky Billette Calvin Folwark 
Garth Goddard Kenneth Graham 
Keith Hagen Anthony Hager 
Garth Ivey James Jones 
Hadden Garrett Kid John Knihniski 
Cynthia Lemire Joseph Lett 
Marvin Loff Lloyd Love 
Kevin Lucas Christopher Mosterd 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

Carman Reetz Stephen Reidy 
Edward Schmidt Daniel Schultz 
Devon Whitehead Harlan Williams 
Jochen Wolf Emerson Zuck 
Chris Peter Vernon Bakke 
Saverio Coppola Kenneth Baber 
Jason Maurer Lyle Hoggarth 
Cameron Hunter Manfred Nigge 
Emil Schug  
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I thank all members. Please be seated. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would like to join with the 
Minister of Labour in offering our support and prayers to those 
families who have lost a loved one due to workplace accidents, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When a family loses a loved one due to an unexpected death, it 
is a tragic thing, Mr. Speaker. And if it’s in the workplace and 
particularly if it could have been prevented, that makes that 
person’s death even more tragic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon all of us in this 
Legislative Assembly to make sure that we do everything we 
can to protect the working men and women in our province to 
make sure that they have safe working conditions, Mr. Speaker. 
And even though we do everything we can, accidents will 
happen. Sometimes they’re unpreventable, as they are when we 
sit in our vehicles and drive down the roads and sometimes 
something happens that cannot be prevented. But oftentimes 
there is room for improvement, and we must make sure that that 
progress of making a safer workplace for all people . . . that 
work continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, on behalf of the opposition, we offer our prayers and 
our support to all those families who have lost a loved one in 
this past year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government I’ll be tabling 
responses to written questions nos. 1,048 to 1,053. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,048 to 1,053 have 
been submitted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Return Nos. 575 and 576 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we would like to order return 
nos. 575 and 576. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion 575 and return 576 have been 
ordered. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to go to government orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to go to government orders. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 64 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
with great pleasure that I rise today to speak to Bill 64, The 
Income Tax Act of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, corporate income taxes in Saskatchewan 
contribute some $361 million of revenue or approximately 22 
per cent of all taxes in the province. As we have known and 
heard time and time again in this Assembly, Saskatchewan has 
had the highest corporate income tax rates in the country, that 
rate being 17 per cent. This rate is levied on income that’s not 
eligible for the small-business or the manufacturer and 
processing rate reductions. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has also 
had the distinction of having the highest small-business taxes in 
the country. 
 
And I just want to go into this one a little bit, Mr. Speaker. The 
exemption in Saskatchewan was $300,000. Above that number, 
companies had to pay 17 per cent. Jack Vicq and his committee 
has told us that Saskatchewan tax rates were not competitive 
and nowhere is that more evident than in this situation. 
 
Companies paying above $300,000 in income and paying their 
taxes had to compete with rates as low as 4 per cent in 
Manitoba, 3 per cent in Alberta, at the 17 per cent rate. Clearly, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising to notice why Saskatchewan is 
in the position that it is of having the highest rates of job loss, 
the highest rates of out-migration of young people, with 
business taxes like that. Certainly, certainly this legislation is 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

long overdue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of attending most of the 
committee hearings that Jack Vicq and the business tax review 
committee held across Saskatchewan and I heard from many, 
many business people. And what they said time and time again 
was that Saskatchewan’s tax rates are just not competitive. Yes, 
businesses had ways of getting around it. You know, they 
would create extra companies to make sure that the income was 
below $300,000. But it wasn’t efficient, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
the way that business should be done. It’s not the way that a 
province’s taxation system should be done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve known for a long period of time that 
taxes in Saskatchewan were way out of whack. We’ve known 
certainly since I’ve been in this legislature in November 2003, 
that Saskatchewan could no longer continue with the tax rates 
that were put forward. What, Mr. Speaker, did this NDP 
government do? 
 
For the first two years that I was a member of this legislature — 
nothing. They have done nothing to reduce taxes. They have 
done nothing to make taxes competitive in Saskatchewan. In 
fact the only real financial measure that this government has 
undertaken is an increase to the PST [provincial sales tax] — 
$150 million tax grab that still stands today, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
shame. 
 
When we look at this Bill and we look at what’s been 
happening, we have to realize that other jurisdictions do not 
stand still as this NDP government dithers and waits for some 
direction on what to do. The Government of British Columbia 
has moved to reduce the corporate income tax rate to 12 per 
cent and even the Government of Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, 
without even having a commission, is reducing their corporate 
income taxes. And as we all know, prior to the Finance minister 
announcing his adoption of the Vicq commission, the 
Government of Alberta has once again hopscotched over 
Saskatchewan in reducing their corporate income tax rates to 10 
per cent. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill is a move in the right direction. It’s 
something that had to be done. It’s something that’s long 
overdue. I’ve talked to many tax lawyers in Saskatchewan who 
have told me about the concern that they’ve had, the concern 
between their professional responsibility to their clients and that 
they feel as a taxpayer of the Saskatchewan treasury. Due to 
their professional responsibilities they had to advise the people 
that they’re working for, their clients, to move their funds out of 
Saskatchewan. To move their head offices in many cases, Mr. 
Speaker, out of Saskatchewan to ensure that they don’t incur the 
wrath of the high tax rates that Saskatchewan has had here for 
the last 15 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s something that’s long overdue. The income shifting that has 
taken place over the last 15 years has not benefited our province 
as the NDP had campaigned in the last election and said that tax 
decreases would be a detriment to our province. They have now 
realized that is indeed not the case. We need a thriving business 
sector to turn around the economy in this province, to send a 
message to businesses that you can hire young people here, to 
send a message to those young people to stay in Saskatchewan 
and have their future here. 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the high corporate tax rates, the high 
tax rates in general — you name a tax, it’s near or at the top; the 
highest taxes in the country — it has not worked in this 
province. It has been a detriment, this NDP policy, for the last 
15 years. And I’m glad that they’ve finally seen the light and 
have chosen to actually reduce taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is long overdue. It’s something 
members on this side of the House have been speaking about 
for many, many years. And with that I’d refer this to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 64, The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that this 
Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 64 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill No. 64 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: —Yes. Mr. Speaker, can we just reconsider 
the previous question? It was referred incorrectly to the wrong 
committee. I’d ask for leave to reconsider the previous question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to reconsider the previous question in order that it may be 
referred to another committee. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. To which committee 
shall this Bill really be referred? The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well maybe we should just waive 
consideration in the committee; there seems to be such 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

agreement in the House on it. I don’t see the opposition excited 
about that. So instead I will move that the Bill be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 64, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill then stands 
properly referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 63 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 63, The Corporate 
Capital Tax Act. Mr. Speaker, this is something that I do take 
great pleasure in responding to. It’s something that members on 
this side of the House have been talking about for many, many 
years, certainly since the inception of the Saskatchewan Party. 
This is something that has been important — making 
Saskatchewan a competitive place to do business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very pleased when the Saskatchewan tax 
review committee was established to be able to present the first 
presentation to those hearings in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. And I 
just want to quote from that presentation today. And I know 
members opposite would be very pleased. We’ve had many 
debates about this presentation, but indeed for the record here I 
just want to review it for members opposite and for all those 
concerned. 
 
On Tuesday my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone said 
that he would like to hear the whole presentation. I’m sorry I 
can’t do that at the present time, in interests of time, but I will 
undertake to personally go through it with him in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 10, 2005, almost one year ago, the Sask 
Party made the first presentation to the Saskatchewan business 
tax review committee in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. The 
Saskatchewan Party told the business tax review committee in 
Yorkton that it wants to: 
 

. . . provide its young people with opportunities to 
maintain the high quality of health, education, and social 
services [in Saskatchewan that] . . . people expect, the 
government must embark on a mix of tax reductions and 
new growth . . . incentives to [ensure] . . . new investment 
and [to] create jobs. 

 
And I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

“There are [many] good reasons to make Saskatchewan a 

more attractive place to invest and do business . . . These 
include our young people, the high quality of health care 
and social services we value, and a growing and 
competitive economy” [which is very much needed]. 
 
“If we are going to provide our young people with career 
opportunities and continue to afford valued social services 
into the future, we need to expand our tax base. And to do 
that we need to make Saskatchewan’s business 
environment as competitive as possible.” 
 
The Calvert government has given Saskatchewan the most 
aggressive capital tax investment taxes in North America 
and the highest general corporate income taxes in Canada. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed important. This presentation 
speaks to the very role of opposition in this legislature. The role 
of opposition is not only to criticize — although the 
government has given us ample opportunity to do that, 
especially in the last couple of weeks — but it’s also to propose 
ideas, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I take great pride in 
presenting this presentation on behalf of the official opposition, 
on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party. Indeed I was the only 
member of any political party to represent their party and to 
make such a presentation. 
 
But not only did we make the presentation, Mr. Speaker, we 
went into the specifics — each and every area. We outlined the 
specifics. We costed them out. We demonstrated that they were 
indeed affordable within the context of the present financial 
situation of the province. 
 
[11:15] 
 
We talked about reducing the small-business tax to eleven and a 
half per cent. What did Jack Vicq and his committee come up 
with? They moved it to 12 per cent. And we agreed with that, 
and we thank them for that. Obviously the government didn’t 
want to listen to us, but they have listed to the Vicq 
commission. And we certainly appreciate them at least doing 
that and following a road map that was given to them. They 
neglected to create one of their own. They neglected to show 
leadership in this regard, but at least they listened to the Vicq 
commission and indeed, through our submission, to the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Another thing that we recommended is making small-business 
tax rates competitive in Saskatchewan. The 5 per cent business 
rate is still amongst the highest in the country, and there’s 
further movement that can be done in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in interest of time I want to just touch on the 
highlights of that presentation that was made on May 10, 2005. 
And I quote: 
 

Now is not the time for mixed messages from the Calvert 
government like praising the oil and gas industry one day 
and [then] hitting the same industry with tax hikes . . . [the 
next] day . . . Now is the time for a strategic plan to ensure 
opportunities for our young people, the continuation of 
high quality public services, and a growing economy. 
 
There is no better time to make a commitment like this 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

than right now in Saskatchewan’s Centennial Year . . . 
 

That was the advice we gave the government through the Vic 
commission. That was the advice that the Saskatchewan Party, 
as the official opposition, took the time to research, took the 
time to cost out, and took the time to put forward in a 
responsible manner. And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly what an opposition should be doing. And, Mr. Speaker, 
further to that, that is exactly what a Saskatchewan Party 
government will do. We will not divvy. We will work, we will 
work in that regard. 
 
When we talk about the corporate capital tax in Saskatchewan, 
it’s important to look at the history of the CCT [corporation 
capital tax]. It was introduced in 1980 by the Blakeney 
government. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Blakeney government did 
some good things, but certainly introducing the corporate 
capital tax in our province was not one of them. And of course 
we know nationalizing the potash mines was certainly not a 
good idea by that Blakeney government. There were some 
ideologues though in that government that convinced the 
members of the day, convinced the government of the day to 
put this tax on capital — not on profits, just on capital. 
 
Come to Saskatchewan they said. Invest your money. Invest 
your money in our province, and what’s the first thing we’ll do? 
We’ll send you a bill for the corporate capital tax. That was 
instituted in 1980, and look what has happened to our province 
in the last 25 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We haven’t grown. Our population has dwindled, especially in 
the last few years, and we take no pleasure in enunciating those 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. They’re numbers that trouble all of us. 
And we know exactly why that businesses weren’t able to 
create jobs as they were in other provinces, because of the 
situation on the taxes here in Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look across the country and we look across the world, 
corporate capital tax has been something that has been 
decreasing wherever you look. Certainly across North America, 
they’ve phased them out, so much so in fact that Jack Vicq said 
we had the highest corporate capital tax, not only in Canada, not 
only in North America, he wasn’t for sure, but he said probably 
in the free world — the highest corporate capital tax in the free 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other provinces have moved. Ontario is moving to get rid of 
their general corporate capital tax. Quebec has been moving to 
reduce that tax, and BC [British Columbia] of course has moved 
very quickly to eliminate that tax altogether, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan was indeed unique in its substantial reliance on 
this revenue both provincially and nationally. 
 
Private investment in Saskatchewan is one of the key factors for 
wealth creation. By investing, companies are able to modernize, 
be more competitive, create jobs, and grow in the short and long 
term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of our competitiveness with other provinces in Canada, 
Saskatchewan again didn’t make the short list. Those are words 
of Jack Vicq and what he told us. And I think it troubled all 
members, many members on the government side that were 
there when he said those words, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I know in the interest of time that it’s important 
that we move along, but at this time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to request leave of the Assembly 
to make an introduction. It’s a moment that I just don’t want to 
miss. Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I thank all members. Members, in the 
Speaker’s gallery today is our granddaughter of my wife and I, 
Anisha Zolty who is here for her first visit to the legislature. I 
see she’s already got the wave of royalty perfected. Anisha is 
two years and four months old. She’s here with her mother, 
Lara Kowalsky, our daughter, and with them of course is my 
wife, Olesia. I’d like you to welcome three of the most 
important women in my life. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
continue on by talking about the input that organizations across 
Saskatchewan have had into the Vicq commission and continue 
to have to guide this province on how to make it more 
competitive. 
 
The Saskatchewan Institute of Chartered Accountants in 2004, 
their checkup said, and I quote: 

 
Indirect corporate taxes are extremely unpopular with 
company owners, managers and investors owing to their 
lack . . . [on] relation to profitability. A company in 
difficult financial circumstances must pay indirect taxes, 
even in the absence of profits . . . The corporate capital tax 
. . . in particular is seen as a substantial barrier to 
investment. Some provincial governments have reduced or 
eliminated their corporate . . . tax as a consequence. 
 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to thank the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Chartered Accountants for their work in this area; 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business; the Canadian 
taxpayers association; chambers of commerce across 
Saskatchewan; in my home city, the North Saskatoon Business 
Association took this very seriously; and to all those groups that 
both the minister and myself have written to and met with and 
have had substantial contributions to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this too is legislation that is long overdue. It’s 
something that Saskatchewan has waited for, and I know that 
it’s something that really will speak to the growth that’s needed 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

in Saskatchewan. 
 
When the federal government has done studies on what has 
happened to jurisdictions that have had high capital taxes, the 
most distortionary tax has been the capital tax, followed by 
taxes on wages and taxes on consumption. Furthermore, 
measures targeted toward reducing taxes on new investment 
only are found to be highly effective. Mr. Speaker, that’s new 
growth tax cuts. 
 
And again we were very pleased to see that the government has 
finally seen the light. They must have read the Leader of the 
Opposition’s Enterprise Saskatchewan model, because they 
have adopted some points from it. It’s much like the 
Saskatchewan Party plan of 100 Ideas. They’ve adopted many 
of them, but, Mr. Speaker, they have not gone the full way, and 
we will be here to remind them of that certainly into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, without further ado, I would like to tell you 
that the members of the opposition here will do all we can to 
ensure speedy passage of this Bill to ensure that 
Saskatchewan’s economy, for the first time in probably 15 
years, has a real chance to start growing; that young people 
have a chance to stay here, to make their careers here. This 
sends a signal. It won’t happen overnight. Again it’s not 
something that’ll be done in isolation. We have to ensure that 
we have competitive labour laws. We have to ensure that we 
have a full growth agenda in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to refer this Bill to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 63, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that this Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 63 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 63 stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 62 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I enter into the debate on Bill 62, The Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Act. This Bill sets into legislation the amounts 
listed in the budget for municipal revenue sharing. There’s a 
total of $97 million for all municipalities in this budget year. 
 
This Act moves the rural revenue-sharing section concerning 
hamlets into regulations allowing for greater fluidity in the 
content. It also paves the way for greater consultation with 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] if a 
new revenue-sharing formula is ever implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important when we talk about this 
legislation to review the revenue-sharing ideas that we hear 
from both sides of this House. The members on this side of the 
House want to ensure that true revenue sharing happens in this 
province for the benefits of all municipalities. 
 
The government likes to talk about revenue sharing, but 
Saskatchewan has not had real revenue sharing in place since 
the 1970s, Mr. Speaker. Real revenue sharing means that a 
portion of provincial revenue is indeed shared with 
municipalities, that that is put into legislation, and they can 
count on that benefit. Real revenue sharing allows 
municipalities to plan for the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP today — and I think members opposite will agree 
with this — does not have real revenue sharing in place. Any 
funding to municipalities — and it seems to be a habit with this 
government — is done on an ad hoc basis. Municipalities 
cannot plan for anything that involves just one year or more of 
funding. They can’t plan for anything that involves more than a 
year of funding. If the grants from the government for example, 
Mr. Speaker, are low in one year, what happens? It’s similar to 
what’s happening with this budget. Taxes go up, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what happens when you don’t have real revenue sharing 
in place that municipalities can count on. 
 
And what is the result? That is the important question here 
today. Communities cannot build recreation complexes, 
improve their roads, or enhance the quality of water they have 
in their communities if they do not receive stable and adequate 
money from this government. This leaves cities and 
communities holding the financial bag. Because this 
government is on some kind of a power trip it seems where they 
want to control the purse strings, they leave communities and 
municipalities holding the financial bag, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That means that communities often have no choice when 
they’re downloaded upon to raise property taxes. Higher 
property taxes means Saskatchewan communities will fall 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2006 

further behind other jurisdictions in the province and other 
jurisdictions outside the province, across this country, falling 
further behind. Higher property taxes means that revenue will 
have to come from other sources, or it means cutting services to 
these very communities that have been hit so hard by this 
government already. 
 
Even with all the new farm property tax money, revenue 
sharing for municipalities is still only $97 million. Revenue 
sharing today is still millions of dollars less than it was 15 years 
ago, Mr. Speaker — 15 years ago. And this government is the 
first one to pat themselves on the back whenever they feel that 
they’ve done something over the last 15 years. But indeed in 
this case they haven’t done anything. And with inflation we’ve 
been falling farther and farther behind. 
 
The amount of money allocated to cities in this budget is $35 
million. This is a far cry from what it was in 1990, Mr. Speaker. 
In 1990 the revenue-sharing allocation in the Urban Affairs 
budget was approximately — and I know members opposite 
will want to hear this — in 1990 it was $67 million, Mr. 
Speaker; $35 million this year, $67 million in 1990. Fifteen 
years ago before this operation took over. Mr. Speaker, this is 
indeed shameful. And I know members opposite are realizing 
this, that it’s indeed shameful. I hope that they can do better. I 
hope that they can do better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not even talking in real dollars. And I know 
the Finance minister or one of his colleagues could do that 
calculation and tell us exactly what that is in real dollars. But it 
would be less than half, Mr. Speaker, of what the funding was 
in 1990 and that’s shameful. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The NDP government continues to starve our communities at 
the time when they should be centres of growth in our province, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what they should be. Small communities in 
this province should be thriving. They should have their own 
enterprises. They should be attracting young people back to this 
province and they’re not, and I suggest it’s because of this 
government and the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does not change tax rates, tax uses, or tax 
assessments by any other factor. This legislation doesn’t put 
more money into the old system. Mr. Speaker, the same issues 
that led to today’s crisis are still there and they will produce 
another crisis in the future unless something is done by this 
government to ensure that the funding is at least put back to 
where it was before they took over, before 1991 in October 
when they took over. Let’s go back to the 1990 budget as a start 
with this government. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, believes that funding to 
municipalities should be linked directly to the funding that the 
provincial government is taking in. And wouldn’t that be a good 
situation today for each and every municipality across the 
province if they had a share in the new-found oil wealth that 
this province is experiencing? Not because of any credit really 
to this government, but at least they should have the audacity to 
pass that on to communities, municipalities that need it very 
much. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what have we heard from the NDP government? 
Well it’s clear, we’ve heard little for the last 15 years. But now 
the NDP government — and I’m glad that the minister is 
listening attentively — now the NDP government says that it’ll 
have a formula ready. When, Mr. Speaker? When will their 
formula be ready? In 2007. Well where have we heard that 
before, Mr. Speaker — 2007. Everything that we’ve heard for 
the last 3 years is going to happen in 2007. 
 
And indeed you know — I don’t want to be a cynic — but that 
may be an election year. They think they may get an advantage 
but, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are smarter than that. 
They’ve seen this happen time and time again with NDP 
governments, where the only time anything happens is an 
election year. So we’ll wait and see what they come up with in 
2007. But I would suggest that Saskatchewan municipalities, 
Saskatchewan communities, Saskatchewan community leaders 
have a long memory and will punish this government for 15 
years, punish them politically for 15 years of inaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have starved rural communities because 
of politics. They play politics with Saskatchewan people. The 
time is now, Mr. Speaker, to rise above that, to give 
municipalities a fair revenue-sharing agreement, what they need 
to ensure that they can share in the wealth that is being 
generated from our natural resources. Natural resources that 
come from rural Saskatchewan, that belong to everybody in 
Saskatchewan, but this government seems to be sitting on a 
mountain of money and not sharing that revenue with 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move this Bill to 
committee. It goes a small step in the way that needs to be done, 
but certainly we’d encourage the government to see their way to 
come up with a formula before election year in 2007. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Estevan has requested leave 
for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Estevan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
the east gallery, I have guests from St. Olivier School in 
Radville. There’s 18 grade 5 students along with their teacher, 
Lorrie Bolton. Chaperones are Kendra Hansen, Toni Reedy, 
Anita Gust, Juliette Ferguson, and Mary Jane Fradette. I would 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2006 

(continued) 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 62, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
62, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by Minister of Government 
Relations that Bill No. 62 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 62 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in order to accommodate the 
work of the Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
Committee as well as the policy field Committee on Human 
Services, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:36.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1411 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1412 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..............................................................................................................................................................................1412, 1414 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1414 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
 Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 
 Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
 Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 
 Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des  
 administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (n° 2) 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
 Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
 Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1414 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................1415, 1426 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
 Estevan School Wins Award for Green Schoolyard 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
 Yorkton Terriers Win Anavet Cup 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
 Royal Care Fundraising Goal Surpassed 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1416 
 National Water Polo Championships in Regina 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
 Deputy Premier’s Role 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1417 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Review of Medical Services Delivery 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
 Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 



 

 Saskatchewan Public Service Employee Survey 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1420 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1420 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
 Government Spending 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1421 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1421 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1422 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1423 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Return Nos. 575 and 576 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1423 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1423 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1424 
 Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1427 
 Bill No. 62 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1427 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1429 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


