






















































Hansard: May 16, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 61A  TUESDAY, MAY 16, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1689 
 May 16, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to stand in this Assembly to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens across the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I present a petition signed by a number of 
residents from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
individuals around the community concerned about inequity in 
employee pensions and benefits. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Today’s petition is signed by individuals from various 
communities around the province of Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding pension and benefits of provincial employees 
that have been long overdue in being recognized by this 
provincial government. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by, again, people from across the 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of well over 8,000 pensioners and 
their spouses. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signators today are from the city of Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Swift Current, the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to rise on 
behalf of residents of the province concerned with the issue of 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all the petitioners today on behalf of whom I rise 
are from the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
government’s failure to meet its commitment to provide a fully 
funded pension plan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Regina and 
Moose Jaw. I so present on their behalf. 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

The Speaker: — The member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition requesting measures to bring parity to all provincial 
employee pensions and benefits. This petition is signed by 
people who are concerned that the province of Saskatchewan 
has failed to meet its commitment to provide a funded pension 
plan for employees under The Public Service Superannuation 
Act. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the Queen 
City of Regina, and I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens aggrieved by the former government 
employees’ pension plan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals that appear to 
be all from the community of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And on behalf of the signatures, I so present . . . people from 
the province of Saskatchewan. 

The Speaker: — Member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am pleased to 
rise this afternoon and on behalf of a group of our seniors 
present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The Speaker: — The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of retired civil 
servants. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of 
Regina. And I’m pleased to be able to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition today with retirees that are disappointed that the 
province of Saskatchewan has failed to meet its commitment to 
provide a funded pension plan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the great city of 
Regina. And I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again today to present a petition from citizens concerned about 
the lack of government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signed by citizens from Osler and Saskatoon and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 



May 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

rise today with a petition on behalf of retired civil servants from 
across Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is the only province 
without a legislated cost-of-living increase for retired civil 
servants. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial pensions and benefits. 
 

The petitioners today are from the constituencies of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, Saskatoon Sutherland, Saskatoon Nutana, and 
Regina South. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a petition today from citizens that are very, very 
concerned about the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] two tiered 
health system specifically related to the cancer drug Avastin, 
where if you’ve got the money, you can get it. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s two-tier health care. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from 
Martensville and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from concerned citizens, concerned with the 
parity of provincial government employee pension benefits. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employees’ pensions and benefits. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to the reductions of services to Imperial 
health centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Imperial health 
centre be maintained at its current level of service at a 
minimum with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available as well as lab, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services available to users from the 
Imperial area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by the good citizens from Imperial, 
Simpson, Liberty, and Holdfast. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and 
privilege to rise today and present a petition that the province of 
Saskatchewan has failed to meet its commitment to provide a 
funded pension plan for employees under The Public Service 
Superannuation Act. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding pension benefits 
payable to provincial employees who have retired. This petition 
deals with pensioners who have had during their working career 
regularly deducted money from their employee paycheques to 
go into this pension plan. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens from Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

of citizens of the province who are concerned that the 
government has failed to meet its commitment to provide a 
funded pension plan for employees under The Public Service 
Superannuation Act. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens who I am pretty sure are also 
concerned that Highway 5 is way too narrow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as an addition to a previously tabled petition being 
sessional paper no. 639. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its sixth report. I 
move, seconded by the hon. member for Arm River-Watrous: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moose Jaw North, seconded by the member Arm 
River-Watrous: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[13:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few years ago the Governor of 
Montana and the Premier of Saskatchewan signed an 

intergovernmental accord in recognition that these are two 
jurisdictions that have a common heritage and that these are two 
jurisdictions that share one corner of the globe and therefore 
subject to similar challenges and opportunities. 
 
Yesterday and today we were pleased to receive a delegation of 
legislative officials and also administrative officials from the 
state of Montana in accordance with that accord. And I should 
like to introduce to you . . . And some of my colleagues will 
also be introducing some of the legislative officials that are 
here, but I would like to start by introducing to you — and he’s 
seated behind the bar — Lieutenant Governor John Bohlinger 
from Montana state and if John could stand give us a wave. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Seated beside Lieutenant 
Governor Bohlinger is Senator Sam Kitzenberg from Glasgow 
and if he could give us a wave. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now there are some other 
legislative officials who will be introduced shortly, but I want to 
take this opportunity while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, to 
recognize some administrative officials that are here with us. 
And they’re seated in your gallery. 
 
First there’s Mr. Jim Lynch, the director of Montana 
Department of Transportation. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Dan McGowan, the 
administrator of disaster and emergency services, Department 
of Military Affairs, Montana state. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Tom Kaiserski. He’s an 
economic development specialist with the Office of the 
Governor of Montana. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Will Hammerquist, a policy 
advisor to the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Mark Bison, bureau chief, 
international trade and relations, Department of Commerce. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Marc Boucher, Canadian 
Consul in Denver. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Ms. Shirley Ball who is the 
honorary Canadian Consul designee for Montana. 
 



May 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And we’re very pleased to 
welcome Ms. Betty Rice who is the press secretary, education 
and cultural affairs, the Consulate of the United States of 
America in Calgary. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that 
some of my colleagues will also be introducing other members 
of the delegation. Can I just say in closing that we in 
Saskatchewan look forward to visiting Helena, Montana and to 
carrying on this dialogue and this friendship that has been 
developed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly another member of the delegation from the great state 
of Montana, Representative Hal Jacobson, seated behind the bar 
on our side here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
and privilege to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, seated behind our bar, the Democrat 
representative of Havre House district in Montana, John 
Musgrove. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly I would like to introduce 
Representative Wayne Stahl who is sitting behind . . . standing 
behind the bar now, on our side. Wayne is from Saco, Montana 
which is very near to where I live. 
 
And I share an awful lot of commonalities with Wayne. He was 
United States military West Point member. He served as Saco 
town council, mayor of Saco, and Phillips County 
commissioner. Representative Stahl currently holds House 
standing committee assignments on business and labour, federal 
regulations, energy and telecommunications and is Vice-Chair 
of local government. I’d ask all members to please welcome 
Wayne to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the government, I want to introduce to the Assembly 
galleries full of retired former public servants. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that they got here very early. I think 
they were here at about 12:30 trying to get into the galleries. 
And I want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 
commissionaires for letting people into the galleries early, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that these public servants are here to inform 
the Assembly of some of their issues, and I’m looking forward 
to the discussion. And on behalf of the government, I’d like to 
welcome all of you to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the Assembly, I would like 
to recognize over 200 individuals that are retired civil servants 
in the province of Saskatchewan, people that have made a 
tremendous contribution to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to single out one individual, Mr. Alf 
Zimmerman. He’s a dedicated and focused individual who I’ve 
had the pleasure with working with. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask them to all stand but there might be a minor tremor. But Mr. 
Zimmerman was the first person to call me after I became the 
Finance critic. And I just want to thank him for his tenacity and 
for bringing a large group to their legislature today. This group 
is looking for fairness and equity, and we hope that they are 
satisfied with the results that they see at their legislature today. 
 
Again to all members please help me in welcoming them to 
their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is the 35th anniversary of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business. 
 
And I see in your gallery today is Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the 
director of provincial affairs for the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, and also M.J. Nelitz, the member 
services councillor for the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] in Saskatchewan. And I’d like to 
welcome them here today. 
 
And I’d like to say to you and through you to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, how diligent this organization really is in surveying its 
5,200 members in our province and letting us know what the 
small-business community is saying and what the 
entrepreneurial community is saying. 
 
And I know that all members will join in congratulating the 
CFIB on their 35th anniversary and welcoming these 
individuals here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I would too like to join the minister in 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

welcoming the CFIB individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
Thirty-five years, it’s quite an accomplishment. 
 
And I would like to thank them for the work that they do and 
the contribution that they make to our province, especially the 
contribution that they’ve recently made to the Vicq commission 
report — I had a chance to meet with them on numerous 
occasions — and also the work that they do prior to each and 
every budget here in the province. I think the government 
would agree that the work that they do helps us do our job as 
legislators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I ask all 
members to join in welcoming the members of the CFIB to their 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to a group seated 
in the west gallery. They are a group of 16 students from 
Thomson School. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Heather Walton and Darcia Cunningham. If we could get 
everybody to give us a wave from Thomson there — yes, there 
they are, very energetic group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Thomson, in addition to being one of the most 
historic and oldest schools in the city of Regina, is also one of 
the most diverse. And certainly their school motto is “Where 
the children of the world come to learn. ” And we know that the 
teachers and the staff do a good job of making sure those 
students come from around the world to get that good 
education. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them later on, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’d invite all members to join with me in welcoming them to 
their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon it is a pleasure for me to introduce 15 grade 5 
students from Grenfell Elementary Community School. And 
seeing as the galleries are quite full, actually the students are 
basically up at the top on the east gallery and some down the 
side. And I certainly want to extend a welcome to Constance 
MacKenzie, her grade 5 students from Grenfell Elementary 
School. 
 
I had the privilege of meeting with them just prior to the 
opening of session, and I’m looking forward, Mr. Speaker, in 
probably about 3, 4 weeks time to meeting with the students 
again in their classroom. But a special welcome to the students 
from Grenfell Elementary School. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Northeast. 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all the 
members of this Assembly, seated in the west gallery, a group 
of 22 grade 4 students from Henry Braun School in my 
constituency. They are accompanied today by their teacher, 
Donna Raiter, and chaperons, Mrs. Holly Handzuik and Mrs. 
Lauri Burkowski. 
 
This group has just arrived, and they’re going to take in part of 
question period, and then they’re going to tour the legislature. 
And then we’re going to meet on the great stairs for pictures, 
and after that we’ll have some refreshments. 
 
So I ask all of my colleagues to give this group of our future 
leaders of Saskatchewan a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Holding Back Rural Businesses 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I arise in the House 
today to talk about a business owner in my constituency who 
recently received a quote from SaskTel. This gentleman simply 
wanted to add a second line to his existing phone line. This 
business simply wanted to have what all businesses want — to 
be competitive by having all the communication technology 
available. But once again this NDP government decided to hold 
back rural businesses that want to succeed in Saskatchewan. 
 
This business owner was given an estimate of over $5,000 from 
SaskTel for just installing a second line. And not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, he even asked, can he pay it over several months? And 
SaskTel insisted that it be paid up front, $5,000 in one month, 
which is a shame. And they wonder why there’s no businesses 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I have had several other complaints about other companies 
wanting to install lines — also from SaskPower infrastructure, 
SaskEnergy — of huge, huge infrastructure costs being applied 
to these businesses in rural Saskatchewan. If this was a house 
owner in Regina or Saskatoon or a major city, $500 is all they 
would pay for a second line. So you wonder why businesses 
aren’t flourishing in rural Saskatchewan. This is all the proof 
that you need is . . . why rural Saskatchewan is not growing 
under this present NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
Celebrates 35 Years 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, 35 years ago John Bulloch, 
convinced of the need for an organization to provide a big voice 
for small business, launched the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business. Over the years, the CFIB’s 



May 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

multi-dimensional approach of turning research into intensive 
action through media campaigns and political activity has 
proven to be very effective, and the organization has been very 
successful. Since 1971 Mr. Bullock’s non-partisan, 
not-for-profit political action organization has grown to 
represent over 100,000 members nationally, including some 
5,200 right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that small businesses are an 
economic driving force in Saskatchewan. With 98 per cent of 
all firms in the province employing less than 50 workers each, 
it’s clear that small business is vital to the health of the 
provincial economy — which is why we are pleased to have the 
CFIB as part of the budget consultation process and even more 
pleased to have received a letter from CFIB’s Saskatchewan 
director of provincial affairs, Marilyn Braun-Pollon, 
commending the government for implementing the 
recommendations to the business tax committee and for 
providing a provincial tax credit for workers who provide their 
own tools and for taking measures to address the shortage of 
qualified labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last three and a half decades, the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business has been an 
advocate for business and the entrepreneurial spirit in this 
country. I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
CFIB on their 35th anniversary. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Highway Conditions in Kelvington Area 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 
the frustrating parts of being an opposition MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] — other than waiting for this tired, 
old, arrogant government to call an election — is trying to get 
the ministers to truly understand the issues around that affect 
our people. 
 
My example today is highways. I recently received a note from 
a constituent regarding Highway No. 49. She writes: 
 

Just to let you know about good old 49, when the 
department patches three holes, there’s five more left right 
beside them. We’ve had two wheel alignments this spring, 
and we’re off to Saskatoon where we’ll have to get another 
one after travelling 49. We had to transfer our 
prescriptions to Preeceville from Kelvington like others 
have. The road conditions are hurting businesses in 
Kelvington, thanks to the government of the day. I heard 
someone make this statement the other day. We’ve got 
some kind of road from Okla to Kelvington, all red signs. 
What do I do? No green signs so when do I go? 

 
We’ve had trees planted in some of the holes. Thank God, 
at least we know where the deep ones are. A work crew 
from communities are in the planning to fill the holes that 
are 8 to 12 inches deep. We love and care for our 
neighbours, and we do not want to attend their funerals. 

Please help us in any way you can. We need a road. I 
wonder if the Premier is promoting the words, God helps 
them that helps themselves. 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister would like to respond to this 
note. Kelvington-Wadena constituency is part of Saskatchewan, 
and we do pay taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Community Works Together to Combat Fire at Debden 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
strength of our rural communities is never more evident than in 
times of adversity, and this was certainly demonstrated 
yesterday in Debden, a community in my constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Yesterday morning a fire broke out in a chemical storage 
building just south of Debden at Greenspring Ag Services, 
owned and operated by Denis Lafond. Denis is an active 
community leader whose business serves many farmers in the 
region. Within a very short time, the community mobilized with 
the local fire department, joined by firefighters from 
neighbouring communities. Because it was a chemical fire, the 
RM [rural municipality] of Canwood declared a state of local 
emergency, and evacuations were carried out of rural residents 
downwind. Highway 55 was closed by the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police]. 
 
The town of Debden also declared a state of local emergency 
and prepared for a possible evacuation, setting up an operation 
site in the town hall and a reception area in the church at 
Victoire, 15 kilometres to the west. At the school, Principal 
Tetreault and her staff kept the students indoors. Volunteers 
provided lunches, and school buses were lined up in case of an 
evacuation call. Thankfully this never became necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a collective sense of both relief and 
sadness in Debden today — relief because a dangerous situation 
has been averted with no harm or injury, sadness at the loss of a 
valuable local business. But, Mr. Speaker, I am sure there is 
also pride. Mr. Speaker, this fire brought many people together 
in common cause: numerous municipal and provincial officials, 
the RCMP, firefighters, school and health officials, and of 
course the good people of Debden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in thanking all of those 
who joined in this collective effort and especially to commend 
the strength and spirit of the people of Debden. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Cancelled Sale of Grain Hopper Cars 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on May 4 
of this year, federal Transport minister, Lawrence Cannon, 
announced that he was cancelling the sale of 12,000 grain 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

hopper cars to the Farmer Rail Car Coalition. 
 
His decision, Mr. Speaker, leaves a number of questions that 
Saskatchewan farmers need answers to. Questions like, what 
will be done to recover the $30 million per year overcharge that 
the railways collected for hopper car maintenance? Will the 
continued government ownership of hopper cars ensure prairie 
farmers stable freight rates? 
 
Who will ensure that railways actually maintain the cars? What 
pressures will be brought to bear to ensure that some of this 
maintenance is done in Saskatchewan in communities such as 
Ogema and Melville? What is the plan to replace the hopper 
cars? And who will pay for them? How does government 
ownership of hopper cars empower Saskatchewan producers in 
the marketplace? 
 
Grain and oilseed producers, Mr. Speaker, are facing a crisis 
and need answers to these important questions. The Leader of 
the Opposition, the member from Swift Current, raised these 
very important questions with Minister Cannon in Ottawa last 
week, Mr. Speaker. We in the Saskatchewan Party and farmers 
of this province are looking for answers, Mr. Speaker, but 
there’s another question. Where is this NDP government on this 
important issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Graduate Tobacco-Free Challenge 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we approach the graduation season, I’m looking forward to 
being part of a very special ceremony. Later this month, I will 
be presenting certificates and awards to the graduating class of 
actually the Goodsoil Central School in my hometown in 
recognition of their successful completion of the graduate 
tobacco-free challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, smoking is the single biggest cause of disease and 
premature death in Canada. Encouraging our youth to be 
tobacco-free is an important step to ensuring that people of 
Saskatchewan live healthy, productive lives. 
 
In November, in response to the harmful effects that smoking 
continues to have on Saskatchewan youth, the Minister of 
Healthy Living Services issued a challenge to all Saskatchewan 
grade 12 students to graduate tobacco-free. A total of 17 
graduating classes across the province have registered as 
smoke-free classes in response to the minister’s challenge. Each 
student of each class will receive a certificate of completion and 
a reward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join me in 
commending the graduating class of the Goodsoil Central 
School, and all of the classes that participated, for meeting the 
graduate tobacco-free challenge. The students who made a 
commitment, who helped others to quit or refrain from 
smoking, are truly deserving of our congratulations and 
recognition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 

Upcoming Provincial By-Election 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve recently 
had a chance to see a brochure for the NDP candidate in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. The brochure asked the question, 
shouldn’t we be represented by someone who actually lives 
here? Well that’s an interesting question, Mr. Speaker. Maybe 
someone could ask the same question of the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, who actually lives a couple 
of hundred kilometres away in Moose Jaw. 
 
And speaking of the Premier, I notice he is completely missing 
from the NDP brochure. No picture of the Premier. His name is 
never even mentioned. It’s like he doesn’t exist. It’s quite 
something. The NDP are so totally embarrassed of their own 
leader that they leave him completely out of their brochure. 
 
The funny thing is the brochure does mention the Minister of 
Finance by name, understandable when he gets 12 people out to 
his meeting compared to the Premier’s supper that couldn’t sell 
any tickets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the NDP, the Saskatchewan Party is proud 
of our leader. And the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy will be 
seeing a lot of our leader during the upcoming provincial 
by-election as soon as the Premier calls it. Go ahead and call it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Disclosure of Financial Irregularities 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning at the 
Public Accounts Committee meeting the deputy minister of 
Community Resources and Employment reported three new 
instances of financial irregularities within that department. 
 
The first case involves a contractor with Saskatchewan Housing 
Authority and rent going missing to the tune of more than 
$10,000. Mr. Speaker, the second case involves the 
Saskatchewan Housing Authority and irregularities regarding 
an employee expense account involving more than $1,200. The 
third case involves a child and family services operation with 
the Yorkton Tribal Council, and no amount was released for 
this irregularity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all these three instances apparently have been 
reported to the police. Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this 
Assembly, would the Premier care to tell this Assembly why 
these cases were not disclosed to the public, to the taxpayers, in 
this Assembly or any other forum prior to today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 



May 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When this Minister of Finance put out rules, he put out rules for 
every department, Mr. Speaker. And we intend to follow these 
rules in every department. 
 
I would point out, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that 
when we have allegations, it is important that we take the due 
time and the process to ensure that we do everything in our 
power to make sure that we have a thorough investigation. And 
part of being thorough in this investigation, Mr. Speaker, is to 
never assume guilt and always make sure that we cover our 
bases in terms of investigating all these matters. That member 
knows very well when you have an allegation, it takes time to 
investigate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to follow these rules set out by our 
Minister of Finance. This government is accountable. We have 
put the procedures very publicly in terms of what comes out and 
what is being said when. The rules are there for all of us to 
follow. We will follow those rules. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to take the 
minister at his word that they’re going to find out the facts first 
and then decide whether to release it or not, why . . . It’s our 
understanding that two of the three, two of the three cases 
involve employees being terminated by this government. 
 
So then the question to the minister is this: if they’re going to 
let the process unfold, why were two terminated? That’s the 
first question. The second one, while I’m on my feet quickly, 
Mr. Speaker, is why didn’t the minister, why hasn’t the Premier 
then reported to the public that two people have been 
terminated in three financial irregularities within that 
department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
the leader of the liquor party crowd, I want to point out this 
very important thing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What’s pretty darn important . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. Order 
please. Several times I’ve had to intervene on this issue, and 
that is to require members to refer, when they’re referring to 
another member, to refer only by their title. And I would ask the 
member before he proceeds just to withdraw that remark. Order 
please. Order please. Withdraw the remark, and then to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What’s 
important, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I’d ask the minister to 
first of all withdraw the remark before he proceeds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw 
the comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s really important to us is that when the 
Minister of Finance set out these rules . . . Again as I stressed, 
the rules were for absolutely every department to follow. And 
part of the rule said that it’s really important that we have 
reporting of all incidents involving over $500 to the Provincial 
Comptroller by any department. Then, the Provincial 
Comptroller then reports to the Public Accounts Committee of 
which the member from Rosetown-Biggar is the Chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did exactly that. The only challenge that I’d 
point out in the reference to the case is that these things take 
time to investigate. We will take the time to investigate and 
make sure that we’re not remiss in our responsibility to follow 
the rules. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Swift Current, the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yes or no. To the minister: were two 
employees of this government fired over financial 
irregularities? And if so, when? 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is 
that any time that we have incidents of irregularities, it’s 
important that we are very responsive. And every time we have 
a question or an allegation, we take those allegations and 
questions very seriously. 
 
There are many good staff in this government, Mr. Speaker. In 
my particular department there are many really good staff that 
do a tremendous amount of good work. They are responding to 
thousands of people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue following the rules set out by our Minister of 
Finance to make sure that there’s good accountability measures 
within our government. It is a $7 billion operation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we take all those rules as seriously as we can. And we 
will follow the procedures set out by our Minister of Finance. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well it would be nice if the minister was even in 
the same area code as the question, Mr. Speaker. But that’s 
clearly not the case. 
 
Here’s what this Legislative Assembly, here’s what members of 
this Assembly asked the Minister Responsible for Community 
Resources and Employment. Here’s the quote: “Is management 
of the department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

illegal activity within the department from April 1, 2005 to the 
present . . .?” 

 
We also asked the question, quote: “Does management of the 
department have any knowledge of any actual or suspected 
fraud or other illegal activity from April 1, 2005 to the present 
. . .?” 

 
Information relating to these fraud cases was apparently then, 
Mr. Speaker, withheld from the official opposition, withheld 
from the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To the minister or to the Premier: why are they now 
withholding information when only months age they made a 
commitment to come clean, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we have not withheld any 
information. That Leader of the Opposition knows very well 
that his seatmate right next to him, the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, is the Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have gone to Public Accounts to account 
to the public exactly what happened in many of these instances. 
And we have the rules — as we’ve indicated — settled very 
clearly by the Minister of Finance, when and if we have 
irregularities that they’re investigated and any information 
attached to those investigations that first of all the comptroller 
knows it. Then the comptroller certainly reports to the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really, really important for folks to know out 
there that we take these issues seriously. The rules have been 
spelled out. And certainly the people that have not been acting 
in good faith on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan are being 
caught. Our system caught the problems and we took corrective 
steps and we advised people accordingly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I know that NDP government has 
been around for a very long time; the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan think way too long. 
 
But here is a lesson for the minister. He — that minister — and 
that Premier are accountable to this Legislative Assembly, to 
the taxpayers of, the people of this province. That’s who he is 
accountable to. 
 
Here is a quote that the government offered up when they 
introduced the changes not more than a few months ago, quote: 
“Transparency and financial accountability have been the 
hallmarks of the NDP government since the early 1990’s . . .” 
This might come as news to the minister responsible for 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]. “This Government is committed to safeguarding the 
money belonging to the people of . . . [the province],” the quote 
goes on to say. 
 
In this case, in this case employees have been fired, and there’s 
been no notification. Written questions were not answered, Mr. 
Speaker. To the Premier: why has this government withheld 
information on these fraud cases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I reiterate, we have not 
withheld any information. And it’s kind of odd, Mr. Speaker, 
coming from that member that sought the nomination of one of 
the most corrupt governments in the history of Canada to get up 
and start talking about accountability. Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, furthermore, furthermore 
the continual attack on the civil servants is unwarranted. There 
are thousands of people that are working for this government. 
There are many thousands that will continue working for this 
government, and these many solid civil servants that are worked 
very hard and dedicated their entire lives to service of others, 
they have done a tremendous job. 
 
There are a few bad apples, Mr. Speaker, and our system caught 
them. And we reacted and we responded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the important note is that this Minister of Finance 
set out rules. The rules are clear. We follow them and we will 
continue to follow them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to be sure the problem in 
government today in the province of Saskatchewan is not the 
civil servants, Mr. Speaker. It’s that incompetent NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here’s a question for the Premier, and I want the 
Premier to take to his feet, please, and be clear with this 
Assembly. Can he, can he assure, can he assure, Mr. Speaker, 
this Assembly and the people of the province today — can he 
provide unequivocal assurances on behalf of each of his 
ministers of each of the departments — that there are no other 
instances of fraud or criminal activity that they are aware of 
within their departments, Crown corporations, or agencies? Will 
he do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 



May 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is important is to 
point out that our internal process caught these problems, Mr. 
Speaker, and that our system works. When the Minister of 
Finance set out the rules, he set out the very stringent rules. 
They are very public and, Mr. Speaker, these rules work. Our 
internal process caught this and, Mr. Speaker, what’s really 
important is that, as I pointed out, there are many thousands of 
people that work in my department and in this government. 
They do a tremendous, powerful job for the people of 
Saskatchewan and many of them are fantastic. They are honest, 
hard-working, and they do their jobs right. 
 
And what is kind of worrisome to me, Mr. Speaker, is why all 
of a sudden on the credibility issue we have that member, who 
ran for the party that put this province 15-plus billion dollars in 
debt . . . And that’s why that party will never have any 
credibility on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect that just in a few moments 
this government will be able to explain to now retired civil 
servants just how they respect them and how they want to treat 
them with fairness and equality. 
 
This question is for the Premier: will he not stand in the 
Assembly today and give the assurance to this Assembly and to 
the people of the province that this government is not 
withholding any information with respect to the allegations of 
or suspected fraud or criminal activity within his government 
departments? Will he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is important to note 
is that as the leader of the so-called opposition tries to engage 
the folks that are in the gallery, I’ll point out to the folks in the 
gallery that every group that comes into the gallery they try to 
be everything to everybody, Mr. Speaker. They do that every 
week and every day, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the people of 
Saskatchewan say you have no credibility because you play to 
the gallery. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s important and been pointed out, 
you’re trying to be a mile wide but an inch deep and that’s 
exactly why that party across doesn’t have any credibility. That 
is why the people of Saskatchewan don’t trust that party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Retired Civil Servants’ Pensions 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Joining us 
today in the legislature are over 200 retired civil servants from 
across Saskatchewan. They’re looking for fairness, they’re 
looking for equity, they’re looking for parity. These men and 

women worked for years assuring the people of Saskatchewan 
received the highest-quality services possible. Now these 
people are being denied the indexed pensions that many other 
public servants, retirees are now receiving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t think that’s fair, and the official 
opposition doesn’t think that’s fair. Mr. Speaker, why is this 
NDP government not considering the request of these 
well-respected senior citizens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As the Minister of Community 
Resources has pointed out, the position of the Sask Party seems 
to depend on who’s in the gallery on any given day. And as we 
know from the member for Thunder Creek, that that 
commitment lasts about as long as it takes for them to leave the 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges of being in government is 
running the government, running the finances of the province in 
a way that is accountable and providing a fair and appropriate 
way to deal with things. There are two main issues that we need 
to deal with on this file. First of all is the means by which we 
provide increases to these retired civil servants. The second is 
the rate at which it’s done. 
 
There is no doubt that in the last 40 years that this plan has been 
providing ad hoc increases, that there is now concern about the 
continued ad hoc basis. And perhaps we should look at 
legislation. There is not however, there is not however a 
consistent approach in terms of what that rate should be. 
 
I am prepared to look at legislation this fall to deal with the 
level of the increase, but we will need to have more discussion 
about what that rate is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind 
that minister and that Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Member 
for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind that minister 
and that Premier that these people in the gallery have been 
trying to get a meeting with them, and they have been refused. 
Their answer changes depending on who’s in the gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many of their generation, these retirees are 
asking for nothing that they have not already paid for. During 
their years of working for this province, these workers 
contributed millions of dollars to the government’s coffers. But 
that money went directly into the day-to-day operating budget 
of the government. Had the money been invested in a special 
fund as is now the case, Mr. Speaker, these men and women 
would have had more than enough money to deal with their 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

current needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government do the right thing and right 
this obvious wrong and commit today to pension indexing for 
these people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is interesting to hear the 
Saskatchewan Party again today call for more spending today. 
The impact of the decision that they are calling for would add 
$347 million to the public debt — $347 million. That’s on top 
of the 160 million that they want in agriculture. That’s on top of 
the $100 million they want for a CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization] payout. That’s on top of what they want 
for highways. That’s on top of yesterday what they were saying 
they wanted for Avastin, in terms of people that were in the 
galleries then. 
 
The simple fact is that we need to find a balanced approach to 
deal with the request of these retired civil servants, and we need 
to be able to do so in a way that meets the needs also of the 
taxpayers who are called on to meet those demands. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what we are working on. That, Mr. Speaker, is what 
we’re committed to doing. And I would ask the support of the 
opposition in doing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Chris Pasloske is a retired public servant in Regina. In a recent 
letter, Mr. Pasloske said he and his fellow pensioners have 
been, and I quote, “totally frustrated and stonewalled” by a 
Premier who won’t even meet with them to hear their case. 
 
Tom Yeomans worked 38 years for SaskPower. In an interview 
last year, Mr. Yeomans said, and I quote: “Essentially, you get 
the feeling they’re waiting us out. How much longer do they 
have to wait before we’re gone?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this indeed the NDP strategy — wait this out so 
it’s no longer an issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think that that member has now 
reached a new low. I cannot think of a more disgusting thing 
that he has said in this House, and I just think it is shameful and 
it demeans the debate that we’re having in the Assembly today. 
 
Let me say this, that I have said that we are prepared to take to 
this Assembly, this fall, legislation. What we do not have 
agreement on however is what the rate of increase is. 
 
I would note that the ad hoc increase approach has been in 
effect for longer than I have been alive. This has been through 
five different administrations that has used this approach. We 

have a fund today that is working on a 50 per cent actuarial 
basis in terms of 50 per cent of CPI [consumer price index]. If 
we increase that, there is an impact on the overall debt of the 
province. 
 
What we need to do is balance out what those competing 
interests are — those of the retired civil servants that seek an 
increase and those of the taxpayers that will be called on to pay 
for it. That, Mr. Speaker, is really what the issue is, not the 
cheap politics from the Sask Party opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the minister 
that I was quoting from many of these individuals that are in the 
gallery today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in NDP Saskatchewan this is the only province in 
Canada without a legislated cost of living increase for 
pensioners. Ad hoc, ad hoc, as the minister likes to talk about, 
ad hoc increases were granted in 14 of the last 21 years at the 
whim of the Finance minister of the day. Seven of those did not 
have an increase. Many were zeroes. But no one seems to turn 
the ad hoc into a permanent benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sadly as this is often the case with this government, these 
pensioners have had no choice but to resort to the courts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the ad hoc increases, this government has 
already conceded a point. Why does this matter have to 
continue before the courts, Mr. Speaker? Is the NDP 
government trying to wait this out until all those that are here 
aren’t able to speak for themselves? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, will the Premier 
and the Finance minister meet with these pensioners today and 
try to resolve this outstanding issue in an amicable manner and 
circumvent the courts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The Finance critic for the Sask Party 
shows both his ignorance of understanding of what is in fact the 
case across the country in terms of law and his understanding of 
the lawsuit that is before the courts today. 
 
Let me point out that there are provinces on either side of us 
that do not provide CPI increases to their retired civil service. 
No, the member opposite clearly does not understand this. 
Alberta provides a 60 per cent increase and Manitoba provides 
two-thirds of the CPI for the previous year. That is the simple 
fact. The member ought not to distort this. 
 
The member also ought to understand that there are five 
significant issues before the courts of which four of which will 
need to specifically be dealt with by the court. What we need to 
be very careful of is to make sure that those substantive 
arguments are heard and not debated on the floor of this 



May 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

Assembly. That needs to be dealt with there. 
 
I am however prepared to look at legislation this fall in order to 
dealing with the issue of a base rate increase. But that’s an issue 
that we need to deal with in this Assembly. The other issue 
needs to wait for the courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Cannington. 
 

Federal Gun Registry 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier today Auditor General Sheila Fraser released a scathing 
report detailing hundreds of millions of dollars of wasted and 
mismanaged money within the Liberal long gun registry. This is 
money that could have been used to improve law enforcement 
and fight crime. Instead it was squandered on an ill-conceived 
gun registry. It did nothing to reduce crime. 
 
It penalized thousands of law-abiding gun owners across 
Canada and here in Saskatchewan. Immediately after question 
period we’ll be introducing a motion urging the federal 
government and all federal parties to scrap the Liberal long gun 
registry and use that money that will be saved to improve law 
enforcement and protection services across Canada. 
 
To the Premier: will his government support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The position 
of this government has been consistent throughout the existence 
of the long gun registry. The Government of Saskatchewan 
does not agree that the registration of long guns has been 
helpful in reducing crime, particularly in Western Canada, 
particularly in rural, northern Saskatchewan. It imposes 
hardships on people, which is not the intended consequence of 
the registry. 
 
But certainly we have not been supportive of the registry. The 
funds that have been spent on the registry could well be better 
spent on more focused attempts to reduce crime through 
policing and other measures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In yesterday’s 
paper there was a story suggesting that Canadians support gun 
registry, according to an Ottawa reporter. The story neglected to 
mention that, while most Canadians support some form of gun 
registry, a strong majority — including 71 per cent in 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba — oppose the current Liberal gun 
registry. 
 
I understand that the federal government is announcing its 

intention to end the long gun registry while keeping the 
handgun registration. The Saskatchewan Party strongly supports 
that move. However it is unclear whether the Conservative 
government can get this through the legislation in parliament 
because the Liberals and the NDP in Ottawa want to keep this 
boondoggle in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell his NDP cousins in Ottawa to 
stop supporting this wasteful and useless Liberal long gun 
registry? Or is he tied to Jack Layton’s eastern coattails? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I take it that the member 
opposite is conceding that he is associated with . . . his party 
across the way is associated with the Conservative Party of 
Ottawa. They are cheerleading again for the federal 
government. 
 
On this issue there isn’t a disagreement within this legislature. 
On both sides of the House there are deep concerns about the 
long gun registry. This government has never supported the 
long gun registry, Mr. Speaker. But it’s interesting that this 
matter, which is not a matter of dispute within this legislature at 
all, Mr. Speaker, would come on the floor of this legislature 
today. 
 
Here is a party desperately trolling, desperately trolling across 
the way for votes in Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker. And 
they want to campaign against a party and against politicians 
that aren’t even sitting in this room, Mr. Speaker. It’s just crass 
politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I would ask leave 
at this time, before orders of the day, to make some 
introductions of our visitor services people that have just come 
onside. I do that at this time because there simply wasn’t room 
in the galleries for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, you may see some 
very smart-looking people seated in the front row of the 
Speaker’s gallery. With them is Lorraine deMontigny, who is 
the director of visitor services. But these young people are, first 
of all, Mark Bryanton, Amy Dancsok, Rebecca Parry, Marita 
Wacker, and Adam Zelmer. 
 
They’ve just completed two weeks of training and orientation 
yesterday, and they attended the parliamentary program for 
public services. And all of these guests are bilingual. 
 
I would also like to point out at this time that our visitor 
services is beginning their summer hours on the May long 
weekend. Building tours are offered until 9 p.m. every night of 
the week. 
 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2006 

Members, please help me in joining to welcome our newest 
Legislative Assembly Service employees. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of the Human Services Committee and the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure Committee, I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the ayes have it. The House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow. Order. 
 
The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:35.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1689 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1690 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1691 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1692 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1692 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1692 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1693 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1693 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1693 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1693 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1693 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1693 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1694 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1694 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1694 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1701 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holding Back Rural Businesses 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1694 
 Canadian Federation of Independent Business Celebrates 35 Years 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1694 
 Highway Conditions in Kelvington Area 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1695 
 Community Works Together to Combat Fire at Debden 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1695 
 Cancelled Sale of Grain Hopper Cars 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1695 
 Graduate Tobacco-Free Challenge 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1696 
 Upcoming Provincial By-Election 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1696 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Disclosure of Financial Irregularities 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1696 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1697 
 
 



 

 Retired Civil Servants’ Pensions 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1699 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1699 
 Federal Gun Registry 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1701 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1701 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


