
















































Hansard: November 06, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 183 
 November 6, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s again 
my pleasure to present petitions on behalf of a renal dialysis 
unit at the Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present are signed by the good folks 
from Broadview, Regina, and Whitewood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The condition of 
Highway 18 remains a matter of concern for constituents of 
Cypress Hills. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals once 
again from the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today from a constituent in Carnduff. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Fort Qu’Appelle, Lanigan, 
Storthoaks, Carnduff, Glen Ewen, a lot of them from Carnduff, 
Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to present a petition on behalf of residents concerned about 
highway structure in the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Preeceville. I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise on behalf of people who are also concerned about Highway 
No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from 
Preeceville. I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition that urges the government to repair Highway 36. Mr. 
Speaker, the highway has been allowed to deteriorate to the 
point that several klicks of Highway 36 need a fix. And the 
prayer of the petitions reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Coronach, Calgary, and Willow Bunch. And 
I’m pleased to present them on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are 
very upset with this government’s plan for gravel highways in 
our province. The prayer reads as follows: 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 
gravel portion of Highway 99 between Junction 6 and 
Craven. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of 
Regina, Regina Beach, Lumsden, and Abbotsford, BC [British 
Columbia] I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
with several petitions of citizens who are concerned about the 
safety on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ensure that the government 
take the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 
No. 5 from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And to demonstrate just how much this highway is driven, Mr. 
Speaker, the signatures are from Invermay, Sturgis, Wadena, 
Osler, Annaheim, Norquay, Naicam, Humboldt, Saskatoon, 
Young, Englefeld, Colonsay, Canora; Swan River, Manitoba; 
and Bonnyville, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from the 
Estevan area who are very concerned about the future of the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan, Carlyle, 
and Macoun. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present another petition from citizens from Wilkie who are 
concerned about their reduction of health care services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least the 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present on behalf of people from across 
Saskatchewan a petition of those who are concerned that 
Saskatchewan does not have a dedicated children’s hospital, 
and increasingly parents are having to take their children to 
Alberta for the care that they need. The prayer of the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a children’s hospital 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners today are from the Willowgrove and Erindale 
neighbourhoods of Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
Highway No. 5. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Bruno, 
Dana, and Victoire. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition from 
the citizens of the town of Jansen calling on the government to 
upgrade Highway 20 to primary weight status. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
As I said before, this particular petition is signed by good 
citizens from the town of Jansen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens wishing to see Avastin, the cancer drug, funded. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are number of signatures on this particular 
petition and they’re from Carievale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today that this is the first time in the province’s 
history that the government has denied coverage of the cancer 
drug Avastin recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

And this is from the good people of all around Saskatchewan. I 
so present 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I wish to rise in the House today to present a 
petition regarding the allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon 
Southeast, Saskatoon Silver Springs, and elsewhere in the 
province. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 
in my constituency feel that it’s time for the government to fix 
Highway 36 and I have a petition in that regards. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can be returned to being a 
safe and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by the good 
people of Coronach. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Regional Economic Development: what 
are the costs associated with creating, publishing, and 
distributing the Communities at Work magazine that is 
distributed by the Department of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 12 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: to date how many 
accidents have been recorded on Saskatchewan highways 
with wildlife, and what was the cost to SGI in claims? 
 

And I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for the years 2005 
through to the year 2000. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you it’s a pleasure to introduce 26 grade 11 
students from Kelvington, my hometown. 
 
I’m very pleased to be able to meet with these young people 
this morning. And I know that these young people love 
Saskatchewan, and I think the government opposite is fortunate 
that they don’t have to answer the very tough questions these 
people have about why young people leave the province. 
 
Please welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

Saskatchewan Football Victories 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately we didn’t get a chance to see our favourite gopher 
at McMahon Stadium yesterday, but you know what? I didn’t 
see the Stampeders’ horse in the second half either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The Stampeders were probably wishing 
they could have dressed the horse for the game because he was 
the only Stampeder who might have had a chance to catch 
Kenton Keith. So no gopher, Mr. Speaker, no horse — but I did 
see several ducks, all thrown by Henry Burris. 
 
Fortunately our gopher’s talents were still utilized by the 
University of Saskatchewan Huskies. I was happy to see Gainer 
join the Dogs on the sidelines at the Huskies game as they 
marched over the UBC [University of British Columbia] 
Thunderbirds at Griffiths Stadium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you to the thousands of fans who flocked to 
McMahon Stadium this weekend, both those who live in 
Calgary and those who made the trip from Saskatchewan. Your 
presence made the difference. I know travel agents will be busy 
this week booking flights to Vancouver for the Rider fans and 
to Winnipeg for the Huskie fans. I ask all members to join me 
in saying, go green; go Riders; go Huskies. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Corner Gas 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
Brent Butt of Corner Gas and author Michele Sponagle, who 
for the last hour or so have been in the Cumberland Gallery 
here in the Legislative Building signing copies of Tales of Dog 
River, the just released official guide to this hit Canadian TV 
series. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 1 million fans from all across Canada tune in 
to Corner Gas to catch a little of what’s going on in Dog River 
in any given week. The theme song says it’s not a lot, but 1 
million Canadians can’t be wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be able to say that this very popular, 
very intelligent, and a very funny television series calls 
Saskatchewan home and is shot out in Rouleau and here in 
Regina at the Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage. I’m proud of 
the fact three of the show’s stars — Brent Butt, Janet Wright, 
and Eric Peterson — are from Saskatchewan. The quality and 
success of Corner Gas speaks very eloquently about all that 
Saskatchewan has to offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the Cumberland Gallery is 
donating 10 per cent of today’s book sales to Regina’s food 
bank, and I want to acknowledge and thank those involved with 
the gallery for that. 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate everyone associated 
with Corner Gas on their three Gemini nominations this year 
and on winning the Gemini Award for Canada’s best comedy 
program or series just last Saturday night. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 

 
Lessons Needed 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday in this 
Assembly in an exchange between the minister of DCRE 
[Department of Community Resources and Employment] and 
the member for Saskatoon Northwest, the minister said, and I 
quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the last lesson that I need of poverty is from 
that member, Mr. Speaker. I come from an area where I 
see poverty every day. 

 
And he went on to cast some aspersions and talk about the need 
for some sort of a big, fat mirror. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I disagree with the minister. I think he does need a 
lesson from members on this side of the House and specifically 
from the member from Northwest. I think he would be well 
served, Mr. Speaker, with a lesson from someone who grew up 
in Cabbage Town in Toronto whose family included eight kids. 
He was the fifth of eight kids. They lived in a house without a 
furnace, Mr. Speaker. They got their Christmas presents from 
the Toronto Star Christmas hamper program. 
 
And despite that circumstance, that particular member has 
worked hard all of his life —much of it in the province of 
Saskatchewan — to create jobs for himself and for others. And 
yes, he has enjoyed now some success as a result of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think the member, that minister, would be well served to take 
some lessons from this minister for Northwest. I think the 
Premier would be well served to take lessons from the people of 
the province and fire that minister of DCRE for ignoring 
vulnerable kids in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moose Jaw North. 
 

Riders Win in Calgary 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, how about those 
Riders? And how about those Rider fans including, Mr. 
Speaker, and perhaps especially Gainer, everybody’s favourite 
7-foot gopher and Roughrider team mascot whose trials and 
tribulations over the days preceding the game provided 
inspiration and motivation to the Saskatchewan fans and players 
alike? Mr. Speaker, I watched the game along with Gainer and 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

several hundred others at the Casino Regina show lounge. And 
it was clear from the people in that room and from the 
Saskatchewan fans in the stands in Calgary that support for the 
Riders was even more vocal and more passionate than usual. 
And that’s saying a lot. 
 
As for the team, Mr. Speaker, the Roughriders played with an 
intensity and desire that simply wouldn’t be denied. It was a 
brilliant come-from-behind victory with hard-nosed defensive 
play and an offence that just wouldn’t quit. Mr. Speaker, I 
congratulate the Riders on their victory, and along with every 
other citizen of Riderville I hope they have a great game against 
the BC Lions next Sunday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Go Riders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

World Junior A Game in Melfort 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday night I had the 
occasion to attend an extremely exciting event. The Melfort 
Mustangs board and volunteers organized and played host to an 
exhibition game of the World Junior A Challenge at the 
Northern Lights Palace featuring Team Canada East versus 
Russia. 
 
This was a tremendous opportunity for fans of our community 
to watch some of the strongest junior A hockey talent from 
around the world. With over 800 people in attendance this event 
was a great success, and the board and volunteers of the Melfort 
Mustangs should be proud of this accomplishment. 
 
Hockey Canada and the Canadian Junior A Hockey League are 
bringing the World Junior A Challenge to Saskatchewan. They 
plan for it to be an annual event that will expose top Canadian 
junior age players to international competition. 
 
The 2006 World Junior A Challenge will be 13 games featuring 
six teams that include Canada West, Russia and Belarus, 
Canada East, Slovakia, and Germany. The events games are to 
be held in Yorkton and Humboldt, two Saskatchewan 
communities with a long-standing junior A hockey tradition. I 
encourage everyone to attend some if not all these games as 
they are great fun for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join me 
today in recognizing these well-deserving people from the city 
of Melfort for supporting this event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

World Junior A Challenge in Yorkton 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yorkton is a world-class city, Mr. Speaker, and our new 
world-class facility, the Gallagher Centre, will be playing host 
to the people from around the globe beginning today, 
November 6, with our hockey challenge. That’s right. Yorkton 

will be hosting the first ever World Junior A Hockey Challenge, 
and Humboldt will be hosting a number of those games. 
 
In the core of the tiger of the East, Mr. Speaker, right in 
Yorkton, Saskatchewan, the two Canadian teams will lock 
horns with Slovakia, Germany, Russia, and Belarus teams in a 
championship which will test the abilities of Canada’s top 
junior A hockey players. And I’m confident, Mr. Speaker, that 
our Canadian players will showcase their outstanding hockey 
skills. Canada has put forward two teams — Team East and 
Team West. 
 
And because Saskatchewan is such a major player in the West, 
we will be contributing several of our top players to Canada’s 
west team: Weyburn’s Kyle Haines on defence, Rosetown’s 
Jordie Johnston on forward, Nipawin native Tyson Hobbins on 
forward, and Yorkton Terriers’ own, Springside’s Chad 
Nehring, a forward. The coaching staff will include Lashburn’s 
Dwight McMillan as coach, Broadview’s Ron Holloway as 
equipment manager, and Weyburn’s Don Pindus as therapist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join with me in congratulating all of the 
players that will be representing Canada West and all of the 
players that are coming here from all over the world to play in 
the very first international championship tournament in our city 
of Yorkton. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Suggested Names for Party 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, last week the Saskatchewan Party announced that our 
party was inviting Saskatchewan people to help rename the 
out-of-ideas NDP [New Democratic Party]. The Minister of 
Industry and Resources was complaining that our party utilized 
the word Saskatchewan and he didn’t think that was fair. I was 
very surprised that on Friday he didn’t go on an open line show 
to vent his feelings. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, over the weekend our office has received 
over 100 submissions for a new name for this tired, worn-out 
New Democratic Party. Well, Mr. Speaker, I will read a few 
submissions for the pleasure of the Assembly: no darn 
principles, never did produce, no direction party, the out of 
touch party, the Saskatchewan depopulation party. And my 
favourite so far is, the you’ve got to be kidding me party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that many of the names 
submitted cannot be read in the Assembly due to their content 
and graphic nature. That is a very clear indication about how the 
Saskatchewan people really feel about this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will gladly provide ideas 
for the government to steal, and name suggestions to the 
members opposite, as they hide from their record of 
mismanagement, incompetence, and stagnation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Improvements to Saskatchewan Court Houses 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Last Friday I was extremely pleased to welcome my colleague, 
the Minister of Justice, to my constituency of Meadow Lake. 
And I was particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, because the 
Justice minister was in Meadow Lake to announce a $7 million 
investment the province is making to help ensure safety and 
security for the public and court staff by making significant 
improvements to court houses, including, Mr. Speaker, the 
funding required for detailed planning and design for the 
construction of new court houses in Meadow Lake and in La 
Ronge. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, airport-style, walk-through metal 
detectors will be installed in court houses in Saskatoon and 
Regina and as well Prince Albert Provincial Court. And of 
course a variety of other security upgrades will be completed in 
a number of court houses in the province. 
 
Renovations to Yorkton Broadcast Place, which houses the 
Provincial Court, will be completed by 2007. As well, planning 
of renovations for Melfort Provincial Court will begin next year 
and for Lloydminster, the year after that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, providing suitable court houses with appropriate 
security is a priority on this side of the Assembly. This 
investment will result in significant improvements in security 
and space for public, courtworkers, and those involved with the 
courts. 
 
I want to as well thank Mayor Darwin Obrigewitsch and the rest 
of the town council from Meadow Lake for working so closely 
with our government on this important initiative. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Timely Access to Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Crystal Bonderud is in your gallery today. She is the recent 
widow 38-year-old Doug Bonderud who died of cancer on 
October 3 of this year. 
 
In May of this year, Doug and Crystal went to the Mayo Clinic 
for a second opinion which they couldn’t seem to get on a 
timely basis here in Saskatchewan. That second opinion came 
too late. What’s disturbing is that the couple were told by 
doctors there that Doug could have been saved if surgery had 
been performed on him six to eight months earlier here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could have that happened in our province? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite has indicated that Mrs. Bonderud and 
members of her family are present today. On behalf of the 
government, we would extend our condolences to her and to all 
of Doug’s family on his recent passing. 
 
We recognize any incident of cancer, Mr. Speaker, as very 
tragic. But when a member of your family or a friend or a 
neighbour is struck, passes away, that tragic message is 
multiplied many times over. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, this 
government over a number of years has continued to devote 
ever-increasing resources, human and fiscal, to fight this 
disease through both research and treatment. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why in this current budget alone, Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency by more 
than $10 million, a 16.5 per cent increase over last year. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Doctors at the 
Mayo Clinic had told Doug that early treatment could have 
prevented his death. For reasons unknown to us, he didn’t get 
that treatment he needed here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, doctors in Rochester removed a tumour the size of 
a dinner plate from Doug’s abdomen. It wasn’t enough that 
Doug wasted a year of precious time when he was 
misdiagnosed with Crohn’s disease, Mr. Speaker. When he 
finally was diagnosed with cancer, he couldn’t receive the 
intervention he needed here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 
the question is why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a month since Doug’s death. What has 
the minister done to review this most horrible situation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much for the 
question. And, Mr. Speaker, for a number of reasons relating to 
privacy, legal, and jurisdictional, Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak to 
some of the specifics of the case that the member opposite can 
address questions about. But, Mr. Speaker, what I can do is say 
that since I learned about the event, both from the family and 
through the media, I’ve been reviewing matters on a regular 
basis. This is indeed an unfortunate circumstance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, over the years, this government has 
recognized that incidents occur from time to time that either are 
most unfortunate or don’t meet the public’s expectations. We 
have put in place processes, Mr. Speaker, to address these 
issues, and these processes are available to Mrs. Bonderud and 
the family to proceed and to follow through on some of the 
questions that have been raised. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Mayo Clinic said that this 
death was preventable. Doug’s last wish was that his death 
would not be in vain and that others would not have to suffer 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

the same fate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Coroners Act states that the coroner inquest 
may be conducted if the coroner deems it necessary. And I 
quote from The Coroners Act, “bring dangerous practices or 
conditions to light and facilitate the making of 
recommendations to avoid preventable [preventable] deaths.” 
Under the Act, Mr. Speaker, the Justice minister can direct this 
request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug’s family would like to know what went 
wrong with our health care system that would cause a 
38-year-old to die needlessly. Will the Justice minister today 
commit to ordering a coroner’s inquest to find out what went so 
horribly wrong in this case? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member is correct. 
The coroner may direct an inquest in those circumstances that 
he describes. And if the coroner sees a value in holding such an 
inquest, the coroner may do so. 
 
The opposition took the position when we introduced the first 
full-time coroner to this legislature and the first full-time . . . or 
the first forensic pathologist to this legislature . . . to the 
coroner’s office as part of our upgrading of the coroner’s office, 
the opposition took the position, through the Justice critic, on 
December 1, 2005, quote: 
 

It’s absolutely essential that this process take place and . . . 
this office be treated with the appropriate professional 
respect that it deserves. 

 
This government agrees the coroner’s office should be treated 
with respect. These decisions should be made by a professional 
coroner. And if the opposition wants to change their position, 
that’s the opposition’s right to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Bonderuds had had 
serious reservations about the care options that were presented 
to them in here in Saskatchewan, so they took it upon 
themselves to do research. What they found, that surgical 
intervention was the first line of treatment for Doug’s cancer. 
They repeatedly asked for this in Saskatchewan but were denied 
the option, so they finally, out of desperation, went to the Mayo 
Clinic. They were told that surgery was required followed by 
drug intervention, but it was too late unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To the Minister of Health: why did they have to go to the Mayo 
Clinic to find out that it was the first intervention of care, not 
the last, which he was told here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again, I simply preface my answer by indicating that for reasons 

relating to privacy, legal, and jurisdictional, there are a number 
of matters specific to the member’s question that I can’t 
specifically answer in this place or any other. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I can indicate that as far as policy is 
concerned with regards to this government, we have policy and 
processes in place to address these questions in a more formal 
manner. And, Mr. Speaker, questions specifically related to the 
quality of care provided by physicians are rightly handled by 
the professional organization charged with accreditation and 
competency of care. And, Mr. Speaker, we have directed the 
family to the College of Physicians and Surgeons to seek 
answers to some of the questions that have been raised by the 
member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s our 
understanding that the Bonderuds contacted Sask Health to 
request funding to go to the Mayo Clinic because treatment 
being prescribed here in Saskatchewan wasn’t working. Given 
the urgency of the request, the Bonderuds believe that they 
didn’t get a timely reply. And when they did get a reply, Mr. 
Speaker, the day before Doug’s surgery at the Mayo Clinic, 
they were given no guarantees for consultation and no 
guarantees that surgery would be performed here, anywhere in 
Canada. Doug was bleeding internally and had to undergo 
emergency surgery at the Mayo Clinic at a cost of 
approximately $80,000 which Sask Health has now refused to 
pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, timely access to urgent cancer care in Canada was 
not available to the Bonderuds. Will the minister commit today 
to reviewing that decision by his department not to fund that 
surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 
say first of all generally I am constantly reviewing matters in 
the health care field. This is an evolving sector, and so it goes 
without saying that we would review these issues. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also, up to this point, reviewed the 
policy of the department with respect to this case. And, Mr. 
Speaker, just to reiterate, the policy is very clear. Saskatchewan 
Health requires a written request from a patient’s specialist 
describing the nature of service required and verification that 
the service is not provided in Canada, anywhere in Canada, 
before prior approval is provided for out-of-country expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out of country in the last 12 months, this 
government has supported close to 1,500 Saskatchewan 
residents at a cost of ten and a half million dollars. Mr. Speaker, 
the policy clearly supports . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are cases that are urgent. 
I’m asking this minister to look at that case which was urgent, 
when they couldn’t receive the care here in Saskatchewan, to 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

look at it because they couldn’t wait for your department to 
make the decision, to go through all the hoops that your 
department made them go through, Mr. Speaker — his 
department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not just the Bonderud’s family that are concerned about 
what happened here. We are getting emails and letters daily, 
and I’m sure the minister is as well about the treatment that 
some of our patients are receiving in Saskatchewan when it 
comes to cancer care. 
 
Crystal brought with her a number of petitions which she 
brought with her today. In fact within five days, she received 
950 signatures on these petitions. Crystal is here today. She’s 
requesting a meeting with that minister to present her petitions 
and to have some of the questions that haven’t been answered, 
answered. Will he see and meet with Crystal today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in a government briefing note dated July 4, 2005, 
outlines a number of serious allegations involving the 
misappropriation of funds. These allegations were made by a 
former executive director of the Oyate Safe House. Can the 
minister please tell us what specific actions were taken by his 
NDP government to investigate these serious allegations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And as the member indicated, the information that he’s making 
reference to was a department document. And obviously, as 
I’ve indicated time and time again, this department took the 
matters very seriously. They identified a number of problems at 
Oyate. They met with the Oyate board. And, Mr. Speaker, 
progress was being made. 
 
What I’ll point out is that we are going to continue moving 
forward with the recommendations of the advocate and the 
auditor. And I would point out, the last place, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’re going to get any advice from is from the members 
opposite, because all they have done, Mr. Speaker, is they have 
ratcheted up the political pressure on this. They have created 
much discourse amongst many groups of people in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not into cheap theatrical 
politics. We’re into real programs and, Mr. Speaker, we intend 
to deliver. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and all he’s 
done is put 14 young Aboriginal women at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former executive director alleges that an 
employee was paid five weeks salary even though this 
employee was not working at the safe house at the time. This 
payment was the result of another individual, whose name is 
blacked out, directing payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific steps were taken by the NDP 
government and this minister to investigate those allegations? 
And what actions were taken as a result of that investigation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the children 
that are in care are in care of Ranch Ehrlo, and they’re also in 
care of Dales House. I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
that the Oyate Safe House is no longer operational. They 
haven’t taken any children and this has been going on for the 
last seven or eight months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these children are being cared for. And what’s 
really, really important here is that the information that that 
member makes reference to, our department forwarded that 
information, and we’ve shared the information. And the whole 
purpose of us being very forthright and honest and open about 
this, Mr. Speaker, is we’re trying to find some solutions. 
 
Now what I’m going to say is it’s clear as day is that they have 
a political agenda. We have a program in place, a plan in place, 
and we’re going to implement it so the children that are out 
there being exploited right now do have options and as many 
options as possible, Mr. Speaker. That’s our role. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The minister says 
that he’s been forthright and honest. We all know in this House 
and outside this House that they were dragged into this kicking 
and spitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former executive director makes a number of 
other allegations regarding the payment for services that were 
never actually performed, for example, payroll and accounting 
services that were never delivered. Mr. Speaker, these are 
coming from his own . . . documents from within DCRE. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific steps were taken by this NDP 
government to investigate these allegations? What actions were 
taken as a result of those investigations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister of 
community service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, once 
again I’ll say to the people of Saskatchewan, that as we had 
concerns, we brought the concerns forward and the board 
certainly responded to them, Mr. Speaker. And as we continue 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

going down this path with the advocate and the auditor 
engaged, as we’ve said before we’re going to follow the 
recommendations, and we’re going to certainly listen to the 
advice of both the advocate and the auditor. 
 
What we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is we want to fix this 
problem. What we want to do is we want to put some new 
programs in place to really help these children. And yes, we’ve 
been very forthright in saying there’s been some hard lessons 
learned. But quite clearly the agenda here we have now is to 
move forward, all the while being aware of the hard lessons. 
 
And what I’ll point out, all we got from the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is cheap politics. And they want to continue moving 
that political agenda forward so they can grasp power, and it 
doesn’t matter who they hurt in that process. And, Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of the day they are going to wear that. They are going 
to wear that. And now I’ll point out we want to find some 
solutions, and we will find those solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was that 
minister who stood out in that foyer and said there are no 
problems, and now he’s saying there are problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former executive director said that the process 
for accessing safe house funds consisted of some persons — 
whose name is blacked out — phoning another person — 
whose name is blacked out — and authorizing payments over 
the phone. The former executive director suggests there was no 
checks or balances, that the board of directors had pretty much 
ceased to function, that there was one board member who was 
pretty much running things. Mr. Speaker, what specific steps 
did this minister and this government do to investigate those 
allegations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what we did was, as soon 
as more issues came forward, we shut down the Oyate house. 
Oyate house was shut down. And as the minister, we took the 
decisive step to shut down this facility. And unless and until the 
auditor and the advocate’s recommendations are fulfilled, we 
don’t plan on reopening Oyate, unless and until. 
 
And I’ll point out that since Oyate’s been shut down . . . And 
the moment we have found that there is more problems, this 
place was shut down, and the children are being cared for 
somewhere else. 
 
So in the meantime, we got some issues we have to work our 
way through, and we certainly will. Given the information at 
the time when I stood up in this Assembly said that things were 
moving forward and things were going well with Oyate, 
because they were, Mr. Speaker. There is issues that are being 
resolved as we brought it to the board’s attention and things are 
moving in the right direction, and I stand by my answers. But 
quite clearly I’m going to take advice from many people, not 

from that political party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. He needs to read 
the reports from his own department. He obviously hasn’t even 
read them yet. He’s talking about things that he says aren’t 
there. This report I’m talking about was in July 4, 2005, Mr. 
Speaker, almost a year before they shut it down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former executive director also stated there 
were significant problems related to nepotism, and the 
department appeared to agree. On July 4, 2005, the memo says 
and I quote: 
 

The absence of process and the instability that typically 
accompanies work environments where relatives are hired 
and favoured would suggest that delivery services to this 
very difficult client group is bound to suffer. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an astonishing statement. The department is 
saying that hiring of relatives was taking precedence over the 
well-being of children. Mr. Speaker, whose relatives are being 
hired and favoured, and what did this NDP government do 
about it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is important for 
people of Saskatchewan to know is that this was an independent 
board. This board was operating the safe house and, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re an autonomous board. And as issues were 
certainly brought forward by different people, the staff 
responded — my staff — by asking questions of the board and 
certainly the information flew back and forth. 
 
What’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that we are going to 
stay the course. We are going to allow the advocate and the 
auditor and Oyate to do their work. And despite all the rhetoric 
and despite all the pressure and all the issues and all the 
allegations that may come from opposite, Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to stay the course. We’re going to give the Oyate group 
until the 14th to come forward with their plan, Mr. Speaker, and 
at that time I will make a decision whether we’re moving 
forward with Oyate or not, despite the political games being 
played at from across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll remind the 
minister of two things. First of all this report is from his 
department, nobody else but his department. And now he’s 
saying he’s not listening to his own people. He’s hiding behind 
the advocate report. He’s hiding behind the auditor’s report. He 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

is responsible for the kids. He is the father of those children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am quoting from a document briefing note. Just 
let me repeat what the department told the minister in this 
briefing note: 
 

The absence of process and the instability that typically 
accompanies work environments where relatives are hired 
and favoured would suggest that service delivery to this 
very difficult client group is bound to suffer. 

 
That’s what it is, Mr. Speaker. The children were suffering 
because somebody’s relatives were being, quote, “hired and 
favoured.” Mr. Speaker, whose relatives were being hired and 
favoured, and what did this NDP government and that minister 
do about it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, allow me to remind that 
member Oyate is shut down. And this minister, upon hearing 
more information that there are some challenges and problems, 
Mr. Speaker, we took the decisive step to shut down Oyate with 
the board’s co-operation, Mr. Speaker. This is one of the issues. 
We went to the board with a problem and, Mr. Speaker — 
guess what? — Oyate’s shut down. The children are being 
cared for. Oyate is shut down. 
 
So now I’m . . . continue moving on that despite the fact that we 
have rhetoric and despite the fact that they have a political 
agenda over there, Mr. Speaker, we are going to stay the course. 
We’re going to listen to the advocate. We’re going to listen to 
the auditor. And come the 14th, we will make a decision, Mr. 
Speaker. We will make a choice as a minister as to whether 
we’re going to move forward with Oyate or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We care about those children. 
And despite the rhetoric coming from across the way, Mr. 
Speaker, they proposed a $50 million cut to social services two 
years ago. Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The rhetoric that 
he’s talking about comes from his own department. I don’t 
know why he’s yelling at me about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gets worse. Let me read how the department 
summarized these allegations by the former executive director. 
Quote: 
 

Taken in their entirety, these allegations paint a disturbing 
picture. At the same time that additional funding is being 
requested to offset staffing costs, the former executive 
director is alleging that money is being spent in a manner 
that is inconsistent in acceptable counting practices. 

 
And I quote: 
 

In the service agreement between the department and the 
safe house, the former executive director suggests that 
advocating for extra funding was becoming difficult given 
the inappropriate distribution of payments to relatives and 
board members. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a very serious allegation — inappropriate 
disbursement of payment to relatives and board members. If 
that’s true, the money should have been used to help these kids. 
What specific steps did that minister take to resolve these 
critical issues? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’m going to 
point out that there’s nothing new here, Mr. Speaker. The 
auditor and the advocate have seen all of this, Mr. Speaker. Our 
department has shared all the information, Mr. Speaker. These 
are departmental notes that that member’s making a reference 
to, so we’re fairly open and honest, Mr. Speaker, and we’re also 
accountable. So there’s nothing new here from what the 
advocate and the auditor have stated that there are problems 
within the safe house. 
 
Let me reiterate. What we have done, Mr. Speaker, is we have 
shut the house down, Mr. Speaker. We have shut down Oyate. 
Oyate is no longer operating, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing new 
here. These are all departmental correspondence, Mr. Speaker. 
And that member wants to heighten the problem. He wants to 
create some division amongst our Saskatchewan community. 
And I say shame on them because, Mr. Speaker, they advocated 
cuts to this department — not more support for vulnerable kids 
— in the last election. That’s why they lost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to call on this 
minister just to do his job. You know, he needs to do a forensic 
audit on this, Mr. Speaker, and get to the bottom of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has repeated that the NDP 
government took action as soon as they became aware of the 
problems, but that’s not true. I know it and he knows it. The 
former NDP minister received this briefing back on July 4, 
2005. We also know it extends back to 2003. These were 
serious allegations of nepotism and financial irregularities. The 
department concluded that the children were suffering as a 
result of these activities. And what did the NDP do about this? 
Judging from today’s answer by the minister, absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: did the former 
minister bring these attentions to cabinet and to the Premier? 
And why is this government doing nothing about these serious 
financial irregularities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll point out, 
as soon as we heard there was more problems at Oyate, this 
minister made a decision to shut it down. And what’s really 
important, Mr. Speaker, is that every time an issue came up at 
the Oyate Safe House the board responded. But nonetheless, 
we’re going to continue looking at this with the advocate and 
the auditor’s advice, Mr. Speaker. It’s very important to take 
that advice into consideration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re also going to give the Oyate board their due time. 
We said to the 14th of this month in which we’re going to give 
them the opportunity to defend what they have done and to 
certainly answer the allegations, and to respond to some of the 
issues raised in our documents, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll point out 
again, we are going to give them their due time, Mr. Speaker. 
On the 14th we will make a decision as a minister on the future 
of Oyate, what we can do to help these kids. 
 
The last place to take advice from, Mr. Speaker, is that party 
who are so hungry for power they’ll use anybody to get it, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 

Saskatchewan’s New Water Conservation Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to announce Saskatchewan’s new water conservation 
plan. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, water is one of our most precious 
resources. A safe and secure water supply is essential to the 
long-term health and prosperity of our province and our 
citizens. Water is not only essential for life but it is also a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order please. Order please. The 
Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
announce Saskatchewan’s new water conservation plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As you know, Mr. Speaker, water is one 
of our most precious resources. A safe and secure water supply 
is essential to the long-term health and prosperity of our 
province and our citizens. Water is not only essential for life, 
but is also a major factor driving the growth of our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an extraordinary opportunity to manage 
and develop water responsibly at a time when other 
jurisdictions have already overallocated their supply. A strategy 
to conserve water is an important component of Saskatchewan’s 
green strategy which when fully developed will provide the 
vital framework for encouraging community growth while 

ensuring the protection of our natural resources. 
 
The water conservation plan I am tabling today is a result of 
extensive consultation with the Saskatchewan public. In 
addition to the distribution of a consultation guide, over 300 
people attended eight public consultation meetings in early 
2005, and 60 written submissions were received. Input critical 
to the development of the plan was also gathered from 21 
meetings with industry and environmental stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we thank all citizens and groups for their 
invaluable contributions to the plan. Mr. Speaker, I would also 
wish to acknowledge that I shared leadership in developing this 
plan with my colleague, the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation, and the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
The water conservation plan is based on government leading by 
example partnerships with agriculture, industry, and 
communities, and public education. The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority will assume responsibility for overall 
water conservation policy direction, coordination, target setting, 
and reporting on results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s water users are ready and willing 
to conserve our water sources, but factual, meaningful 
information is needed to make better choices in regards to water 
use. This will be achieved through public education and 
extension initiatives. A long-term water conservation awareness 
campaign will increase the knowledge base, reinforce support 
for water conservation, and encourage new patterns of water 
consumption. 
 
Government will lead Saskatchewan’s water conservation plan 
by setting appropriate allocation policies, compiling data and 
information, and demonstrating efficient water use at its own 
facilities. As well, we will work with industry, environmental 
groups, municipalities, and others to promote the use of 
water-efficient fixtures and appliances. As domestic use is the 
second largest use of water, the plan will provide information 
on water saving measures such as water-efficient appliances, 
ultra-low plumbing fixtures, and low water-use landscaping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also work with Saskatchewan Health to 
develop options for grey water use and effluent reuse in 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, considering that irrigation is a crucial factor in 
enabling and ensuring a stable and sustainable agricultural 
industry, the plan promotes irrigation research, education 
initiatives leading to more efficient water use, the development 
of industry standards, and the conversion to more efficient 
irrigation systems. As well, opportunities to reduce transmission 
losses within water delivery systems and irrigation districts will 
be reviewed. 
 
In addition to issues surrounding irrigation of farm lands, Mr. 
Speaker, the plan also deals with the growing demands that 
intensive livestock production will have on our water supply. 
As expansion of these operations will continue, water saving 
strategies such as efficient animal watering systems and manure 
management techniques will be encouraged. As well, we will 
work with industry associations such as the Canadian 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

Association of Petroleum Producers to develop best 
management practices that address water conservation issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, becoming more efficient in our use of water is a 
long-term process. The recommendations contained in this plan 
will serve as blueprints for action in the years ahead. 
 
I would like to close with a summary of benefits that water 
conservation will provide to Saskatchewan. Water conservation 
initiatives will help to maintain our water supplies, provide 
more opportunity for future development, reduce energy 
consumption, heal our ecosystems, prepare us for potential 
climatic changes, and reduce infrastructure costs for water 
supply and waste-water treatment. Conserving our water 
resources will also be part of a move toward a green economy 
which must be effective in its use of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water conservation is the responsibility of us all. 
By working together, we can meet the goal of safe, reliable 
water supplies and ensure a prosperous future built on a healthy 
environment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
would like to respond to the minister’s statement dealing with 
his new water conservation plan. As the minister stated, Mr. 
Speaker, water is certainly a very precious and valuable 
commodity that we should all be aware of. And it will become 
even more so in the future as the increased demands for water 
within our province and within our country and around the 
globe grow, particularly, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this in 
the context of climate change and look at some of the models 
that are out there that predict more variance in our climate that 
could result in multi-year droughts and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister mentioned that some jurisdictions have 
overallocated their water supply. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
hope that in this plan, in this government’s plan, that we do an 
inventory of our current water resources that we have in this 
province so that we know what our supply is in a definitive way 
so that we can then deal with allocation issues from a 
knowledge base of inventory, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister referred to Saskatchewan’s green plan. And I find 
it rather interesting when he said that, when the green plan is 
fully developed. And that is an issue, Mr. Speaker, that citizens, 
particularly those that are in the environment area, that are 
following this issue as to when is this government going to 
unveil their full green plan . . . . We underwent a series of 
meetings and consultations and so on over a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, and we still don’t see the whole plan. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t . . . I’ve just received the 
minister’s statement and I do thank him for that. We will have 
to review what the minister is proposing, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
a couple of issues that come to mind as I listen to the minister, 
particularly when he talked about leading by example, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

I would hope that one of the examples that that government 
doesn’t use, Mr. Speaker, is the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company] example and leadership 
in that whole area. 
 
I would hope that we look at issues and conservation practices 
that are meaningful, Mr. Speaker, and we certainly would be 
. . . will view with interest and will certainly lend our support 
where it is required, but we will certainly also make suggestions 
and offer alternatives if we feel that it is required in this area. 
But we certainly feel that water is a very important and essential 
issue in this province, and we will be certainly looking forward 
to working with the government in the future to develop a plan 
that is in the best interests of all citizens of this province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9, 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
12, The Planning and Development Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 12, The Planning and 
Development Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to move that Bill No. 15, The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 15, The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 
Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
17, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 17, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: —Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, 
The Court Security Act, 2006 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 18, The Court Security Act be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, 
The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 19, The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds 

Mandatory Reporting Act 
 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, 
the gunshot and stab wounds Act, 2006 be introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 20, The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory 
Reporting Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 

/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, 
The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 21, The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’d like to table responses to written questions 1 to 10 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1 to 10 inclusive have 
been tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Duncan.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone, the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to resume debates. 
 
In 1992 when delivering his first full budget, the minister of 
Finance, Mr. Ed Tchorzewski, said, and I quote: 
 

. . . last October Saskatchewan people turned from secrecy 
to openness, from conflict to co-operation, from inequity 
to fairness, from injustice to compassion. Today we begin 
rebuilding Saskatchewan together. 

 
And rebuild Saskatchewan we have. We are still building and 
that brings me to the four cornerstones of this Throne Speech. 
The first cornerstone — our government is determined to make 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures. 
 
Our government is committed to nurturing lifelong learners, and 
success must begin early in life. We are trying to backfill the 
hole left by cuts caused by the federal cousins of the 
Saskatchewan Party for child care. Our government wants 
quality options for families with children. 
 
This government has made investments in education. We are 
expanding the province’s literacy program. We deliver 
Saskatchewan’s early learning and child care program. The 
KidsFirst initiative employs the combined efforts of health 
districts, school divisions, Aboriginal organizations, and 
communities. I’ve seen the benefit of this program first-hand, 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency. The people doing this work 
on the front lines—tremendous people, Mr. Speaker. These are 
people that will break the chains of poverty. And KidsFirst is an 
example of what can be accomplished by working together for a 
common cause. Families need help, and we are there for them. 
 
Investments in education will continue to focus on meeting the 
needs of families and to ensure the children grow into healthy 
young adults. Young adults need assurance that they have a 
place and role in the future of this province. And this 
government is giving that through investments in training — by 
expanding training opportunities to meet market demand, by 
strengthening our regional training model, by bringing 
education closer to students with the mobile training lab and 
things like the partnership with the Kawacatoose First Nations 
and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology], Mr. Speaker, in terms of nurse training. We’ll be 
expanding those partnerships with First Nations and Métis 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

people. We’ll be continuing the freeze on education. And we’ll 
be continuing to make high levels of investment in business, 
training, and employment opportunities in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to providing people 
with access to education and training, and the training required 
to become part of the workforce in Saskatchewan and to grow 
their careers right here at home. 
 
It is my great honour to have been appointed by the Premier to 
conduct the post-secondary education accessibility and 
affordability review. The interim report will be completed by 
the end of January 2007, and final recommendations will be 
made in the fall of 2007. We had our first public consultation 
meeting, Mr. Speaker, this past week on Friday here in Regina 
and this work, this stage of the review, will build on the 
extensive literature review that is available on the website. And 
it will build on extensive consultations with the members of 
public, students, and interested groups and stakeholders. 
 
We have the great pleasure of working in concert with the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy. And everyone will 
benefit by building a stronger education and training system 
which will provide more opportunity for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this work is predicated on the notion that we 
believe access to post-secondary education should be based on 
the desire in your heart and the brains in your head — that 
willingness to learn — and not by the cash in your bank 
account. 
 
It takes me to cornerstone no. 2, Mr. Speaker, strengthening 
Saskatchewan’s leadership and improving public health care 
while reducing wait times and improving access to services. 
From the beginning Saskatchewan residents have recognized 
the value and advantage of working together and pooling their 
resources. Medicare continues to be the best example of what 
can be achieved working together. 
 
Saskatchewan is the only have province which does not charge 
a health care premium to its citizens. And in this session the 
government is committed to reducing wait times and improving 
access to service, enhancing efforts to recruit health care 
providers with relocation incentives, expanding the Aboriginal 
health workforce, and continuing to work for the development 
of a children’s hospital within a hospital. 
 
Cornerstone no. 3, Mr. Speaker, advancing Saskatchewan as a 
leader in environmental protection and green economy of which 
we’ve heard more today from the Minister of the Environment. 
But this government is going to be researching the feasibility of 
the world’s first utility-scale, clean-coal generating facility, a 
very exciting program, Mr. Speaker, that had a good 
memorandum of understanding signed last week. 
 
We’re going to continue to build a plan to develop biofuels, 
building on that good work we’ve done in the ethanol sector. 
 
We’re going to continue the work on safe water supply and 
water conservation policy developments. 
 
This government is going to lead the way in organic food 
production, building on the excellent work that’s currently 

being conducted by the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
We’re going to clean up abandoned uranium mine sites in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re going to set and meet long-term goals to meet energy 
requirements through renewable resources. And to that end, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier has appointed the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone to lead an examination into Saskatchewan’s options 
for development of renewable resources, energy conservation 
programs, and to develop an action plan that will see us through 
not just the coming years but the coming decades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Cornerstone no. 4, ensuring that families benefit from our 
strong and prosperous economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this 
past weekend we noted in the Leader-Post the job numbers 
were out on Friday, and what do the latest numbers have to say 
but jobs, jobs, jobs. Mr. Speaker, there were 21,800 more jobs 
in October than a year before. This is the lowest unemployment 
rate of 3.3 per cent — the second lowest in Canada. But it’s 
also, Mr. Speaker, it’s the lowest unemployment rate since 
1979. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, who was in power in 1979? It’s the 
hero of this side and the person that the members opposite like 
to vilify, Mr. Allan Blakeney. And of course it’s maybe taken 
us since 1979 to get back to that position, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re back there and we’re going to keep rolling forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Full-time jobs up, 22,900. Youth 
employment up, 8,100, the second lowest youth unemployment 
in Canada. Manufacturing shipments are up; natural gas and oil 
production up; urban housing starts up; international exports up; 
value of building permits up; retail sales up. The only thing 
that’s down is the mouth of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — So we’re on a roll. We’re one of three 
have provinces and we’re one of only two provinces to exceed 
the national average GDP [gross domestic product] growth for 
the last five years. 
 
Saskatchewan continues to be a good place in which to do 
business. The province scored well in the new 2006 KPMG 
survey of business costs. Saskatoon ranked first, first among 21 
featured cities from the North American Midwest. All 
Saskatchewan cities in the study ranked higher than the 
Canadian average. That’s solid evidence that our economy is 
steadily growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fourth cornerstone contributes to economic 
growth. It supports job creation so our young people can build 
strong futures right here. It builds real benefits for families. 
This government has introduced Family Day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve continued to press the feds to honour their election 
promise to provide fair equalization. We’ve reduced the sales 
tax 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, some of the 
commentators have talked about desperation in the House. And 
the only desperation that I could see in the House when that 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

sales tax cut went in, Mr. Speaker, was the desperation that was 
plain on the faces of the members opposite as they saw that tax 
going down and their futures along with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is building a communities fund 
for cultural and recreational facilities. We are making 
improvements to roads — heavy-haul, and access to First 
Nations communities. We are expanding high-speed Internet to 
rural and northern communities. Northern Saskatchewan natural 
gas — the announcement was made just this past week for the 
expansion to La Ronge. 
 
We are building an urban agenda to support cities, 
communities, and regional economies. We’re focusing on 
workplace safety, continuing to respond to the Occupational 
Health and Safety Council report. We are responding to The 
Workers’ Compensation Act committee, and we are providing 
full funding for CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization], Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are becoming a national leader in support to Voluntary 
Sector Initiative and we are improving safety and security in 
communities. This final point is very important to me as 
Minister Responsible for Public Safety. Moving towards the 
goals of safer communities, Mr. Speaker, we are creating more 
targeted crime reduction efforts, gang strategy, the HEAT [help 
end auto theft] program, the drug court, the break and enter 
strategy. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We are reviewing legislation to ensure that everyone in this 
province has an acceptable level of fire protection and fire 
prevention services. This point is also very important, Mr. 
Speaker. The last amendment was made to The Fire Prevention 
Act in 1992. Changes in technology, legislation, and procedures 
for the provision of fire services requires a review of the Act to 
ensure Saskatchewan maintains a comprehensive system of fire 
and public safety, and I very much look forward to undertaking 
that work and continuing the good work in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s a very brief, brief list of the priorities that fall under the 
four cornerstones that this province has committed to, that will 
bring real benefits to Saskatchewan families. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I think I’m going to close off my remarks. I’m going to 
reluctantly take my seat because there’s a lot more to be said 
about this great Throne Speech. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we’ve got a 
government that is working, working with Saskatchewan 
people. And on that side of the House we’ve got an operation 
that’s working for the Saskatchewan Party. We’ve got an 
operation on this side that is working with people. We’ve got an 
operation on that side that is trying to divide people. We’ve got 
an operation on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
trying to build community. We’ve got an operation on that side 
of the House that tries to tear communities apart. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be voting against the 
amendments. I’m going to be voting with pride for the Throne 
Speech and the work of this government. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s indeed a 
pleasure to join the debate today. There’s a few 
acknowledgments that I want to make before I begin. And one 
of them is to join my colleagues on both sides of the House in 
welcoming our new member of Weyburn-Big Muddy. It’s truly 
a pleasure. It’s great to have him with us. 
 
And as well I want to acknowledge someone else because I 
know that this other person plays a major role in the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy being able to join us, and that’s his 
wife, Amanda, because I know she supported him. When he 
was just thinking about it, she was behind him all the way, so I 
really want to thank Amanda for that support. 
 
I want to thank the constituents in Humboldt for their 
confidence in me now for a number of years and it’s an honour 
to serve them. I have met some great people and worked with 
some very, very great people in Humboldt and it’s an honour to 
be representing them. 
 
I want to thank someone that has become a very, very important 
person in my life. She does far more work than I do at times. 
She is my constituency assistant, Susan Dunne. And without her 
I don’t think I could do my job as well as I try to do it because 
Susan is the backbone to the Humboldt office. 
 
I want to congratulate all the newly elected municipal leaders in 
the various municipal governments. I want to congratulate them 
and hope they do well. I want to congratulate the incumbents as 
well for agreeing to continue to serve. I’d like to make a special 
announcement or acknowledgement of Dennis Korte, the mayor 
of Humboldt, who has decided not to run again. But it’s been 
great working with Dennis. He has done a very good job for 
Humboldt, the city of Humboldt, and I welcome the new mayor, 
Malcolm Eaton. I think Malcolm will be a great guy to work 
with and I’m looking forward to seeing what Malcolm would 
like to do for the city of Humboldt. 
 
Lastly, I want to thank Ms. Ronyk for her years of hard work 
here in the Assembly. And she will be missed when she decides 
to retire. 
 
You know it is always difficulty entering these debates when 
you’re on the last day or almost the last day, because so much 
has already been said before you. But I would like to begin, Mr. 
Speaker, by just asking the question of, how do you know when 
a government’s become old and tired? And it’s with humour 
when I listen to the different members give their address within 
this debate. And I know one way that you don’t do that is what 
the Deputy Premier tried to do which is, you know, he equated 
that to the average age of the members and he thought that’s 
what’s meant by being old and tired. And it’s not. It’s not what 
the term means. 
 
It’s interesting that he decided that the average age on this side 
of the House had to have been greater than that. He’s never 
asked me my age. I don’t think he has the courage to do that, 
Mr. Speaker, but at any rate he’s decided. But that’s not the 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

important thing here. It’s just simply not what’s meant by that 
term. But the Deputy Premier’s response to it shows that they 
just don’t get it. They don’t get the fact that they’re on the 
wrong track. They’ve become a tired, old government and the 
people of Saskatchewan are getting tired of them. They’re 
getting very tired of them. 
 
Another indicator that a government’s becoming tired and old is 
when on the very first page of their Throne Speech, they have a 
title. It’s underlined. It’s bold. It’s one of the titles within the 
very first page of their Throne Speech and it says, where we 
have come from. And it’s an indicator that on the most 
important page of their Throne Speech, instead of looking 
forward, instead of laying out a vision, instead of starting with a 
vision, they’re looking back. They’re looking back. And in 
speech after speech that we’ve listened to, they have looked 
back — every, almost every single member. And I can’t say 
I’ve listened to every speech, but every one that I have heard, 
they’re looking back. 
 
The member that spoke just before me, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone, I mean, he was talking about 1979. I was just out 
of school, Mr. Speaker, in 1979. He’s looking back. I don’t 
think he was out of school in 1979. And then he’s making 
quotes from the early 1990s. We’re going back 15 years. We 
keep looking back. We keep looking back. That’s the sign 
we’re a tired, old government — when we can’t talk about what 
our plan is for the future. If we keep looking back, we become a 
tired, old government. 
 
Our time’s always limited, Mr. Speaker, so I want to address a 
little bit, touch on the four cornerstones. And again, I know the 
member that spoke just before me did that as well. And he 
talked about the four cornerstones. One, the first one being, 
make Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, 
work, and build strong futures. 
 
Now it’s interesting, they’ve been in power for 15 years. 
They’ve been in power for 15 years; for 15 years our population 
is declining. And the population that we’re losing is our young 
people. For 15 years they haven’t addressed this problem, and 
now they want the people of Saskatchewan to believe that 
they’re going to do something. They don’t say what they’re 
going to do, but they say they’re going to do something, and it’s 
a priority. 
 
It’s of particular interest to me, Mr. Speaker, because of course 
. . . And everyone in the Assembly knows I have three 
daughters, and they’re of that age that we’re losing. They’re age 
17 to 22. And so I’m very, very concerned and very interested 
as to what they have that’s going to entice my daughters to want 
to stay, besides me asking them to, because, I mean, the mother 
only has an influence so far. And so far, yes, all three of my 
daughters are still here in this province. But I don’t know that 
this is where their opportunity is going to be unless we make 
some major changes. 
 
The Throne Speech talks about investments in training. And 
I’ve had a number of constituents that say their children are on 
incredible waiting lists to get into a training program. What are 
they going to do to address that problem? And again, I’ll go 
back to my daughters, of whether or not they will stay. My one 
daughter applied for a program, and it was a medical program. 

It was an area where we’re saying there is, you know, dire 
shortages. And she was told that she was on a 10-year waiting 
list. She was 17 at that time. Ten years to a 17-year-old is a 
lifetime. 
 
She did stay in the province. She trained for something else, but 
many don’t. If they’re told they have to wait 10 years to get into 
a training program when there’s a shortage in that particular 
profession, what’s wrong with the picture? And why has 
nothing been done about it? Absolutely nothing’s been done 
about it. 
 
The Throne Speech talks about abundant career opportunity. 
That is going to be essential to keep young people here and it’s 
going to take more than just lip service; it’s going to take some 
fundamental changes. It’s going to take some major policy 
changes before that opportunity is there. 
 
One of my daughters works for a company that she loves 
working for, but it’s a sad scenario. She’s in a subsidiary office. 
The main office is based out of Calgary. The owner, Mr. 
Speaker, the owner is from Saskatchewan. He owns the 
company; the main office is in Calgary. If she wants to be 
promoted within that company do you know where she’s going 
to be sent — because I do. That’s where the opportunity will be 
for her to advance within the career that she has chosen and that 
has to change. And I don’t see where they have a vision to 
make those changes. 
 
The second cornerstone that they talk about is to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving public health care 
while reducing wait times and improving access to services. 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, you don’t really want to get 
into health care in the Humboldt area. I know that the 
government’s come out numerous times and made the 
announcement of the new Humboldt hospital. It’s never 
happened. They no longer believe their announcements; they 
know that it is based on a political agenda more than actual 
intent. But what’s happened — because it’s been announced 
and announced and announced again over 10 years — is the 
cost of that facility has doubled and then tripled. And you know 
who has to pay for that, Mr. Speaker? Well the people in 
Humboldt and surrounding areas because there’s a rural health 
tax. Whether they want to admit it or not, in rural communities 
for health care facilities, you are responsible to pay for 35 per 
cent of the capital cost. So all of the municipalities have to 
come up with more money. And they don’t know. They don’t 
know. They no longer believe that there really is going to be a 
hospital because they’ve been told so many times and nothing 
has truly happened. 
 
They want to know why they have to pay higher taxes. Or in the 
case of the city of Humboldt, they decided that it was going to 
be $100 a door for 10 years. It’s a rural health tax; it’s a rural 
premium. You can call it whatever you want but they have to 
pay extra money for health care in Humboldt and they still 
don’t have the facility. 
 
They want to know why they have to pay the capital cost of any 
other office or support service that’s incorporated into the 
hospital. I do agree with integrated facilities. I think that they 
are very economic and efficient. But the minute you put health 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

care into a rural hospital then the rural community has to come 
up with 35 per cent of the cost. If the health care building was 
somewhere separate, they wouldn’t. It just doesn’t even make 
sense. What’s going to change just because of this Throne 
Speech? I don’t see anything that’s going to change, quite 
frankly. They’ve said all these things before, and nothing 
changes. 
 
The third cornerstone, advance Saskatchewan as a leader in 
environment protection and a green economy. Mr. Speaker, are 
they kidding me? Are they kidding me? 
 
I want to talk about the community of Aberdeen. The 
community of Aberdeen is an amazing community, quite 
frankly. They built a facility that if anyone has a chance to see 
it, they should go to Aberdeen and take a look at this facility. 
 
They have integrated almost everything that community will 
need all under one roof. There’s a library, a skating rink, curling 
rink, dance studio, bowling alley, town offices. The list goes on 
and on and on as to what’s incorporated into this building. 
 
It’s an architectural genius of a building. It’s insulated well 
beyond regulation. They have geothermal heating and cooling 
systems and every possible energy-saving technology was 
incorporated into that facility. 
 
And guess what happened when they approached the 
government to see what energy-saving programs were available, 
in particular for geothermal. And we found out there are none. 
The Premier keeps talking more and more and more about 
being green and prosperous, but there was nothing there 
available when they built the Aberdeen facility. 
 
Other provinces have incentives for different geothermal 
projects, but not this province. Even though we acknowledge 
that it’s an energy-saving system and we keep saying that we, 
you know, we support energy saving, but we don’t actually put 
action behind our words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to go for the last cornerstone which 
is, ensure that today’s Saskatchewan families benefit from a 
strong economy. And we do think it was a very positive step in 
dropping the PST [provincial sales tax]. We do acknowledge 
that that is going to benefit all the families. 
 
But does a drastic increase in the Premier’s communication 
budget benefit Saskatchewan families? Does ensuring that 
every single NDP member receives extra pay for . . . if they’re 
not in cabinet, they’re going to have some other assignment 
which gives them the extra pay, every single one. Does that 
benefit Saskatchewan families? Does running taxpayer 
campaigns, running them over budget. just basically to feel 
good about the NDP government, does that help Saskatchewan 
families? 
 
Again we’re looking at words. We’re looking at words with 
absolutely no action behind them. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
how do we know we have a tired, old government? We’ve all 
heard the jokes, you know, how do you . . . you know you’re a 
redneck when . . . And we’ve heard the ones of, you know . . . 
oh there’s a few out there, you know. So I want to say you 
know you’re a tired, old government when you make decisions 

and policies based on how you’re doing in the polls rather than 
what’s good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
You know you’re a tired, old government when you make 
decisions and policies based on how close you are to an election 
rather than what’s best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know you’re a tired, old government when you defend a 
minister who is totally, absolutely incompetent and puts at risk 
the most vulnerable in society just so that you look politically 
correct. 
 
You know that you’re a tired, old government when even your 
own cabinet members are questioning the competency of the 
leader. 
 
You know you’re a tired, old government when you constantly 
mock the ideas of the opposition, have a good laugh over it, and 
then incorporate them. 
 
You know that you are a tired, old government when you want 
to change your name, Madam Deputy Speaker, and you try to 
hide from that dismal record. 
 
You know that you’re a tired, old government when you have to 
continuously add more staff and funds to prop up your leader. 
 
And you know you’re a tired, old government when the best 
that you can do for a slogan is Imagine. But then again, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this tired, old government, they are dreamers if 
they think for one minute they can win another election. 
 
I’m going to support the amendment put forward by the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, and I will not be 
supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Northern 
Affairs, the member from Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, tansi. Good 
afternoon. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
I would like to thank them for the good work that they continue 
to do for my office. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, on October 26 the Speech from the 
Throne was delivered to Saskatchewan people. It was a proud 
moment for this Saskatchewan New Democratic government 
because it proves that our strategy is working. More 
importantly, it was a proud moment for the people of 
Saskatchewan who have worked so hard and have so much to 
look forward to. They love this province and they have chosen 
to make it their home. And it is indeed a great home. 
 
Our government is committed to a Saskatchewan that is not just 
a good place to live but the best place to live. And our citizens 
have good reason to be hopeful. First, we enjoy a clean 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

environment, the envy of much of Canada and the world. From 
southern cities to northern lakes, Saskatchewan has been a 
leader in preserving our lands and our waters. Our elders tell us 
the land, the water, the trees are here for us to use and to protect 
for future generations. In this Throne Speech, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we have committed to promoting cleaner fuels, 
harnessing renewable energy sources such as the wind, and 
cleaning up abandoned uranium-mine sites. 
 
Secondly, we work in a bustling economy with hundreds of jobs 
and no signs of slowing down. We will take advantage not only 
of the resources of our lands and our waters but also our people 
by providing the best education and training for our youth. As 
young people look to make their careers here, our government 
will meet their needs and those of our changing labour market. 
 
And finally, we enjoy a standard of living that is hard to match 
when it comes to value for your dollar. We live in a green, 
uncluttered space with homes and utilities among the most 
affordable in the nation. And it’s okay to know your neighbours 
in Saskatchewan, which boasts the most vigorous volunteer 
sector in Canada, thanks to our caring citizens. 
 
This government first took office with a crushing deficit. Today 
Saskatchewan can proudly point to 13 balanced budgets. We 
are investing more in health care than ever before with special 
attention to recruiting the professionals we need. And we 
reduced business taxes last year and income tax in 2000. We 
have provided relief for education and property taxes. Now we 
dropped the provincial sales tax down to 5 per cent, a saving of 
$325 million for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Our record speaks of a commitment shared by our citizens to 
make Saskatchewan a fine place to live and work, not only now 
but into the future. Madam Deputy Speaker, we have celebrated 
one centennial but now we are building for the next 100 years. 
The Throne Speech furthers that commitment to the future. 
 
There are four cornerstones as the foundation for our agenda. 
And they are: to make this province for young people to live, to 
strengthen our leadership in health care, to advance an economy 
that is both green and prosperous, and ensure that families 
benefit from that economy. 
 
But in addition to speaking about our government’s vision for 
the future, I wish to speak how northern Saskatchewan is 
reflected in that vision. Our government believes it is important 
to respond to the needs and aspirations of northerners and the 
Throne Speech illustrates our ongoing commitment. 
 
The first cornerstone is to make Saskatchewan the best place for 
young people to live, work, and build strong futures. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we are committed to expanding regional 
training in order to bring education closer to the students who 
need it in their chosen careers regardless of where they live. 
Many of those who need it most are First Nations and Métis 
youth, a group that faces the greatest obstacles but also poses 
the greatest opportunity. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan we have long used regional training. 
Here are three examples. The northern teacher education 
program is in its 30th year of training northerners to teach in 
northern schools rather than relying on southern recruits. That’s 

30 years of helping northerners work and live in their home 
communities. 
 
We have an excellent record of working with post-secondary 
schools to meet the needs of the mining industry. We are in the 
second decade of the multi-party training plan in which 
government, schools, and industry partners come together to 
prepare northerners for the jobs in their own backyards. Today 
more than half the labour force in the northern uranium mines is 
northerners. And the future of mining continues to be very 
bright, given mineral exploration which is expected to reach 
another record at $208 million this year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the last five years the Northern 
Development Agreement has funded a wide variety of training 
programs from practical nursing to oil fuel safety. Thanks to 
agencies such as Northlands College, SIIT [Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies], and SIAST, these courses 
have taken place in northern communities so that trainees don’t 
have to be so far from home and family. 
 
Just this fall SIAST unveiled its mobile training lab which will 
deliver trades classes in any community that wants it. It is 
important to know that although our training commitment is to 
the entire province, it is extra important for the North where the 
large majority of residents are Aboriginal people. They face 
higher unemployment rates than any other group. 
 
The North also has a very young population. Nearly half are 
under the age of 20. Madam Deputy Speaker, trends suggest 
that by the year 2050, half of Saskatchewan’s population will be 
Aboriginal. It is crucial that we continue to develop the 
Aboriginal workforce and our northern workforce. They are a 
big part of the solution to our provincial labour shortage. 
 
We are already part of a northern labour market committee that 
shares news and plans about this thriving region. In the coming 
months we will unveil a new partnership between business, 
labour, and training institutions to advise the government on our 
entire province’s changing labour market needs. 
 
We are also making a brighter future for young people through 
investment in infrastructure — schools, health centres, the 
Internet, basic water and sewer, and of course roads. 
 
A year ago our Premier unveiled the Roads to Prosperity plan, 
our commitment to spend $6.5 million over five years on 
northern roads. This plan is also called the northern economic 
infrastructure strategy. This plan calls for upgrades to key 
economic corridors — the same corridors that support not only 
existing mines but the record investment in mineral exploration. 
This plan will also complete the road link from La Loche to 
Fort McMurray. It will open up jobs in the oil sands while 
letting our citizens continue to live in their homes in our 
beautiful North. This also opens up traffic in other direction 
allowing Albertans better access to the wonderful wilderness of 
our Northwest. Several Saskatchewan communities have 
already seen a big increase in property sales for recreational lots 
and the road isn’t even done yet. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as in most northern projects, 
there is indeed a training angle. A key part of Roads to 
Prosperity is to ensure that northerners have a chance at 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

training, at jobs, and at business opportunities related to this 
five-year project. In fact we have hired a project coordinator 
based in La Ronge whose job is to help link northerners to those 
opportunities. How we build a road is as important as the road 
itself. This will further our goals of giving young people a 
future, a future that they can build at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
The second cornerstone of our government’s agenda is to 
strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving public 
health care. In recent years our government has funded new 
health facilities in Stony Rapids and Ile-a-la-Crosse — the latter 
a joint facility to be shared with a new school. Since year 2000 
we have also committed more than $34 million towards 
building basic water treatment plants and sewage services. In 
the North and elsewhere we continue our commitment to 
provide a safe water supply for communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we also continue to expand the 
Aboriginal workforce and health services. With our growing 
Aboriginal population, it is only right that a large number of 
First Nations and Métis people take their place as nurses, 
nutritionists, lab techs, and yes, as doctors.  
 
We will continue to implement the Premier’s Project Hope to 
prevent and treat the devastation caused by alcohol and drug 
abuse. Sadly the North is not immune to this issue, and our 
Project Hope will bring more resources to bear on this 
frustrating problem. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we will work with First Nations 
and Métis leaders, including those in the North, and demand 
that the federal government live up to its commitment to First 
Nations communities — commitments made at a First Nations 
meeting. It is clear that the federal government must live up to 
its responsibilities for First Nations, but it seems to be failing as 
we continue to hear about more cuts including major cuts to 
Aboriginal languages that, you know, we’ve heard today. 
However it is equally clear that our provincial government will 
not ignore the needs of any community. We are all part of . . . 
unbreakable, social fabric. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the third cornerstone is to advance 
Saskatchewan as a leader in environmental protection and the 
green economy. A key part of this cornerstone is to move 
forward in our commitment to clean up abandoned uranium 
mines in the North. Fulfilling this promise will bring to an end a 
decade-old issue. It will be good for the environment and, 
again, it will create business and employment opportunities for 
northerners. 
 
I am happy to say that the province has led the way in moving 
this issue forward. We were the first to commit money to the 
cleanup and we are pleased that the federal government in 
September signed an agreement to share the $24 million 
cleanup. The next step is to complete the environmental 
assessment and design the cleanup plan, which may take two 
years. The actual cleanup work is expected to take another three 
to five years after that. 
 
Last year, Madam Deputy Speaker, our province also drafted 
the policy and procedures for government’s long-term 
management of decommissioned mines and mills on Crown 
land. We are now developing the regulations for the new 

reclaimed industrial sites act, which will set out in detail a 
mining company’s responsibility for a decommissioned site, 
under what conditions the land can later be transferred back to 
the province. 
 
Saskatchewan citizens want to make sure that companies look 
after their sites. And the companies want their responsibilities 
set out clearly so they know what we expect of them. By 
working with the mining industry, everyone else’s roles, we are 
leading the nation in environmental production. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, looking into the current operations of 
uranium mines is another northern initiative. The environmental 
quality committee, the EQC, is made up of residents of 32 
northern communities, largely First Nations and Métis, and it 
provides a way for communities to monitor the activities of 
uranium sites and ask questions of companies. It even 
influences decisions about the industry through presentations to 
provincial and federal regulators. 
 
The EQC, I’m happy to say, has attracted the attention of other 
nations who are keenly interested in linking Aboriginal peoples 
to industrial development. It plays an important role in making 
our economy prosperous today while protecting our lands for 
future generations. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the fourth pillar is to ensure that 
today’s Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong 
economy. To this end we are investing in infrastructure to 
improve the quality of life now and for the future. Two 
co-operative projects, CommunityNet and the northern 
broadband network, already have taken high-speed Internet into 
dozens of northern communities. Students from Beauval to 
Black Lake can now do research online and meet and work with 
students in North Battleford or New Brunswick or New Zealand 
for that matter. 
 
We will continue to build on the success of the northern 
broadband network. In this Throne Speech we have committed 
to further expanding of high-speed Internet into more rural and 
northern communities. 
 
Under the Roads to Prosperity plan, we have said that we’ll not 
only fix roads but build them to communities like Fond-du-Lac 
and Wollaston. These communities rely on winter ice roads — 
communities that last year were running very short of supplies 
when the ice wasn’t good enough for travel. New roads here 
and better roads to other communities will improve access to 
key public services and to essential goods — goods such as 
affordable, healthy food. Something as simple as buying a jug 
of milk and a bag of apples is not easy when you live in a fly-in 
community. By building roads we’ll open up a new quality of 
life for many northerners. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne we 
announced that we will establish a multi-year infrastructure 
fund to enhance family life including funding for cultural and 
recreational facilities. In the North we will give young people 
more ways to be involved in their community and to be proud 
of where they live and who they are. We will support 
Saskatchewan’s many dynamic peoples and communities and in 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

this way as well, give young people another reason to make 
their place Saskatchewan. 
 
Just recently I was very happy to be with my colleague, 
Minister Thomson, when he announced our government’s $7 
million investment in a proposal to bring natural gas service to 
Weyakwin and La Ronge and area. This comes after years of 
hard work by SaskEnergy and members of the northern gas 
committee who have often said that natural gas would support 
more business development in this key northern town. 
Residents in the area will soon be able to enjoy an energy 
source that is clean, affordable, and reliable. They will share the 
benefits of our strong economy. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I have touched on a number of the 
building blocks that our government has set out for the future of 
Saskatchewan. We want all citizens to benefit regardless of 
jurisdiction or where they live. In technology, in training, in 
water, health centres, and roads we are seeking partnerships that 
will serve all of our northern communities, municipal and First 
Nations alike. We are not letting jurisdiction stand in the way of 
doing what is right. We are committing our energy and our 
dollars to the places that need it most, and as a First Nations 
person, that makes me very proud to be able to say that today. 
 
You know one of the greatest values we have as Aboriginal 
people is that everyone is valued and supported and we, as the 
Saskatchewan New Democratic government, say that no one 
will be left behind on the road to prosperity. And we mean it 
because we’re doing it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, many of the things I have talked about 
not only have an impact on the North, we already see progress 
in the North. When it comes to developing an economy that is 
smart and sustainable, our focus is already on the North. When 
we talk about a plan to invest in our core transportation 
infrastructure, we have already started in the North. And when 
we talk about partnerships to deal with our labour needs and to 
train our young people, well the North already boasts a model 
or two. 
 
So as pleased as I am to see the Throne Speech speak to the 
needs of the North, I am even more pleased to hear the voices of 
northern success stories reflected in the Throne Speech for the 
rest of the province to hear. And that too makes me very proud 
to be a northerner. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our vision is all about building a 
future for young people and families in Saskatchewan. That 
vision speaks very clearly to northerners as it does to all of the 
province whether you are a farmer or a trapper, a teacher or a 
construction worker, an accountant or a musician. 
 
In our Saskatchewan, people will be able to pursue their goals 
and dreams regardless of their background. No one will lack for 
opportunity. No one will be left behind. People will be able to 
live in a safe and healthy community, in clean air, an 
uncluttered space with a quality of life unmatched anywhere. 
Our young people want and deserve a good future, and they 
want it close to home. They will find it in our Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the 
amendment, but indeed I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 

Thank you very much. Ēkosi. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today I 
appreciate having the opportunity to reply to the Throne Speech 
and speak to the amendment. But before doing so, I would be 
amiss if I didn’t congratulate our newest member to the 
legislature — our Sask Party member from the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very interesting by-election down there. And we 
were told by all the pundits that this was going to be a very 
close race throughout the by-election, in fact told by our 
colleagues on the other side of the House that they predicted a 
very easy win on that side. Now remembering, Madam Speaker, 
that in the 2003 election it was a very close seat. I think we’d 
won that seat by about 3 to 400 votes. So it was very close. So 
that wasn’t to be unexpected. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, what we saw out there through some very 
hard, diligent work by the candidate from the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, we saw about a 15 to 1,600-vote margin out there. In 
fact the numbers, I think, were about 49 per cent for the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, 27 per cent — now I’m not 
sure; these numbers must be right — 27 per cent for the 
Liberals, and 23 per cent for the NDP. 
 
So what happened, Madam Speaker, to the close race in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy? But more surprising than that was what 
happened to the NDP in the by-election in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. They not only lost the by-election to the Sask Party 
candidate and to the Sask Party, they came third. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I think what that shows you and shows 
us and shows the members on the government side, but more 
importantly, is showing the people of Saskatchewan that they’re 
ready for change. They’re going to make that change come the 
next election, should the Premier still be leader or the new 
leader — whoever he might be — finds the intestinal fortitude 
to finally call a provincial election, and let the voters start this 
province in the right direction with a new Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Speaker, a number of the members 
have talked in their Throne Speech replies about the labour 
shortage in this province. And again, the labour shortage in this 
province didn’t just happen. The government, if they were 
watching to see what was going to happen with the age of many 
of the workers in this province, was preparing for it for the last 
3, 4, 5 years. They knew it was coming, and then as usual stuck 
their head in the sand. 
 
And guess what? We have employers all over this province, 
from my constituency, Melville-Saltcoats, go into Yorkton a lot 
— from the Deputy Premier’s constituency — where businesses 
can’t find people to work in their businesses because under this 
NDP government and the attitude that’s grown in this province, 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

one out of every four young people are planning on leaving the 
province. But what’s worse than that, I believe there’s about 
two out of every four have already left, Madam Speaker. Our 
businesses cannot function without good people that they have, 
and they need more good people to make their businesses 
prosper and make this province go forward. 
 
Madam Speaker, we hear so many great things. I think it was 
one of the members, could have been the Deputy Premier today, 
holding up a newspaper clipping of “Jobs, Jobs, Jobs . . .” The 
clippings that he didn’t show up — and there was many of them 
on — is about the continuous drop in the population in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And you know, we’re always told, 
as many have said on this side, you can’t compare us to Alberta 
because that’s not fair, because they’ve got Ralph Klein and 
we’ve got Lorne Calvert. And that’s not a fair comparison. And 
I agree with them. 
 
But Madam Speaker, let’s take a look at Manitoba who have 
probably a quarter of the resources that we have in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and they’re doing better than us when it 
comes to population and jobs. They’re even growing the job 
rate faster. The population’s not dropping. And when you do 
not have the resources, they’re doing it with forward thinking 
and looking ahead and building their economy with what they 
have. 
 
What we have in the province of Saskatchewan is an NDP 
government who has turned all the investors off worldwide to 
come into Saskatchewan. In fact they’ve actually gone as far as 
to scare investors out of this province. And here we sit. If it 
wasn’t for oil and gas windfall and many millions of dollars 
which have turned into probably $1 billion windfall last year 
and very close to it again this year — all thanks to the high 
price of oil and gas — this province would still be running the 
deficit budgets that they were for a number of years. 
 
And a number of members on the government side, Madam 
Speaker, have talked about the 13 balanced budgets, Madam 
Speaker. Well I have a little problem with that, and I think the 
Provincial Auditor has a little problem with that. Let’s take a 
look at what the Provincial Auditor actually had to say, Madam 
Speaker. What the Provincial Auditor talks about for those 13, 
14 years, he talks about . . . And I counted the number of 
deficits in that period. And a number of them are under this 
Premier that we have today, Madam Deputy Speaker. Seven 
deficits and nine surpluses, now that’s a far stretch from the 13 
consecutive balanced budgets that they’re talking about. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of these deficits are to the 
tune of . . . One according to the Provincial Auditor is 654 
million. Another one’s 483 million. And this is all under the 
watch of this current Premier, Madam Speaker. So that’s kind 
of a myth that’s trying to be spread by the members opposite, 
and it’s about the farthest thing from the truth you could 
possibly realize. 
 
A number of other areas that the government members don’t 
like to espouse on is that the unfunded pensions in the province 
of Saskatchewan — and I don’t know if some of these might be 
teachers’ pensions, the health care professionals, where these 
pensions lie, Crown workers, things like that — but that 
unfunded liability has grown to $4.3 billion. 

Now how does it work out that these government members are 
standing in their place and say that we’re paying down the debt? 
Well I would find that the debt is probably actually increasing 
under the NDP government as it did under the Blakeney 
government years ago, and then tried to blame the Devine era 
for all the debt when I think many of us know that Allan 
Blakeney probably hid billions of dollars in the Crowns in debt 
that the average public out there would not actually realize was 
there. 
 
And then we talk . . . Let’s spin that a little further, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and talk about the debt for the province 
because I think all members have heard in the last few years 
about the debt being paid down. And the last two years, the debt 
should have been paid down, but what we’re seeing as the debt 
today is exactly what it was in 1991. The provincial debt right 
now, today, the current general revenue debt is 7.8 billion and 
in 1991 was 7.9 billion. Absolutely nothing has changed — 
another deception for the members on the government side that 
I think the public of Saskatchewan is becoming very aware of. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit and take a few 
minutes to talk about agriculture because it’s so important to the 
people of Saskatchewan and so important to rural Saskatchewan 
where many of the members, in fact most of the members on 
this side come from. 
 
The Agriculture minister for the province has been running 
around and pounding his fist on the table and espousing the 
monopoly that the Canadian Wheat Board has. Possibly what he 
should be doing is paying attention of something that’s actually 
under his jurisdiction, that he has input into, things like crop 
insurance that we saw the premium skyrocket. One year alone I 
think they increased the premiums by 52 per cent. Crop 
insurance is one thing that they have input into, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and all we’ve seen from that is the coverage cut, the 
premiums raised. And what is happening out there is many 
farmers are actually going without crop insurance because it’s 
got too expensive for the coverage they’ve got. 
 
We’ve saw in the past that this government saw fit to close 
service centres. I believe there was 22 in the one budget alone 
that they closed in the province. 
 
CAIS funding, every year we see the Minister of Agriculture 
get up and talk about . . . he’s going to fully fund the CAIS 
program except that he’s only putting the base amount in of 
$99.8 million. But what we never see out of this minister when 
it’s actually needed, that he will make the commitment that they 
will fully fund the CAIS program when the budget comes out 
and farmers can count on that. Farmers can go to the bank and 
actually borrow money with that thought in mind — that the 
CAIS program in the province of Saskatchewan is fully funded 
as it is in every other province. But at least they do it when their 
budgets come out. 
 
Number of other areas, Madam Deputy Speaker, where the 
provincial government has input into and has saw fit to make 
cuts — soil conservation group. Now there was a group that 
were working very hard on the area that they were representing. 
And they had their funding cut. As I said before, we saw our 
service centres close. And now on top of the problems that 
we’ve had . . . We’ve been so wet up in the Porcupine area that 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

there’s a number of the farmers up there that are finding it very 
hard to stay above board. They’ve had a number of years from 
the wet, wet area up there. 
 
Now we’re seeing in the Southwest, down in the Cypress area, 
all across the western side of the province and the South and 
also by the way in the southeastern part that we look . . . it’s 
starting to look like it could be a tremendously dry year next 
year in that area, already has caused many effects to the farmers 
in the Southwest. And we hope, I would believe on both sides 
of the House, that that doesn’t come full circle and actually we 
turn into some dry years in the near future. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about highways. 
And in my constituency nothing seems to change. And I guess 
that same situation lies in every constituency on this side of the 
House — in fact for every rural constituency in the province. 
The holes are bigger, and the amount of work done out there 
seems to be less and less every year. 
 
But what I find, Madam Deputy Speaker, is what should be an 
embarrassment to this government and actually is an 
embarrassment to all of us. No. 16 Highway without a doubt 
used to be the best highway in the province. Manitoba border, 
down by Russell, Manitoba right through to Saskatoon was a 
very good highway at one point. And I know No. 1 was in bad 
shape and the twinning was going on out there. But we had one 
highway that it would have just took a little bit of time, money, 
and maintenance, we could have kept it in that condition. 
 
This summer, by I believe it was Sheho, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it should have been a total embarrassment for this 
NDP government. You had to weave all over the highway to get 
through. And then doing that, you had to watch if you got near 
the shoulder, because you were going to hit these orange signs 
that told you about every 30 feet that the next how many clicks 
were rough and in bad need of repair. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s things like this when the 
tourists travel through our province, they don’t have to be 
reminded twice that they probably never will return to this 
province, spend their money in this province — where we 
would all win — because they have to travel highways like that. 
And we have the member for Estevan, the member for 
Weyburn, the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, member 
for Humboldt, and you could just go down the list and through 
this entire caucus, that have brought issues about highways that 
are in just terrible, terrible condition in this province, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that infrastructure is part of the 
problem that’s holding this province back. We have many 
businesses out in the Humboldt area. A number of areas, the oil 
patch down in the southeast part of the province and in fact the 
oil patch up near the Lloyd area that rely on these highways and 
rural roads to do their business, and it’s hurting that whole 
industry everywhere you turn. And RM [rural municipality] 
councils and even urban councils are trying to get that point 
through to this government. 
 
As we saw today in question period, Madam Deputy Speaker, 

health care issues. It just doesn’t go away. And another thing 
that should be an embarrassment to the government when 
they’re sitting on the last two years of almost a $1 billion 
windfall from oil and gas and they haven’t got the knowledge to 
even know how to put that to good use for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s why we see cases like we saw today, 
and actually off and on all through session last spring and again 
this fall. That should be a real embarrassment to this provincial 
government. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, infrastructure in this province as I said 
is deteriorating, and it cannot wait much longer for a change in 
government, as well as neither can the people of Saskatchewan 
wait for that change. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a minute on water 
systems. The Environment minister made an announcement 
today, and I was hoping he’d address some of these issues, but I 
think many of us, you know, on this side of the House represent 
villages in the province of Saskatchewan. And what we see out 
in those villages is where there’s SaskWater and the 
Department of Environment . . . I’m not sure where these 
checks come from, but we have people go out and study their 
water systems even though their water is being checked on a 
regular basis. No fault found with the quality of water, and here 
we have a government department coming out and handing . . . 
I know I’ve got the village of Bangor out there. I’ve got the 
village of Yarbo. And I believe in both cases were handed a bill 
for 6 to $7,000. That population of Bangor is under 70. How on 
earth do they survive and make payments like this to a 
government body when their water is fine? It’s being tested on a 
regular basis, and there is no problem out there right now. And 
they have a government wing coming out and draining the last 
few resources that they have. 
 
An Hon. Member: — One size fits all. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And one size fits all, the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood said, and that’s exactly right. And what’s 
happening in our small villages, they’re deteriorating at a rate 
fast enough without the help of this NDP government. But 
they’re starting to deteriorate, and the population drop is 
happening a lot quicker when you do things like that that they 
can’t afford. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as I talked before . . . and I’m just 
going to take a minute to talk about crop insurance. When the 
government made all its funding cuts in the last few years, I 
didn’t realize that crop insurance is one of the programs that 
could probably really help farmers out there, and every year we 
have a disaster. We have to run cap in hand. . . exactly with 
what’s happening in the Southwest this summer and what 
happened up in the Porcupine area. They always have to run to 
the province or the federal government and say, we need help. 
If we had constructive crop insurance and CAIS programs in 
place, that wouldn’t have to happen. 
 
But some of the numbers . . . I noticed in 2003, provincial 
government put 99.8 in, million dollars; 2004, 86.2 million; 
2005, 80.4; 2006, 64.4. Every time we turn around, this 
government sees fit to dump on agriculture, dump on rural 
Saskatchewan, and cut funding to programs that actually would 
help the people out there. 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

Another thing that is being brought to my attention an awful lot 
out in rural Saskatchewan right now is utility rates, something 
that the members opposite really like to brag about. And we 
have the lowest utility rate package in the country. Well I would 
question that a little bit. 
 
And I would think if you asked the seniors in rural 
Saskatchewan what they think of that, they would have a few 
words for this government too because when you come out 
there to find out . . . seniors’ halls or whether it’s legions or 
whether it’s skating rinks, curling clubs — any kind of meeting 
centres out there where it’s a non-profit organization, and 
they’re trying to survive in rural Saskatchewan — one of the 
biggest things they say, it’s the natural gas. It’s the power on 
those buildings. It’s making it almost impossible to keep them 
open. 
 
And again what that’s doing is driving our seniors out of rural 
Saskatchewan. That, along with the lack of health care of course 
in rural Saskatchewan, is driving our seniors either out of small 
town Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, into the larger centres. 
Or in many cases what we’re actually seeing is it’s driving them 
to the province of Alberta where the tax regime is a lot easier on 
them in their retirement. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, as you probably have realized by 
now, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech. But I certainly 
will be supporting the amendment and hoping that in the near 
future the Premier — should he survive the NDP convention — 
would call an election. And we would finally get the optimism 
in this province and the promise that we could probably provide 
— will provide — with the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from 
Regina Rosemont, I wasn’t quite certain if the member had used 
in quotation marks a name of the member of the Assembly. But 
I would remind all members that if they’re going to use a direct 
quote, that’s allowable, but if you’re going to be very loosely 
quoting, to remember not to name a member of the Assembly. 
Thank you. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well you’re not Mr. Speaker at all. You’re Madam Deputy 
Speaker. There you go. I better get my glasses changed. 
 
I want to start out just so people aren’t waiting all the way 
through the speech to see what the punch line will be. I am not 
intending to support the amendment to the Throne Speech but I 
will be supporting the Throne Speech. That was for those of 
you with a short attention span. I thought I’d cut to the chase. 
 
And I do want to start out, as others have, in thanking my 
family. Heaven knows, aside from the difficult questions in 
question period, we get the difficult questions about why we’re 
not at home yet another evening or not feeling like going to 
watch a movie for the evening and — which was one of the 
more recent criticisms — but I still do manage to have dinner 
with the family every weekend. And to my father who’s at 
home watching today, yes I am going to speak to the Throne 
Speech and here I am doing it so your reminder to me that that 
was important has been heard. 

I also want to say how proud I am of my father and many 
people that he worked with over the past couple years in the 
completion of the labour book, On the Side of the People. This 
was an important part of Saskatchewan history and I understand 
that there’s some recognition of this in terms of the book 
awards this year, at least in being nominated. So congratulations 
to the team who spent a lot of time at archives and wrote this 
history of both social activism in the province but also work on 
behalf of the individual well-being of workers in their 
individual workplaces. 
 
In my constituency I want to honour all the hard-working 
people who send their kids to school every day, try to make sure 
they get positive activities after school, and work in the 
community on school events, on fairs. I want to particularly 
mention my Adopt-a-Family from community living. Robin 
Ganshorn was a young man who I met through the 
Adopt-a-Family program and he’s now playing in the Best 
Buddies Band at LeBoldus High School. And I really want to 
commend the teachers at that school for making sure that an 
opportunity like that was available to Robin at school. And I 
hear they’re getting probably more gigs than my band so I’m a 
little bit jealous at this point. 
 
The other thing I want to mention is all the good people who 
got centennial awards in the constituency in 2005. We went 
through a process where I invited people in the community to 
nominate those they felt had served the community of 
Rosemont. And they did, and fortunately we had just the right 
number so we were able to nominate the people whose names 
were put forward. And congratulations again to those folks. 
 
I just want to take a minute to mention the event we were at at 
the Legion fundraiser the other night — November 2, a night to 
remember. It was a very memorable event and it’ll go a long 
way to helping the Legion redefine itself in the community and 
create a new partnership with the cultural community that will 
sustain the Legion’s activities in support of remembering the 
importance of democracy and the sacrifices that people made — 
but also will help create a vibrant downtown by the use of a 
facility that was the first Legion in Canada — 001. So that was 
an interesting fact I learned the other night and am proud of. 
 
I want to say that I particularly enjoyed the Throne Speech. I 
was very ill, so I had the perspective of watching it from home 
in a horizontal position. But I have to say it can be easily 
enjoyed that way as well. 
 
And it was the story, Madam Deputy Speaker, of orderly 
progress on a plan. It was the story of a province that went from 
the depth of debt and despair to the huge success that we see 
today. Now people can argue about all aspects of that, but you 
can’t argue with 14 credit upgrades. I know from years of 
dealing with the bank that you don’t get credit upgrades unless 
you deserve them. And so I want to congratulate all the people 
in Finance and the various Finance ministers in cabinet for the 
work they’ve done in getting those 14 credit upgrades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Also we know that the province went from 
70 per cent debt ratio to GDP to a 20 per cent debt ratio to 
GDP. Again, if you were wanting to borrow money anywhere 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

in the world, I’m sure that bankers understand the difference 
that represents. And I suspect most people who have gone for a 
bank loan here understand that difference as well. 
 
This is the story of responsible government making progress on 
a planned agenda for the well-being of the province and its 
citizens. And these were positive results that were possible both 
for and with the people of Saskatchewan. You saw it in this 
weekend’s headlines: “. . . 22,900 more full-time jobs in 
October than . . . the same month last year.” 

 
And the important detail was the decline in part-time work. 
Part-time work declined by 1,000, year-over-year figures. And 
in the words of Doug Elliott, “. . . involuntary part-time crowd 
has virtually disappeared.” So this is very good news because it 
speaks not only to the quantity of work but the quality of work 
that’s available in the province. 
 
And this does all link to the province’s brand. We went from 
debt-ridden and hopeless to futuristic, competitive, innovative, 
and collaborative, willing to do things in new ways, with tax 
breaks for business, tradespeople, consumers, and families. 
 
And I just want to mention the foundation pieces of the Throne 
Speech, and then I’m going to emphasize some particular areas. 
Making Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, 
work, and build a strong future. Well I’ve got some testimony 
to that with me today. Strengthening Saskatchewan’s leadership 
and public health care while reducing wait times and improving 
access to service — always a challenge, but definitely with a 
strong commitment behind it. Advancing Saskatchewan as a 
leader in environmental protection and the green economy. I 
can’t think of anyone today who doesn’t understand the 
importance of that. And ensuring Saskatchewan families benefit 
from the province’s strong, prosperous economy because after 
all that’s what it’s all about; it’s about making life better every 
day for people. 
 
I do want to speak for a moment to Oyate, and some of the 
dialogue that’s been going on in the media and in this House 
over the last few days. You know, I understand and appreciate 
and agree with the need for accountability. And I also 
understand and appreciate 100 years of oppression and the 
difficulty that creates in the capacity that people build to serve 
their own community and look after their own children. 
 
We are talking about a community of people who for many 
years had their children removed at the age of six, not to see 
them again. And most of the children for a long period of time 
were raised in residential schools. Parenting skills were not 
transferred on to the next generation. And today the destruction 
that’s occurred because of the removal of people from their 
families, of the disintegration of family and community life that 
all stems back to the historical roots, suggests that we need to 
be very thoughtful in how we work with organizations who are 
trying to rebuild the community’s capacity to provide services 
for itself in a culturally sensitive and appropriate way, and 
within a family context. 
 
Now that’s very difficult because you don’t want to place any 
child at risk, but the very history of the situation has placed 
those families and children at risk and we can’t overlook that 
when we’re having this discussion. 

I want to say that Oyate is one service and obviously with some 
work to do, and the minister will decide whether or not we 
proceed down that road. But I want to mention the other 
programs that have been set up to support similar types of 
challenges. There’s the KidsFirst program, which is doing a lot 
of work with young parents and people who are trying to 
combine raising their children with their first job or their first 
chance at advanced education. We established special need 
child care centres, a commitment to universal child care, and 
expansion of pre-kindergarten in schools where the children 
were coming into kindergarten unprepared for school. We have 
family literacy programs, a lot more training opportunities for 
young families with children, Project Hope. 
 
These are all examples of other services that complement the 
work that’s being done to try to make sure that children aren’t 
the victims of sexual abuse. And of course we need to continue 
to dedicate ourselves to helping our friends and neighbours in 
that particular situation. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But as I contemplate this question, I look at the party opposite. 
And I say, what is your brand? What do you believe in? 
Because our brand is to make sure that the first Aboriginal 
educational institutions in Canada were established in this 
province, whether it’s Dumont Technical Institute, whether it’s 
the Saskatchewan institute of Indian technologies, whether it’s 
the First Nations University, the Aboriginal economic 
development fund. We are trying to walk with First Nations and 
Métis people in helping to create a new brand for them and their 
children and their families within an inclusive Saskatchewan 
where we all work together. 
 
Today at the chamber of commerce luncheon there was a prayer 
given by a young Aboriginal man, and he talked about how 
much he appreciates the positive future that we’re working on 
together. And I appreciated as much as his words his whole 
attitude towards the process of building together. 
 
And it does have a little bit to do with your view of how you 
develop children and how you develop community. Some 
people have the view that if the child’s not doing well, more 
discipline is required, more punishment, more retribution. Some 
people have the view that if a child’s not doing well, more love 
is required, more support, more guidance. 
 
And I think what we sometimes have here is a clash of 
philosophy about the way one develops children or 
communities. And it’s obviously not black and white. It’s 
neither all one way or the other. But it does require a thoughtful 
look at which of those elements are most likely to produce the 
results for children and families and communities that do well 
— and delivered, of course, in a professional context. 
 
I think that part of the opposition brand is hiding in the weeds. 
We’ve had a number of important issues over the last while 
with their federal brothers in Ottawa and sisters, and some of 
those have been on issues like museums. I have not heard a 
single comment on what their position is on the removal of the 
funding for museums. 
 
Child care. I haven’t heard much about whether they think $100 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

a month is enough to create a child care system any more than it 
creates a school system. 
 
On literacy, surely, surely, given the pretend concern about the 
labour market, this would have been one where we expected the 
members opposite to say something, but they haven’t said a 
darn thing. It’s their brand of hiding in the weeds. 
 
Equalization — well they were all for it before the election. 
And I don’t know where that enthusiasm has gone to now, but 
certainly they’re pretty quiet on the subject. 
 
The issue of volunteers. We’ve got people like the United Way 
of Regina committed to improving lives. And, of course, one of 
their key tools is to work with volunteers in the community. 
Certainly no one knows that more than our own Legislative 
Secretary working on the volunteer sector. But again on 
September 25 the federal government eliminated the funding 
for the Canada volunteerism initiative, saying that the CVI was 
cut as a non-core program. Well what is more core to 
Saskatchewan and Canada than volunteers? I ask you, what is 
more core to our communities than volunteers? So I ask what 
the hiding-in-the-weeds brand over there has to say about that 
particular subject. A little bit of a lapse in the commitment to 
democracy. 
 
What about the vote on the wheat board? What is the brand of 
the members opposite on farmers having the right to vote on 
something as important as the wheat board? 
 
Then we got into some softer issues like the holiday. Well some 
people were for it. The member from Wood River said, well 
nobody in my constituency asked for a holiday. So I don’t 
know. Are they for it or agin it? It’s hard to tell sometimes. 
 
The tax cut. I actually thought the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs did a pretty spirited defence of why a tax cut was 
a bad thing, but at the end of the day he didn’t totally convince 
me. But the Premier did convince me today when he said, one 
tax cut at a time, because it has to be sustainable. 
 
So I see, as the members opposite are not liking some of my 
comments, that they don’t like hearing all this negativity. Well 
quite frankly we’re not very fussy about it either. But it is their 
brand, and the more people who understand that’s their brand, 
the better. 
 
On climate change, what do they believe? We’ve had 
announcements recently — we’ve had the wind development, 
clean coal, CO2, ethanol, biomass. I was at a wonderful housing 
project in Saskatoon when I was the minister responsible for 
Sask Housing where the whole complex was being heated by a 
new biomass development there. 
 
We have biodiesel, hydrogen. Again I hear a little bit about 
ethanol from the members opposite, but not much about the 
climate change issues in the world. And I think it would be nice 
to have a little bit of idea of what they believe in when it comes 
to climate change issues related to corporate and government 
practices around the world. 
 
The labour laws . . . It’s interesting. I read an article in the paper 
the other day where one of the journalists postulated that the 

Sask Party was speaking in code and talking about a positive 
environment for business and getting rid of regulation, which in 
a sense is the code for the removal of many of the labour laws 
and health and safety, occupational laws that right now support 
the well-being of workers in the province. So again, what do 
you believe in? I think there’s a big empty space on the side of 
the list of what you believe in. 
 
I want to talk for just a minute about our brand as it relates to 
the music industry in Saskatchewan. You know, as I’ve been 
going around doing this review as the Legislative Secretary for 
the music industry, I have been absolutely thrilled not only at 
the talent but at the fairly well-developed companies we have in 
this industry in Saskatchewan, which I didn’t quite frankly 
know existed. 
 
And I was particularly pleased about the people like Brad 
Johner and his agent, and Donny Parenteau who . . . they have 
choices. Both of them have been courted. In fact Donny was in 
Nashville for a long time, and they made a decision to come 
back to Saskatchewan because they felt Saskatchewan was the 
best place to do music from. 
 
The other thing was with the . . . They mentioned specifically 
the reach of high-speed Internet in Saskatchewan and how that 
enables someone in the music industry today to operate from 
virtually anywhere in the world because when you’re on tour, 
your location that you’re coming from, one of the most 
important things is that it be affordable and that it serve the 
needs of your industry. And certainly there is huge untapped 
potential yet in the music industry in Saskatchewan. But we’re 
working hard on tapping that. 
 
We’ve heard comments from musicians around more venues, 
investment, education and information, mentorship, scholarship, 
the need for pay and recognition for the work they do — some 
of that linked to the status of the artist work. 
 
I want to commend a couple of the organizations that the 
musicians and their agents and industry and recording people 
have recognized. And that’s Rawlco for their efforts on the 
10K20 where they actually provided $300,000 to emerging 
bands in Saskatchewan to record their product and to provide 
airplay. And we want to commend Rawlco and hope that they 
challenge all the other private sector companies to do the same. 
They were very receptive of the work of SaskMusic, which is 
the former Saskatchewan Recording Industry Association, and 
all they’ve done to bring professional workshops to the 
province and to help people learn how to take the next step in 
the industry. 
 
Creative Music Inc. who’s bringing us the four projects in 2007: 
the Western Canada Music Awards in Moose Jaw which 
everybody is very excited about that, the Country Music 
Awards in Regina, the Junos in Saskatoon, and the Aboriginal 
award in Prince Albert. And I have to say that I was amazed at 
the amount of music activity going on P.A. and north. It’s huge. 
It’s just huge. 
 
A lot of the musician groups are doing programs in the schools. 
I think we are just on the verge of some very big strides in the 
music industry in this province. 
 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

And how about those Rider fans, Mr. Speaker? You know this 
is the attitude we need across the board in Saskatchewan is to 
support the home team, whether those are teams of educators, 
business people, volunteers, public servants, creative people, or 
the science and technology community. And I say to the 
members opposite, change your brand. The nabobs of negativity 
need to take a look in the mirror and adopt that green and white 
attitude and support the home team. 
 
You know, I went to an event which was kind of unusual over 
the weekend. It was a young man who creates music through a 
series of gongs and crystal bowls. And it’s to create vibrations, 
musical vibrations which then create . . . It’s not unlike some of 
the early scientists and early music people at the turn of the 
century who worked on the notions of the vibration of the 
spheres and the vibration of music. 
 
But one of the things that was so interesting was here was a 
fellow involved in something that was almost a meditative 
pursuit and he came into the room wearing his Roughrider shirt 
that he had specially made a trip to the Roughrider store in the 
afternoon to pick out. Why? Because he was so impressed with 
Saskatchewan’s ability to support the home team. He just 
thought . . . So this was a little unusual seeing all these gongs 
and crystal bowls and the Roughrider T-shirt right in the 
middle. 
 
But he went on to talk about all the great things about 
Saskatchewan. He’s from Hamilton, and he says that he’s been 
on tour for 18 of the last 24 months, but he is now looking for a 
place to call home. And he’s considering Saskatchewan very 
seriously because he thinks of all the places in Canada, it’s got 
the most to offer to a young person. And I was just so 
impressed. 
 
Then I look in the newspaper and I see this article. This 
ex-Torontonian thinks life is fantastic here. He says, when 
people ask me why: 
 

My response to them is, “Why not?” Why do people here 
have such an inferiority complex? . . . You have so much 
going for you . . . 
 

He said the cliché about friendly people is not a cliché. 
 

. . . I’m touched by every person I meet. . . . 
 
Your cultural scene is alive and vibrant. . . . 
 
And don’t get me going on the difference in house prices. 
 
You have all the sports activities you’ll ever need . . . 
 
. . . think about how good you have it here. Think and talk 
about all the positives . . . [and] Appreciate what you have. 

 
And that’s a fellow from Toronto, but certainly not the only 
one. This young woman . . . No, the crystal bowl and gong 
fellow was from Hamilton. Okay now. A young person in the 
Leader-Post, young persons’ article section, November 6, she 
says, “ How do we stop our young people from leaving the 
province?” Well I’ll skip all the negatives, and she says, “So, 
what’s the solution?”: 

Some have said we need to create more job opportunities 
. . . Some have proposed more local training . . . [Some say 
more] immigrants? 
 
I have a . . . simpler answer, one befitting a local girl who 
neither studies the statistics, nor understands . . . Stop 
telling our kids to go. 
 
. . . in [an] . . . oft-repeated song . . . it’s more than OK to 
return home . . . 

 
So they decided to pack up the moving van and you know what 
people said when they moved back to Saskatchewan? 
 

“Why did you move back here?” 
“How could you live in a small town?” 
“You’re kidding.” 
 

So she says, “As long as our collective social definition of 
success is to live outside Saskatchewan, our young people will 
continue to leave.” And she said: 
 

When our son was born, we started a university fund. We 
didn’t think much about it at the time . . . 
 
[But we’ve] now changed our tune and we try to call it the 
future fund . . . realizing that our son may want to go to 
technical school close to home or he may want to use the 
money to start a small-town business. 
 
[But] as a society, we’re all guilty of contributing to the 
myth of living the good life outside Saskatchewan. 
 

She says the land of opportunity is here and the finger for this 
problem points right back at us. Well I would maybe point it a 
little bit over across the way at the Sask Party who have never 
done a thing to encourage anybody to stay here for any reason 
any time. They are completely negative. 
 
But there is a little bit of good news here too from the 
university. It says, this is from co-op program, Kevin Bolen, the 
University of Regina’s co-op education program. The message 
that more and more university students are getting is to stay in 
Saskatchewan. “. . . placements in co-op programs 
skyrocketing, ‘four out of five students who come into our 
office want to stay in Saskatchewan.’” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:00] 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Today at the chamber of commerce, the 
Premier was very well received. I looked around the room. 
Many people nodding and many thoughtful, and in contrast 
with the Leader of the Opposition who really had nothing to say 
when you read these eight points. They’re either done or they’re 
so vague you can’t tell what they are. 
 
But if you want a real primer, read John Conway’s article in the 
September 14 prairie dog where he explains “Brad’s 
Fiddle-Diddle.” What did he say? He said: 
 

In other words, the whole Devine regime was apparently 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

operating in a festering cesspool of widespread corruption 
— numbered companies, siphoned funds, safety deposit 
boxes under false names, false invoices, a variety of bank 
accounts around the province for money laundering, and 
envelopes of cash handed out on a regular basis. 
 
The obvious question for Brad Wall is: how was it 
possible for you not to know something was amiss, 
especially given the fact that your boss was one of the key 
architects of the scheme? 

 
Patronage was so rife in that government that we had to create a 
lottery for students to get jobs to prevent all the abuse that had 
taken place during the ’80s. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m coming to a conclusion here, and our 
government’s plan is to make life better for today’s 
Saskatchewan families and build an even better future for our 
young people here. How? By supporting the home team and all 
the people that make up that team. The Sask Party members are 
running for their record. Their relentless negativity speaks for 
itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be from this province. I’m proud to 
be part of this government, and I will be speaking against the 
amendment and in favour of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to enter into the debate for the Speech from the 
Throne. It dawned on me yesterday that November 5, three 
years since I was elected to this House, and I must say that it 
has been a privilege to serve as the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about my constituency. It’s a brand 
new constituency. I have the pleasure to serve as the first 
member of this House representing Saskatoon Silver Springs. It 
was created through redistribution. Saskatoon and the area that I 
represent is an area that is growing. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s an anomaly in Saskatchewan to 
have an area that is actually growing. But it’s a pleasure, it’s a 
pleasure to represent areas like Erindale and Arbor Creek and 
Sutherland and Forest Grove and University Heights and 
Willowgrove. It’s a privilege to represent areas that have 
facilities like the new soccer centre that is in the heart of my 
constituency and congratulations to the soccer community for 
putting their hard-earned dollars behind that facility. 
 
Every day it’s a privilege to serve in this House. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to serve with people like Ms. Ronyk 
who’s had a great career serving this House. She’s been kind to 
me and kind to my family, and I congratulate her on a great 
career, and I wish her well in the future. 
 
I’d also like to thank those that are responsible for me being 
here, not only the constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs but 
my family, my constituency assistant, and those that do the 

things that they need to do to ensure that I am able to do my job 
in this House. I’m speaking about my wife Trish and the work 
that she does. She’s a hockey mom. She can race across the city 
in 15 minutes or less and make sure that the kids get to all their 
activities. I know each and every member in this House knows 
that it is indeed a great job. I say each family needs at least one 
responsible parent, and I know that Trish is that parent. 
 
I also want to pay tribute to my son and daughter. Carter, who is 
eight years old, my son, he’s in grade 4 and in French 
immersion and doing very well. His ability to speak French 
surpassed his dad long ago. And my daughter Paige who’s in 
grade 1, equally enthusiastic about school, about French 
immersion, about just being able to take part in all the activities 
that they are able to take. We are truly, truly blessed, Mr. 
Speaker, as a family. 
 
I want to talk about my constituency assistant as well, Beth 
Epp. Her name has been mentioned many times. She’s no 
stranger to this House or to members of the protocol because 
she volunteers so much of her time. Whenever there’s an 
opportunity to volunteer in the legislature, whether it’s a royal 
visit or something similar, she’s there. 
 
But she brings that same enthusiasm to the constituents of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs and into my office. She’s there 
working weekends. She’s there working late. She’s there 
representing me when I’m away on business. She’s attending 
meetings. She’s even putting on parades, doing things like that 
that my office is involved in, and I can’t always be there to do 
it. But I certainly couldn’t imagine, Mr. Speaker, doing the job 
that I do without the assistance of my constituency assistant. 
And I might mention that it’s her birthday tomorrow, so if 
anybody knows Beth Epp, give her a call. I’m not brave enough 
to tell you how old she is but . . . 21 and I’d say that that’s 
pretty close, that’s pretty close. My hon. colleague says that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had a great opportunity this summer to get 
out and — what we call in political circles — door knocking, 
going out and talking to people on their doorstep. And I had a 
chance to do a fair bit of that this summer. And I really enjoy 
going to people’s homes, talking to them on their doorsteps, 
asking them about what the issues are because so often in this 
House we talk about issues that come up and we really wonder 
if they’re resonating with people. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that yes indeed they are. People 
are concerned about this government, about where it’s going, 
about 15 years of inaction. They want more from a government 
than they’re getting from here. I had a chance to go through 
Silverspring this summer. I very much enjoyed it and this . . . 
just before the House sat I had a chance to knock just about 
every door in Willowgrove. Willowgrove is a brand new area of 
Saskatoon — 400 new homes this year, hopefully three, 400 
more next year. People who are choosing to make their home 
and make their living in Saskatchewan. And it takes a great 
courage for them to do that. They are positive about being here 
but they want the most that they can get from their government. 
And in knocking on their doors and talking to each one of them 
I could tell that they’re just, they’re just not feeling that they’re 
getting it. 
 
I must say that I have to pass on my thanks to the people that 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

have helped me when I was going around door to door and 
Mike Lynden and Mike Morrissey and others who are there to 
help me. And I could tell you a story, Mr. Speaker, that you 
know there was one day that it was so slippery I think we were 
sliding down driveways when we were doing that. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that I want to talk about in my 
constituency — and it’s a way that I’m able to give a little bit 
back to those that elect me — it’s called our picnic in the park 
in Saskatoon Silver Springs. And this year we had a fabulous 
turnout. The weather co-operated and we had a thousand 
individuals come out and partake in a fun time for families and 
it was a time to celebrate the centennial of Saskatoon, an 
important part of the city. And the centennial, again it’s 
drawing to a close here very quickly in Saskatoon but I just 
want to talk about what a wonderful city that I have the 
opportunity to represent. 
 
It is Saskatchewan’s largest city. It’s a city on the move. It’s a 
city with some vibrancy. On November 10 this year it’ll be 
celebrating at a gala the many cultures that make up the 
wonderful city of Saskatoon. 
 
The other thing I like about Saskatoon is that the leadership in 
the city, they’re not afraid to set goals, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
something that I don’t see enough of in this House. But they’re 
not afraid to set goals. They want Saskatoon to be 400,000 
people in 2050. That’s a bold goal, Mr. Speaker. It’s a bold 
goal. It’ll take leadership. It’ll take vision. That’s what they 
have there and that’s what they’re going to achieve. 
 
Another goal that the city of Saskatoon has is to ensure that 
every graduating student has a job in Saskatoon. Now they 
haven’t been able to meet that goal yet, but it sends a signal to 
this provincial government the types of goals that they should 
be setting for themselves. We don’t hear any of that from the 
members opposite but we do fortunately hear that from the 
leadership in Saskatoon. 
 
I want to spend a fair amount of time talking about my 
constituency. My thanks go out to the many, many volunteers. 
Those that take their kids to hockey, those that coach every day. 
I’m somewhat upset by not being able to be there as much as I 
would like to be but I really send out my thanks to people that 
take it upon themselves, whether it’s with the Redwings zone in 
Saskatoon that runs the hockey program or the Blue Jays 
baseball group as well. They’re parents who go out and coach 
and coach and . . . all the time. The Aurora soccer group as 
well. They are very dedicated, very dedicated. 
 
And also I’d like to pay tribute to the Neighbourhood Watch 
group in Erindale and Arbor Creek and the areas around the 
centre of my constituency. People, parents, residents who take it 
upon themselves to address the needs of their community to 
assist the police in ensuring that our communities are safe. I 
encourage the government to work with groups like that to 
ensure that our streets are safe, to keep promises that were made 
some seven years ago that haven’t been achieved yet. Work 
hard on those. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the community associations in my 
constituency — Erindale, Arbor Creek, Silverspring, 
Sutherland, Forest Grove. Dedicated groups who work each and 

every day to make sure that our communities are a better place 
to be. 
 
Also this year is a special year for a group in my constituency 
— the Vanier Cup committee. It extends across Saskatoon but 
it’s made up of many individuals who reside in my 
constituency. People like Hugh Vassos and Grant Kook and 
Mark Regier and John Grabowski and Jim Rhode, many who 
are my constituents. And I wish them well in taking on the large 
responsibility in hosting the first Vanier Cup ever held outside 
the province of Ontario. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, in this municipal election year, want to pay 
tribute to those who let their names stand for public office. 
Congratulations to Bev Dubois and Patrick Bundrock who ran a 
spirited race for Ward 10 in my constituency. Also to Ray 
Morrison and C. D. McIver who ran for the public school board 
and many residents who ran for the separate school board. And 
to Bev Dubois and to Ray Morrison and Mayor Atchison and 
the city council I want to say I look forward to working with 
each and every one of you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Silver Springs is a vibrant constituency 
with people of all walks of life. Today we had the opportunity 
to meet Crystal Bonderud. Crystal and her late husband, Doug, 
were constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs. As we heard 
today in question period, Doug passed away under tragic 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, his health care failed 
him. His government failed him, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
And on this note this government will have to answer for it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I had a chance to meet with Crystal earlier today. I had a chance 
to talk to her on previous occasions. I just want to congratulate 
her for the way she’s carrying herself and working in Doug’s 
memory, but also working to make sure that no other family has 
to go through what the Bonderuds did in our province. And I 
know it’s taken very seriously by members opposite. I know 
that certainly there’s no politics in this. It’s just something that 
we have to address quickly so no other families will ever have 
to go through this again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Silver Springs also has, I would think, 
probably more children than any other constituency in the 
province. And I’m not sure of that fact, but I would guess that 
that is the case. Mr. Speaker, to families with children, health 
care is so important. 
 
Many, many of my constituents work closely, work hand in 
hand with the Children’s Health and Hospital Foundation. 
They’re working to get a children’s hospital, a hospital within a 
hospital, in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, they’ve been at it for years. 
Year in, year out, they go to dinners. They take money out of 
their own pocket and donate it to this foundation to ensure that 
they have a children’s hospital in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just imagine, imagine what they thought when 
they heard in this Throne Speech . . . What did they hear? The 
expectations were high, largely because of what the government 
has said. The Saskatchewan Party has been talking about the 
need for a children’s hospital. The government got on board a 
number of years ago. 
 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

But what have we seen so far from this government, Mr. 
Speaker? Well here it is. Imagine their elation. Imagine their joy 
when they heard the words, “continue the progress towards the 
development of a Children’s Hospital within a hospital,” Mr. 
Speaker — “continue the progress towards the development of 
a Children’s Hospital within a hospital.” Very empty words 
indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that 2007 will hopefully be an 
election year in Saskatchewan. And we know — and certainly 
those members on this side of the House know — that the NDP 
only do things in election years. You know, we’ve heard 
everything. Wait for 2007. Well 2007 is just around the corner, 
Mr. Speaker. Will there be announcement on this hospital? I 
think so, Mr. Speaker. I think so. I think this government will 
finally take it upon themselves to have a little bit of an 
announcement. 
 
They’ll trickle out some money. They won’t put any targets. 
They won’t put any dates. But they’ll come out, and they’ll say, 
well we’ve announced the hospital. We’ll give you a little bit of 
money for a study or maybe, you know, something to . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . A little bit of lip service, my 
honourable colleague says. That’s what we’ll have here. Mr. 
Speaker, I would say that is not a way, with all due respect, to 
run a province. That is not the way to address the concern that 
Saskatchewan and PEI [Prince Edward Island] are the only 
provinces in Canada without a children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, residents of my constituency — and I’ll be clear 
about this — many, many residents of my constituency will do 
anything for their kids. And if it means taking their kids to 
Alberta, which they’ve had to do . . . Many, many of my 
constituents have done that. They’ve gone, they’ve got in the 
car, pack up the family and go to the Alberta Stollery 
Children’s Hospital. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what do they say . . . what happens when 
they get there? What happens when they see the specialist that 
they need, when they get the care that they need? What do the 
specialists say to them? They say, what’s going on in 
Saskatchewan? What is going on here? Who’s in charge? 
What’s your government doing for children? And those people, 
my constituents, Mr. Speaker, have very little that they can say 
in response to that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hear . . . I know I’ve struck a chord out there. 
I know many of their own members on the side, on the 
government’s side are disappointed with how long this is 
taking. 
 
But I have a challenge, Mr. Speaker. I have a challenge for each 
member over there. Talk to the Minister of Health and 
tomorrow, tomorrow is the Champions Luncheon in Regina that 
will talk about the need for a children’s hospital in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I challenge them. I challenge the 
Minister of Health, make the announcement tomorrow. What 
more appropriate time would there be than tomorrow to make 
that announcement, Mr. Speaker? Make the announcement and 
we will give you credit, just like we’ve done on the PST, on the 
Vicq commission. Whenever you’ve done the right thing we’ve 

been the first to say it’s the right thing to do and it’s proper. 
 
We know that you have a mountain of money that you’re sitting 
on, but I would suggest that building a children’s hospital 
within a hospital is something that needs to be done in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t just stop in health care. It’s also 
that same way with schools. The other area of prime importance 
is the need for school facilities to house our children. As I 
mentioned, you know, I have a growing constituency. The need 
is there. Arbor Creek has 600 kids under six years old with no 
school. 
 
Now we know, Mr. Speaker, we know about the $1.5 billion in 
unbudgeted revenue that this government has. What’s the plan? 
What’s the plan from this government with all that money? 
Well we have no capital priority list this year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, not, not one word from this government and I’m 
disappointed. Mr. Speaker, I’m just disappointed that we 
haven’t heard any word from this government about it. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker, is the 2005 list. That came from 
last year. Here it is, the 2005 list. What was the number one 
priority on that list that didn’t get funded? St. Paul’s Roman 
Catholic school. Northeast elementary school, the project didn’t 
get funded — just below the list. Now, Mr. Speaker, that came 
out in June of 2005. 
 
Now I’ve been phoning every couple of weeks to the minister’s 
office, to the Department of Learning, and say, where’s the 
capital list this year? What’s happening? What are you doing 
with your millions of dollars and the billions of dollars? What 
are you doing for children in this province? And, Mr. Speaker, 
the answer is, it’s been approved that . . . it’s been created. The 
list is ready, but it needs to be approved by the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a sad story about Saskatchewan. That’s a 
sad story about education and the way it works. You know, a 
cynic would say, what are they doing? Are they . . . Why the 
delay with this list? Are they waiting for an election next year? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that it’s not going to 
help. The residents of Saskatoon Silver Springs realize it’s too 
little too late. The expiry date, the best before date, has come 
and gone on this government. People in Arbor Creek and 
Willowgrove pay some of the highest property taxes in the 
country. And what do they get from this government? — delay, 
delay, delay. 
 
Sure, we’ll see some announcements in 2007, hoping to give 
them a little bit of bounce from where they are in the polls. But, 
Mr. Speaker, again I would say that’s it’s too little too late. And 
I can speak definitively for the people of Arbor Creek and the 
people of Willowgrove that they’re tired of being ignored by 
this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — And it just doesn’t stop there. It doesn’t 
just stop with schools. What about the academic health sciences 
centre? We’ve heard so much about that in a number of years. 
Where is it, Mr. Speaker? Where is it? That facility was 
suggested by the university. It was supported by the 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

Saskatchewan Party and then announced by the government in 
2003, Mr. Speaker, and where is it? There’s nothing to report. 
We know that the former minister of Finance from this House is 
now in charge of this facility. 
 
But what happens, Mr. Speaker, when we have a government 
like this, that seems to do nothing for three years and then in the 
election year finally puts their agenda forward, Mr. Speaker. 
Well in this particular instance, we’ve seen the cost of this 
facility go from $100 million to — and who knows, the 
government won’t want to speculate on it now — $160 million, 
$200 million. Mr. Speaker, it’s just a sad case of a government 
trying to govern by the polls. They’re not going in their 
direction, and we just see some real concern, real concern, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Saskatoon is successful in spite of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. Credit must go to this 
growth-orientated community. There’s a visionary and decisive 
city council. And there’s an increasingly co-operative . . . And 
members might take surprise at me saying that. There’s an 
increasingly co-operative labour movement in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. Credit must go to the chamber of commerce and to 
Coni Evans, who’s the president and to Kent Smith-Windsor. I 
just want to take a minute, Mr. Speaker, and read to you what 
they have to say. 
 
Coni Evans, the first female president of the chamber of 
commerce, she says, and I quote: 
 

“Saskatchewan investors large and small including 
homeowners, clearly need more confidence in 
Saskatchewan than the current government policy mix 
provides. Policy changes like the ones we outlined are 
obvious to anyone who wants to build a brighter future for 
our province and our youth. Our province has the fiscal 
capacity to . . . make changes . . . We need the political 
will.” 

 
Words well spoken by Coni Evans, Mr. Speaker. And we go on, 
we go on to say, Mr. Speaker, we go on to hear from the 
Saskatoon Home Builders’, a group that’s working hard to 
make Saskatoon a better place to be. And what do they have to 
say? What does Alan Thomarat, the executive director of the 
Saskatoon & Region Home Builders’, what does he have to say: 
Saskatchewan’s consistently low level of performance shows 
that there are long term systemic problems in the Saskatchewan 
government policy mix and it’s costing each and every citizen 
in terms of jobs opportunities for themselves and their children. 
The current policy mix has restricted Saskatchewan’s tax base 
choices and has limited citizen choices in housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 
And they back that up with statistics about housing starts in 
Saskatchewan. And don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
appreciative for every housing start that there is in this 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, as the information indicates, there 
is woefully few of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are dead last in the country when it comes to new housing 
starts, Mr. Speaker. On per 1,000 basis, we have 3.45, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know what the number is in say Prince 
Edward Island? 6.24 per 1,000, Mr. Speaker. In Ontario — 
6.28. In Alberta, you know we can’t . . . the members opposite 

don’t want us to compare ourselves to Alberta, but that number, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to throw out to you, is 12.54 per 1,000, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it just points to the changes that need 
to be made by this government, Mr. Speaker, that’s for sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to attend the Saskatchewan 
Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs, and they’re very 
interested in what the Throne Speech has to say. They’re 
concerned about the future in Saskatchewan. And I was joined 
by the Minister of Industry at that event. And we saw . . . I 
congratulate people like Jerry Bode and Jill Sauter for the work 
that they are doing to ensure that Saskatchewan young people 
have a place to stay in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We heard a 
tremendous speech from Joel Teal and I think the minister 
opposite would agree that it’s just a tremendous, tremendous 
thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time . . . when you’re talking about your 
constituency, when you’re talking about, you know, things that 
are close to your heart, it’s really important, Mr. Speaker. And I 
haven’t had a chance to talk on a lot of things that I want to talk 
about. I want to talk about the finances of this province. I want 
to talk about, I want to talk about a book that tells it like it is — 
the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. It’s great. Many of my 
colleagues have referenced this. Seven deficits, seven deficits, 
seven deficits in the last 16 years, Mr. Speaker. There you go. 
 
You know, you wonder why when a Throne Speech begins with 
13 consecutive budgets, you can’t vote for it when the first line 
of the whole Throne Speech is erroneous, Mr. Speaker. They 
talk about the debt. They talk about where we’re going as a 
province. And it’s just really concerning when you see numbers 
like agriculture numbers — $827 million from the government 
in 1991; 512 million, Mr. Speaker, in 2006. You know, it’s just, 
it’s just very, very concerning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have many other things that I would like to speak about today. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know that our time is limited today and I 
know I hear my colleagues saying that it’s time to wind it up, 
Mr. Speaker. So I know I’ll have other opportunities to debate 
the Finance minister, to debate members on the other side of the 
House, but I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are ready to finish this 15-year-old chapter of 
NDP mediocrity, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan are 
ready to close the book on this tired and old NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re ready for a young, dynamic leader that has a vision for 
the future, Mr. Speaker. And with each new day they are 
excited, Mr. Speaker. They are excited because they know we 
are one day closer to a Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in light of time I just want to summarize 
that I will be supporting the amendment, voting against the 
motion. I thank you for this time to address this House and my 
constituents. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion for an address to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
and the amendment to that motion. And there being no further 
speakers at this time, we will vote off the amendment. 
 
The motion . . . the amendment before the Assembly therefore 
is the one moved by the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

seconded by the member for Cannington which says that this 
government . . . that after the word “session” the following be 
added: 
 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
this Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative in 
finding solutions to the growing labour shortage, the 
out-migration of our youth and families, forcing 
Saskatchewan people to go out of province for health care, 
failing to deal with the agricultural crisis and its impact on 
rural Saskatchewan, failing to protect children who are at 
risk, and for being too focused on its internal partisan 
politics. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this amendment? 
Would those who favour the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Would those who are opposed to the 
amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe . . . Call in the members for a 
standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:28 until 16:35.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amendment to the motion for an address to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor which has been moved by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, seconded by the member for Cannington, 
and reads: 
 

Moved that after the word “session” the following be 
added: 
 
That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
this Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative in 
finding solutions to the growing labour shortage, the 
out-migration of our youth and families, forcing 
Saskatchewan people to go out of the province for health 
care, failing to deal with the agricultural crisis and its 
impact on rural Saskatchewan, failing to protect children 
who are at risk, and for being too focused on its internal 
partisan political problems. 
 

Those who favour the amendment please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 26] 
 

Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kirsch 
Brkich Dearborn Merriman 
Morgan Duncan  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 
 

[Nays — 29] 
 

Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Wartman Forbes Prebble 
Crofford Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Taylor Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Addley 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 26; those against, 29. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. The debate 
resumes on the main motion for the address to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Centre, the 
Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter into the 
Throne Speech today and, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my 
remarks I will conclude by saying I’m in full . . . I’m voting in 
favour of this Throne Speech because it is a plan of action that 
will ensure that Saskatchewan citizens and families are reaping 
the benefits of our strong economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, before I start my 
formal remarks, I want to take a moment to thank several 
people who make my work, our work over here happen for the 
people of Saskatchewan and my constituents of Saskatoon 
Centre. Of course I need to thank my constituency assistant, 
Leslie Bernett, for her dedication and service for the people of 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I need to recognize my office staff here 
in Regina: Linsay, Dan, Rachel, Sherry, and Jeanine for all their 
hard work making sure that my minister’s office is accessible 
and responsive to the questions and needs of all Saskatchewan 
people. Thank you very much. I also want to take a moment and 
thank my family for their support as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I should talk a bit about my riding, 
Saskatoon Centre, the heart of Saskatoon, our largest city in this 
province. Of course this year we’re celebrating our centennial. 
It’s a pretty special year for Saskatoon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Centre is a rich, diverse riding 
spanning from the condos and apartments downtown on the 
beautiful banks of the South Saskatchewan through the core 
communities of Caswell, Westmount, Riversdale, Pleasant Hill, 
to the west end of Mount Royal. All strong communities that 
live out the challenges of Saskatchewan families, communities 
every day. In many ways Saskatoon Centre really reflects what 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

might be called average or today’s Saskatchewan family in all 
its forms. And I know they support our Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know I am deeply interested in all we can 
do to support young people, especially through learning. 
Interestingly, Mr. Speaker, at this time all three west side high 
schools in Saskatoon are located in Saskatoon Centre. But not 
for long. Next fall Bethlehem and Tommy Douglas Collegiate 
will be opening their doors. This just demonstrates our 
government’s commitment to our families and to our young 
people. 
 
Now today in Saskatchewan our future looks brighter than at 
any time in recent past. We have one of the hottest economies 
in the nation, one of only two provinces that outperform the 
national economy in each of the past five years. Just last Friday 
we learned there are more people working in Saskatchewan 
than ever before — 21,800 jobs more in October than the year 
before. We have the lowest unemployment rate since 1979 and 
we have the second lowest unemployment rate in Canada at 3.3 
per cent. Full-time jobs are up to 22,900 and, Mr. Speaker, 
youth employment is up 8,100 jobs this month, and 
Saskatchewan has the second lowest youth unemployment rate 
in this country. 
 
Now what a stark difference from 15 years ago when this 
government came to power, when Saskatchewan was not doing 
well at all. The previous administration, of which the Leader of 
the Opposition was part of, had racked up a huge debt that 
nearly drove this province to bankruptcy. The NDP government 
has a vision of a strong and prosperous province where we can 
use our advantages to build a better future for all Saskatchewan 
families, a bright future where our young people can live, work, 
and raise their families. 
 
Now we paid down this staggering debt that at one point 
totalled almost 70 per cent of the province’s total economic 
output. Now our debt-to-GDP ratio is 17 per cent. Once the 
budget was balanced we invested in our province, in our people. 
We invested in tax cuts, in infrastructure, in research, and in the 
most important resource of all — people — to continue to seize 
the Saskatchewan advantage. We have fundamentally changed 
the Saskatchewan economy. Today we have an economy that 
again can fuel the social progress that we desire, that 
Saskatchewan people want and need. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our strategy is working. Saskatchewan is 
working. And I’m proud to stand in support of the Speech from 
the Throne that lays out a bold vision for how we will continue 
to work to ensure a better province for young people to live, 
work, and build strong futures and to ensure that all 
Saskatchewan families benefit from this strong economy. 
 
And I am, Mr. Speaker, delightfully proud to be part of a 
government that cut the provincial sales tax from 7 per cent to 5 
per cent so that people can have a few more extra dollars in 
their pockets to spend on their families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of a government that 
has introduced legislation to proclaim a new statutory holiday in 
February, Family Day, to help Saskatchewan people maintain a 
healthy balance between work and family life. 
 

As I’ve talked to my constituents, Mr. Speaker, they have told 
me they’re excited about the vision put forward by this 
government. They’re excited about the four cornerstones of our 
government’s agenda: making sure that Saskatchewan is the 
best place for young people to live, work, and build strong 
futures; strength in Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving 
public health care; advancing Saskatchewan as a leader in 
environmental protection and green economy; and ensuring that 
today’s Saskatchewan family benefits from our strong 
economy. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these four cornerstones of our agenda reflect 
the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. But those priorities 
— the priorities which Saskatchewan people support — are not 
shared by the members opposite. Rather they criticize and they 
whine. They complain and they attack. But while they’re doing 
it, doing all that, while they’re setting their time machine to the 
past rather than the future, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting the job 
done. 
 
This NDP government is bringing new investment into our 
province. And this NDP government is creating jobs for 
ordinary people and for our youth. Now, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government is ensuring a better province for young people to 
live, work, and build strong futures. We’ve launched in May 
2006 an accessibility and affordability review of the 
post-secondary education, and this should be completed in 
mid-2007. We will receive the initial recommendations and I’m 
looking forward to seeing them. 
 
Now we have a strong record of listening to the concerns of our 
institutions, students, and their families. We’ve extended the 
tuition freeze until 2008. And consistently we’ve provided 
increases and stable funding for our post-secondary institutions. 
We’ve expanded the graduate tax credit, Gradworks, seats in 
our institutions, capital projects, and we’re even committed to 
doing more. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, since the last budget and the budget before, 
we’ve increased the number of training spots by 3,900. And 
every member over there voted against it. Those members have 
also ignored how important it is to have our First Nations 
trained and full members of our labour force and growing 
economy. But we do, Mr. Speaker. And that is why we 
provided funding for the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies — funding they all voted against. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, building the future here for young people is 
incredibly important for our province’s future and our economy. 
After completing their training, graduates are eager to enter the 
workforce, apply the skills they’ve learned, and build their 
careers here in Saskatchewan. With this in mind, our 
government has engaged in a multi-faceted approach with more 
opportunities and more young people working than any time in 
the last decade. We are turning the corner on out-migration and 
building a future for young people here at home. 
 
To sustain this level of growth and to ensure our level of 
development, we have put into place the following. The 
introduction of Youth Opportunities Unleashed will allow our 
youth to acquire loans of up to $15,000 to be used to start or 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

expand existing businesses. We’ve also introduced Gradworks, 
a program offered to the commercial Crown corporations to 
give recent graduates positions and valuable experience with 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations. 
 
In May this year we launched saskjobs.ca and promoted the site 
through billboards and newspaper ads. And, Mr. Speaker, 
between May and July of this year, saskjobs.ca posted over 
11,000 jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech stated and I quote: 
 

Working people and working families are fundamental 
building blocks of a strong economy. The health and 
safety of, and benefits for, workers are important values of 
. . . [our] government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this government’s record, 
you will see those reflected in our actions. We have made many 
significant advances in labour standards, occupational health 
and safety, and labour relations. In the past decade alone, we 
have increased the minimum wage several times with another 
increase planned for March of next year; expanded the list of 
compensable injuries and illnesses; required the use of safety 
engineered needles; and help in correctional facilities. 
 
We’ve increased protection for whistle-blowers, updated both 
our radiation health and safety and mining regulations, provided 
increased protection for new parents who want parental leave. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we established a work and family unit in the 
Department of Labour, among numerous other initiatives, and 
we’re going to do more. We’re committed to focus on 
workplace safety through the response to the Occupational 
Health and Safety Council report and the Worker’s 
Compensation Act committee of review. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to assisting vulnerable 
workers to overcome employment challenges by responding 
further to the recommendations of the commission on 
improving work opportunities for Saskatchewan residents. 
We’ve made progress on the issue for vulnerable workers. One 
of the areas that’s very important affects vulnerable workers is 
marketable skills. Well this NDP government, as I have said, 
has created 3,900 new training spaces to provide both basic 
adult education and technical skills training through SIAST, 
regional colleges, and the apprenticeship and trade certification 
program. 
 
We have committed to continue and indeed expand our efforts 
in education and training. We’re going to expand training 
opportunities including a new partnership between labour, 
business, and training institutions to provide input on our 
evolving labour market needs so we can plan best how to meet 
the needs of labour demands of the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to expanding our 
partnerships with First Nations and Métis people and 
organizations to enhance education and skills training for 
Aboriginal youth and recognizing that improved child care is 
another way to make meaningful difference in the lives of 
people who are struggling to become self-sufficient. We’ve 
done a lot of good work in this area. 
 

We’ve improved child care subsidies. These increases mean 
that low-income families now get subsidies that cover on 
average 85 per cent of child care fees based on 2005 child care 
rates. The increases also include new part-time subsidies for 
parents who require half time child care or less. In addition, Mr. 
Speaker, family income levels have been adjusted in some cases 
as much as 20 to 30 per cent so that more parents can qualify. 
 
We’re also continuing to build the best province for people to 
live and work and raise a family through continued investment 
in the innovative KidsFirst program that offers supports for 
families. And despite the federal Conservative government’s 
withdrawal, the NDP government in Saskatchewan is 
continuing to deliver on the Early Learning and Child Care 
program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has done much for the 
working people and families in this province, and we are 
committed to do more. Now what a stark contrast from the days 
when those members opposite last held power. Those were the 
days of darkness and, in many cases, despair among working 
people. Now my colleague from Regina already mentioned a 
book, Nine Lost Years, and I want to refer to that as well. The 
labour history book On the Side of the People refers to those 
days when the members opposite were in control as the nine 
lost years. The Trade Union and Labour Standards Act were 
gutted. The Labour Relations and Workers’ Compensation 
Boards were stacked with anti-labour reps, and let’s not even 
get into what they did with the building trades. Crown assets 
were privatized, and social programs were seriously damaged, 
not to mention the financial misconduct that the people of this 
province, the people of Saskatchewan, are still paying for. 
 
Now those members opposite think that legislation to protect 
workers is, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: hurtful, unfair, 
paternalistic, and needless. Those are the Leader of the 
Opposition’s own words in this very Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
But unlike the Sask Party members, this NDP government 
believes that occupational health and safety and basic labour 
standards for working people are absolutely essential. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fundamental. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You bet. Mr. Speaker, I continue to be 
delighted the very good progress we are making here in 
Saskatchewan on our commitment to environmental protection 
and the green economy. These are exciting days, and we will 
need to double our efforts. Mr. Speaker, I was pleased today to 
be part of the water conservation strategy announcement, and 
now I look forward to the launching of the green strategy. I’m 
especially looking forward to the work of my colleague, the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon 
Greystone, concerning renewable energy and conservation. His 
work will help our province tackle the real challenges of global 
climate change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a special remark about the clean 
coal project that we’re undertaking because I believe that will 
form an integral part of our power needs for Saskatchewan, and 
yet it will serve the world as a model for proper use of coal 
while we transition to a more renewable source of energy in a 
post-carbon world. 
 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, what a fall we have had here 
in Saskatchewan. Picture the Rolling Stones playing Taylor 
Field. Well they did. Picture a new family holiday in February 
next year. Picture new record employment, over 500,000 people 
working in this province. Well they are. Mr. Speaker, this is the 
picture we are building of our new Saskatchewan in our second 
century: every family a part of a prosperous economy that is 
well-grounded but only limited by the sky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course I will be voting in favour of the Throne 
Speech and, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of the debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Centre that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the time I will 
move that this House do recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now recess until 7 p.m. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker. — The motion is carried. This House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................183 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................185 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................185 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................185 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................185 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................185 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Football Victories 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Corner Gas 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Lessons Needed 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 Riders Win in Calgary 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................186 
 World Junior A Game in Melfort 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................187 
 World Junior A Challenge in Yorkton 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................187 
 Suggested Names for Party 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................187 
 Improvements to Saskatchewan Court Houses 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................188 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Timely Access to Cancer Care 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................188 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................188 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................189 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................190 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................190 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan’s New Water Conservation Plan 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................193 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................194 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................194 
 Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................194 
 Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................195 
 



 

 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................195 
 Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................195 
 Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................195 
 Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................196 
 Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................196 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................196 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................196 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................196 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................198 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................200 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................203 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................210 
 Recorded Division (amendment) 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................214 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


