


















































Hansard: April 21, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 44A  FRIDAY, APRIL 21, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1245 
 April 21, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a departure from 
my regular and normal practice, I stand today to present a 
petition on behalf of somebody else’s crumbling highway. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Rose Valley, Humboldt, Invermay, Burr, and 
Watson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310. Your prayer reads: 
 

The petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly may 
be pleased to cause this government to repair Highway 
310 in order to address safety concerns and to facilitate 
economic growth and tourism in Foam Lake, Fishing 
Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from the flooded 
areas of Fishing Lake and from Kuroki, Wadena, Yellow Quill, 
and Regina and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’ll come as no 
surprise today that I have another petition with citizens 
concerned with the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Tisdale, Bruno, 
Fulda, Lanigan, St. Gregor, and Rose Valley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens who are concerned about safe 
driving conditions on Highway No. 3. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
parents across Saskatchewan that are concerned that 
Saskatchewan is the only province besides PEI [Prince Edward 
Island] that does not have a dedicated children’s hospital. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live in Dalmeny, Erindale, Arbor Creek, 
and Silverspring in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve SaskTel cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Strongfield and Carrot River. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
from citizens who would like to not only survive but also to 
thrive as they drive along Highway No. 5. I will read the prayer 
for relief. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of citizens who are concerned with the narrowness of the 
Highway No. 5 and the wideness of the ditches. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Spalding, Saskatoon, 
Humboldt, and Naicam. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 7, 27, 64, 67, 638, and no. 
669. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
committee to report The Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of this Bill in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — I move that the Bill now be read a third 

time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 21 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental  
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 4, The Assessment Management 
Agency Amendment Act, 2005 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave that the 
consideration in Committee of the Whole be waived. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave that Bill No. 4, consideration of Committee of the Whole 
be waived. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendment be read a first time? The Chair recognizes the 
minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendment 
now be read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is required for this. Is leave granted 
that we read it the first and second time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Government House Leader that Bill No. 4, the amendments 
be read a first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister, by leave, 
that this Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental  
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 5, The Cities Amendment Act, 
2005 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Bill 5 in the Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendments be read a first time? The Chair recognizes the 
minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 
amendments be now read a first and second time, with leave. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It been moved by the 
minister that Bill No. 5 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 6, The Municipalities Amendment 
Act, 2005 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested to waive 
consideration of this Bill in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall these 
amendments be read the first time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that 
this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the minister that Bill No. 6 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental  
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 15, The Highways and 
Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 15 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: in the fiscal year 2005-2006 
how much money was collected through the 
environmental tax? What amount of the funds collected 
was allocated to the General Revenue Fund? Were funds 
collected through this tax allocated to any other agencies? 
If so, which agencies and how much did each agency get? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 
2004-05, 2003-04, 2002-03, 2001-02, and 2000-2001. I so 
present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me, in fact it’s a very proud moment for me. I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all my 
colleagues here in the Assembly, my family that has come and 
joined us in the Assembly on the occasion of a school break and 
on the occasion of seeing their grandfather primarily in the 
legislature. 
 
But first I would like to introduce of course my wife, Carrol, 
who is in the back. If you’d just give a wave, Carrol. Also my 
sons, Greg, his wife, Tari. If you could just wave. And my other 
son, Lane, and his wife, Carrie. They’re from Lloydminster. 
Greg was from Saskatoon, or is from Saskatoon. 
 
I would also now like to introduce some really good-looking 
young ladies. First of all, if I could get them to wave. First of 
all, there is Sidney. Wave, Sidney, if you . . . there you go. I 
would also like to introduce Hunter. She’s in the front row. 
Kaitlyn, if you’d wave. McKenzie and Stephanie. 
 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

I would ask all in the legislature to help welcome these people 
to their legislature. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour this Friday morning to introduce a group of young 
cadets from the community of Canora and area. These cadets 
are part of the Canora Squadron No. 566. And they are 
accompanied this morning by the commanding officer of this 
squadron Captain Bernie Wlock, who is obviously a little closer 
to Yorkton but still does a great job in making sure that that 
squadron does have a commanding officer and he does a 
tremendous amount of work. 
 
They are accompanied this morning by one of the parents who’s 
acting as a chaperone, Mrs. Lorie Wasyliw. So I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming the Canora squadron and 
their leaders to their Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre, the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to the House, I’d like to introduce some 
employees of SaskWater who are visiting with us today. We 
have Stuart Kramer up in the west gallery. Stuart Kramer is the 
president and Denise Soar, Greg Argue and Jeff Mander. 
 
We are very proud of the good work that SaskWater does. And 
I’d just like to ask all members to welcome them to our House 
here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly a group of very accomplished women in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’d ask them to each rise briefly as I mention 
their names: Deanne McMillan, Lee-Ann Ricci, Christine 
Martyn, Bev Pyne, Therese Voden, and my wife, Mr. Speaker, 
Linda Stewart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group of local women planned an adventure 
to Africa, which took place this past January, principally to 
climb Mount Kilimanjaro. The women paid for the expedition 
entirely out of their own pockets, but before they left they 
raised $15,000 at a very well-attended dinner that they put on 
here in Regina last fall and donated all of that money to a clinic 
for abused women in the city of Goma in the Congo where the 
clinic was run by Dr. Joe Lusi and his wife, Lyn. 
 
When they reached Africa in January, the women spent five 

days on safari in the Ngorongoro crater and the Serengeti plains 
in Tanzania, then eight days climbing and descending Mount 
Kilimanjaro also in Tanzania — an impressive feat since 
Kilimanjaro, the summit of Kilimanjaro, Mr. Speaker, is about 
20,000 feet above sea level and lack of oxygen is a serious 
issue. But each of the six Regina and area women made it to the 
summit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after that, the women flew to Rwanda and 
travelled through Rwanda by car — which is a dangerous 
enough experience — to the border of war-torn Congo where 
they were met by Mrs. Lusi who escorted them also by motor 
vehicle to the city of Goma, where they visited the clinic which 
they had donated the $15,000 to. They found this to be a very 
emotional but a rewarding experience. 
 
I hope all members will welcome this heroic group of local 
women who have been awarded centennial medals for these and 
other accomplishments and have been invited to the upcoming 
Governor General’s luncheon in Regina as people of courage. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, accompanying this group is my daughter, 
Alison — she isn’t going to stand up — visiting from Ottawa, 
visiting from Ottawa to search out an appropriate venue for her 
upcoming wedding. 
 
I hope all members will welcome this group. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 
someone today who’s no stranger to this House, Bob 
Ivanochko. But I particularly am bringing him to your attention 
this year because he’s kept my father out of trouble for two 
whole years working on a book about working people, the 
history of working people in Saskatchewan. And it’s a very 
interesting book. It goes all the way back to the fur trade and 
goes through the various premiers, some of the earliest, some 
very progressive people who understood the plight of working 
people. 
 
So I just want to recognize Bob again in the House. Thank him 
for the work he’s done and welcome again to Bob Ivanochko. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Earth Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow is Earth Day. It’s a day that we pay particular 
attention to the plight of our environment and take the time to 
educate ourselves about environmental issues. The Earth Day 
Network, a non-profit organization founded by the organizers of 
the first Earth Day in 1970, has encouraged and organized 
events across the globe in celebration. 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

Tomorrow the network officially launches its three-year climate 
change campaign to educate people all over the world about 
environmental issues. Their mission is simple: to broaden the 
environmental movement worldwide and to educate and 
mobilize people, governments, and corporations to take 
responsibility for a clean and healthy environment. 
 
The Earth Day Network has hoped for 10,000 Earth Day 
activities worldwide, Mr. Speaker, several of which will occur 
right here in our great province. For example, tomorrow the 
Royal Saskatchewan Museum is hosting numerous events 
including the showing of films about whooping cranes. And in 
addition, members of the Canadian Wildlife Service will speak 
in detail about whooping cranes and what can be done to protect 
these rare birds. 
 
For more information on Earth Day celebrations, I invite 
everyone to consult the official website at www.earthday.ca. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
in congratulating the Earth Day Network for their hard work 
and dedication to our environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Foam Lake Company Active in Biodiesel Industry 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
forgot agriculture producers and the rural economy in their 
current budget. But citizens of rural Saskatchewan were 
disappointed with the lack of recognition and support, but they 
come from hardy pioneer stock, and they know how to just get 
on with it and create new opportunities. 
 
Milligan Bio-Tech Inc. of Foam Lake is one such business 
which saw an agricultural product which wasn’t fully utilized. 
They had a vision and developed it into a resourceful and 
successful biodiesel industry which utilizes canola and protects 
our environment. 
 
This Saskatchewan-based developer and producer of 
high-quality biodiesel and diesel additives recently announced 
that Clearview Agro Ltd. has joined the growing dealer network 
offering a blend of MBTI’s [Milligan Bio-Tech Inc.] 
biodiesel-based fuel conditioner directly to their customers. 
This agreement is important to the company, their customers, 
and the local economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only will this product benefit the producers of 
canola, Milligan Bio-Tech Inc., and the community of Foam 
Lake and area and the province. It will also benefit our 
environment. As gas prices continue to increase, consumers will 
be willing to try this product as it’s been proven to reduce 
engine wear by up to 50 per cent and increase fuel economy 
while reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a success story that the Government of 
Saskatchewan should be promoting, not only in the province 
but nationally and internationally. It’s a win-win situation — an 
environmentally friendly product that utilizes a renewable 

agricultural product that cuts gas consumption and emissions 
while reducing greenhouse gas. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

Federal Commitments Regarding the Kyoto Protocol 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve watched with great disappointment over the past 
three weeks as the federal Conservative government has slashed 
national programs aimed at reducing our country’s greenhouse 
gas emissions. Forty per cent of this year’s federal budget for 
climate change programs has been cut from the federal 
departments of Natural Resources and Environment. 
 
Now Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s government has 
announced it will abandon trying to achieve the legally 
mandated targets for greenhouse gas reductions set by the 
Kyoto Protocol. Canada is the only country in the world that 
has signed and ratified the Kyoto Protocol but is in effect 
abandoning the Protocol and massively cutting back the 
spending needed to implement it. 
 
As the consequences of climate change accelerate, it is clear 
that the Prime Minister’s actions are highly irresponsible. Our 
world is experiencing more drought, more intense hurricanes 
and tornadoes, more forest fires, melting glaciers, melting ice 
caps, rising sea levels, and a rapid loss of species due to climate 
change. If action is not taken to address climate change, the 
world’s coastal cities will be put at risk and severe weather 
events will seriously jeopardize public safety across the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, achieving Kyoto targets should be one of 
Canada’s highest priorities, and provincial governments across 
our country should join forces in insisting that Ottawa honour 
its international commitments under the Kyoto Protocol. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

LeRoy Student Wins First Prize in National Competition 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Rachelle Block is a grade 6 
student from LeRoy who entered her Remembrance Day essay 
in the junior category of the Royal Canadian Legion, Watson 
branch. Rachelle’s essay was entitled “Do You Listen to the 
Sound of the Trumpet?” And she was pleased when she won 
first prize; she was surprised and elated when her essay 
continued to advance to the zone, district, and provincial levels, 
and at every level, she won first prize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to announce today that Rachelle 
Block’s essay claimed first in the junior category of the Royal 
Canadian national literacy competition. Rachelle and the 
winners of other categories will be featured in a national 
publication of the Legion Magazine. I’m also honoured to post 
Rachelle’s essay on my website. 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

 “Do You Listen to the Sound of the Trumpet?” explains what 
we are remembering and why. If you read this essay, I am sure 
you will never listen to the trumpet the same way again on 
Remembrance Day. Mr. Speaker and members of the 
legislature, please join me in congratulating Rachelle Block on 
a job very well done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Communities Pull Together to Help Evacuees 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week I, along with 
my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, had the 
opportunity to stop by the field house in Saskatoon where many 
of the evacuees from the Red Earth First Nation have been 
staying following the flooding in their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the people of Red Earth First 
Nation for their patience and fortitude in dealing with the 
disruption in their lives that the flooding has caused. I want to 
further acknowledge the high level of co-operation between the 
various levels of government in their evacuation. These efforts 
have contributed greatly to having the procedure smoothly run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that services are being provided to 
evacuees by a number of different communities including 
Prince Albert, Nipawin, and Spruce Home. But I particularly 
want to acknowledge the incredible group effort under way at 
the field house in Saskatoon. It involves the city of Saskatoon, 
the Salvation Army, the Red Cross, the Saskatoon Health 
Region, St. John’s Ambulance, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology] Kelsey, and Prairieland 
Park, the Department of Community Resources, members of the 
business community such as Market Mall and many, many 
individuals from the general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the efforts of all the 
individuals and organizations working on behalf of evacuees 
and ask all members to join me in commending them for their 
dedication and hard work in providing an excellent level of 
service. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Drake’s 2005 Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise in 
the House today to talk about a remarkable constituent of mine 
from the town of Drake. On April 2 at the banquet held at the 
Drake Community Centre, Mrs. Janet Blair was presented with 
the honour of the 2005 Citizen of the Year. The annual Drake 
Citizen Award is presented to “an individual who displays 
continuous pride and dedication towards their community 
through their involvement and achievements.” 
 

The list of Mrs. Blair’s achievements is very impressive: 
manager of the girls’ softball team, active in the Drake Figure 
Skating Club, in the rink centre kitchen committee, dinner 
theatre coordinator, Drake homecoming committee, Drake 
community services for senior and minor hockey awards 
banquet coordinator. 
 
Janet Blair was the main volunteer and humanitarian in the 
community of Drake. Her example was a bright light to those 
around her. Janet’s commitments are so like the many 
volunteers across our province today, so I would like to ask all 
members to join me in congratulating Mrs. Janet Blair on her 
remarkable work for the community of Drake. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

First Graduates of New Nursing Education Program 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
number seven has always been associated with good fortune. In 
fact some have believed that it is the number of perfection. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to tell the Assembly today that 
tomorrow seven nurses will graduate from the new nursing 
education program of Saskatchewan in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Tomorrow in a ceremony held at the Prince 
Albert Exhibition Centre, the first graduates will receive their 
degrees since the program’s inauguration. Mr. Speaker, the 
accessibility of the P.A. [Prince Albert] program, still in its 
infancy, is not widely known, and program facilitators hope that 
the first graduation will stimulate interest. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the size of the class following the original seven has already 
grown to over twenty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the nursing education program of Saskatchewan is 
offered through the northern campus of the First Nations 
University. Preference is shown to applicants who are either 
Aboriginal or residents of the North. It is hoped that this 
preference will result in graduates returning to Aboriginal and 
northern communities, providing them with much needed health 
care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join with me in 
congratulating the first graduates of Prince Albert’s nursing 
education program of Saskatchewan. May these seven be a sign 
of good things to come for the community of Prince Albert and 
for our great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

Consequences of Budgetary Policies 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know 
the Minister of Finance is spending close to a half a million 
dollars advertising his budget. But it hasn’t exactly turned him 
into a star, Mr. Speaker. The other day the minister held a 
meeting in Weyburn to try to sell his budget and, according to 
the Weyburn Review, less than a dozen people showed up. Less 
than a dozen people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what did they hear from the minister? Well apparently he 
told them it’s critical for the residents and the businesses of the 
province to change their attitude. Apparently the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] is doing everything right. It’s the residents 
and the businesses who need to change their attitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s the minister’s message, it’s a wonder 
anyone bothered to show up at all. Apparently no one really 
wants to hear about this budget. Will the minister do at least one 
thing right and cancel what’s ever left of this bogus half million 
dollar ad campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I was indeed pleased to be in Weyburn the other night 
at a meeting organized by the chamber of commerce. I guess it 
shows that members of the chamber are in fact satisfied with the 
budget as they seem to have all of their questions already 
answered before I got there. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it has been very interesting 
listening this last week as to what the opposition has been 
saying about this budget, both reading in the rural papers what 
they’ve been telling their constituents and what they’ve been 
saying here on the floor of the House. It is interesting to note 
that that opposition voted against this budget, but has come 
forward in that interim with a huge list of what it is that they 
would undertake. 
 
This list that they have outlined over the last week and a half 
alone has included cuts to the PST [provincial sales tax], has 
included more money for CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization], more money for crop insurance, more money for 
hospitals, more money for nurses, more money for SIAST, 
more money for the school boards, more money for highways, 
more money for municipalities, more money for the drug plan, 
more money for flood relief, and the list goes on. And yet those 
members have no ability to balance the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind that 
minister when there’s cuts to agriculture, when there’s no 
funding for nurses, when there’s cuts to the Department of 
Learning, this opposition will vote against budgets like that 
each and every time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, in Weyburn the minister 
was also forced to defend his decision on a hidden tax hike — 
the $5.3 million tax hike to the Weyburn School Division. 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, apparently the minister called it fair. 
The minister thinks it’s fair to nail the people of Weyburn with 
a huge tax hike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have good news for the minister. He doesn’t 
have to worry about a dozen people showing up next time to his 
meeting. He doesn’t have to worry about a new advertising 
campaign. The Saskatchewan Party will tell everyone in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy that the minister thinks that big tax hikes 
are fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister promised that amalgamation was 
going to be good for school boards. Remember that? The 
Premier promised permanent property tax relief. Will the 
minister please explain how hiking property taxes on the people 
of Weyburn is fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this opposition has no 
credibility. This critic has no credibility on this issue. 
 
And what is very clear is this. This budget and the regional 
pooling model that has been introduced by the Minister of 
Learning in terms of dealing with school financing means very 
simply this: there is no reason that residents in the Sunrise, the 
former Sunrise School Division, including the city of Weyburn, 
should see any increase in their education and property tax as a 
result of these changes. And furthermore, residents in the city of 
Estevan should see a tax decrease. Those members should start 
coming forward with the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Those members should be more 
credible in the arguments that they are presenting, Mr. Speaker. 
Those members should start telling the truth to their 
constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of the lack of 
credibility, I know the minister hasn’t been the minister of 
Learning for a while but he should refer to his own 
department’s website to get his facts straight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read one more part of the Weyburn 
Review article, and it’s a quote. It’s quite an article, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote, “When asked why there wasn’t a 
transition period to ease the impact of such a loss of revenue, 
the minister didn’t answer the question . . .” Imagine that, Mr. 
Speaker, that minister not answering a question. I guess he 
thought I was asking the question here in question period 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

although, Mr. Speaker, he does get bigger crowds here in the 
legislature than he does in Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know why the minister likes being on TV 
commercials. You can’t ask a TV commercial a question 
although from what I hear, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
people yelling at their TVs when that commercial comes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please admit that his budget is a 
flop and cancel what’s ever left of his half million dollar 
leadership campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m glad to hear that the critic, Finance 
critic for the Sask Party, has figured out that talking to the TV is 
not going to do him any good. But what he needs to do is start 
to come clean in terms of what the true figures are within this 
budget. 
 
As long as the defeated Sask Party candidate who is running 
that school board down there takes a looks at the numbers, she 
will see clearly that there is no need in the Sunrise Division for 
any increase in the city of Weyburn on education property tax, 
and in fact there should be a tax decrease in the city of Estevan. 
 
Now the member for Estevan voted against this budget, voted 
against that proposal, and I have no doubt today will find the 
courage to stand on her feet in this House and explain why. 
What I do not know is how it is that that party puts forward any 
credible, any credible candidate in Weyburn that is going to 
campaign against the fact that there is money in this budget to 
make sure there is no education property tax increase in the 
Sunrise Division. That’s the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Funding for Hospital Construction 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, not to be outdone by the 
Minister of Finance, the Industry minister came out to 
Humboldt for a budget meeting, and, Mr. Speaker, just like the 
Minister of Finance he only drew about a dozen people. So it 
looks like the NDP leadership race is running neck to neck. And 
you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of like the Premier’s canoe 
race. They’re both tied for last place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the few people who did show up said he 
was disappointed that the minister didn’t say anything about the 
Humboldt hospital. This is the biggest issue facing Humboldt 
right now, and the minister completely ignored it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the minister come out to Humboldt 
and not even mention the Humboldt hospital to his crowd of 
about a dozen people? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Once again we have the critics on the 
opposition side trying to change the, change the channel. What 
we have here is a critic who voted against the budget that 
contains money in it for the Humboldt hospital, who is trying to 
change the formula that has been in this province for more than 
a decade in terms of how we deal with capital projects, who has 
voted against the largest infrastructure spending budget in the 
province’s history, who has voted against the single largest 
health care budget in the province’s history, who has voted 
against the initiatives that will support her community. That’s 
what that opposition is about. 
 
It is not about putting the interests of Saskatchewan people 
forward. It is about looking after the politics of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to the 
Finance minister that I voted against a budget that put less 
money into the Humboldt hospital than they’re asking from the 
Humboldt community — $2 million less for the Humboldt 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister finally was forced to talk about the 
Humboldt hospital, but only, only when he was questioned by 
the Humboldt Journal. However he wasn’t any better at 
answering questions than the Minister of Finance. He didn’t say 
when construction would start. He only said, well they’re 
moving along with plans. Mr. Speaker, that’s what the NDP 
said seven years ago. 
 
On August 16, 1999, the minister of Health announced the 
planning of a new Humboldt hospital, and last week the 
minister told the Humboldt Journal that they’re still planning 
the Humboldt hospital. Mr. Speaker, if the minister is going to 
come out to Humboldt and speak to a dozen people about the 
budget, will he at least provide some answers? What is the NDP 
going to do to address the $5 million that they’re requiring the 
local community to raise? And when are they going to stop 
planning, and when are they going to start building the 
Humboldt hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen once 
again the opposition’s just not credible in terms of their 
approach on this. They do not understand the formula that is in 
place. They do not understand the process that goes forward in 
terms of major capital construction. But I will add this to the tab 
that the members want to run up on the budget. 
 
We’ve already got them asking for 150 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we already have this 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

opposition calling for 150 more in tax cuts. We’ve got them 
calling for — what was the number? — 150 million more for 
CAIS. We’ve got a call for more money in crop insurance. 
We’ll add 5 million more — is that what the member is saying 
she wants for Humboldt? — on top of what we’ve already put 
on there. 
 
We’ve got the request by the Health critic who’s beaking off 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The health care critic now saying from 
his seat, oh and we need more money for nurses, both in terms 
of wages and in terms of seats, more money for SIAST. More 
money for the school board, says the Finance critic. More, 
more, more. And yet do they support the budget that is one of 
the biggest budgets in provincial history and is a balanced 
budget? No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, he’s right when he says that 
we don’t understand the process. This hospital was announced 
seven years ago. That is one slow process. And they’ve 
announced it several more times since then. And every month 
that passes by, the cost to the community goes up. The people 
of Humboldt and area now have come up with another $5 
million. And even then, even then, Mr. Speaker, the Industry 
minister comes out to Humboldt and basically admits that he 
has no idea when they’re going to build the hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently not one municipal official showed up 
to the minister’s meeting — not one, Mr. Speaker. And is it any 
wonder? Why should the people of Humboldt have to shell out 
an additional $5 million due to the incompetence of this NDP 
government? And when are they going to start building the 
Humboldt hospital ? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the . . . Order please. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the capital budgets in 
health care, the capital budgets in education, the $1.1 billion in 
capital spending across the Crowns and the executive 
government are in place, and there is a process that we follow. 
 
That process is what keeps the budget in balance. It is that 
process that keeps us from following the recipe that that 
opposition advocates, which is a recipe which will cut taxes and 
dramatically increase spending on whatever the whim of the 
day is. It is that process that resulted in us today still needing to 
pay $550 million in interest costs on a debt built up when those 
guys were on the Tory payroll. That, Mr. Speaker, is what the 
problem is when we listen to the kind of advice from the 
Saskatchewan Party that is not reflective of the will of the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Status of Agreement Concerning Lakes’ 
Low Water Levels 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
another summer is approaching, and cottagers, year-round 
residents, and business owners on Round and Crooked Lake are 
concerned that low water levels will once again waste another 
summer for recreation and tourism. In the past, boating, fishing, 
and all kinds of recreational activities have all but been 
eliminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the low water levels are a result of a dispute over 
the control of water structures on First Nations land. The 
dispute is going on for four years now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, can the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority update this Assembly on the status of the 
negotiations and tell us if an agreement is close? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The federal 
government have been working on the negotiations. Watershed 
Authority officials have been part of the discussions. And it’s 
my understanding that they have been able to move the agenda 
along, and they are looking at sorting out some of these issues. 
What they’re doing is working with each group along the valley 
as it’s possible to do that. And my sense, Mr. Speaker, is that 
they will be able to work out an agreement over the longer term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is I believe the 
fourth year that water levels have got extremely low out there, 
and I believe this is the third Environment minister that I’ve 
asked this question to. And we get the same answer: in the long 
term we’ll have an agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was similar problems with Echo and Pasqua 
lakes in the past few years, but a two-year interim agreement 
was reached last year, with the water levels at these lakes now 
stable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us if the province took part in 
that agreement, and did the province put any funding towards 
any part of the interim agreement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the agreements that are 
being reached between the federal government and First 
Nations have worked on the upper lakes. The lower lakes, they 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

haven’t got those ones sorted out. The province is participating 
in the appropriate place where we should be there. We have 
certain responsibilities, but these are agreements that are 
happening with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister for Indian and Northern 
Affairs Canada is very aware of this particular issue and has 
spent some time talking with people who are involved there. 
And my understanding is that the federal negotiators are 
working diligently to resolve this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the current Labour 
minister took the time last summer to tour the area and knows 
very well just how devastating the low water levels are out there 
to the environment, to the people that live along there and to 
everything concerned with the low water levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Friends of the Qu’Appelle are a group of 
concerned cottage owners who believe that both the federal and 
provincial governments have a role to play in helping find 
resolution to this ongoing dispute. This group is so concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, it even hosted a booth recently at the Regina Sport 
and Recreation Show to raise public awareness about the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister again. Did this government have 
anything to do with funding the interim agreement at Echo and 
Pasqua Lake? And if they did, why can’t that same type of an 
agreement be put in place, even for the interim, for Crooked and 
Round Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Prentice, who is the 
federal minister involved with this, I know has had discussions 
with Mr. Durovick who is the man that the member opposite is 
talking about. I have written a letter on behalf of the Watershed 
Authority, as minister responsible, to Mr. Prentice in March 
identifying the concerns. I’ve received information from Mr. 
Durovick saying that he appreciates the support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we, as a province, are participating in the 
resolution of these particular issues, and we will be there as is 
needed. But it is in negotiation between the federal negotiator 
on behalf of the Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs and the 
First Nations. Mr. Speaker, we will be there as required. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Former Member’s Settlement with the  
Legal Aid Commission 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I was surprised to read this 

morning comments attributed to the Minister of Justice. For 
weeks that minister has been loudly proclaiming the sanctity of 
his policy of non-interference in the management of the Legal 
Aid Commission. Now he’s not ruling out becoming involved 
in the decisions of the commission in the Jack Hillson matter if 
those decisions are, and I quote, “patently unreasonable.” 
 
The article goes on to say the minister refused to define what is 
patently unreasonable. Mr. Speaker, since he won’t answer the 
question for reporters, I would like to ask the minister if he 
considers the Legal Aid Commission breaking The Labour 
Standards Act to be patently unreasonable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is where I 
considered it patently unreasonable. The member from 
Saskatoon Southeast accused the Legal Aid Commission of 
being involved, a party to a political vendetta. He then said that 
if there was no direction from the minister’s office, he would 
withdraw those remarks and apologize for them. 
 
What is patently unreasonable is that the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast complains about a cloud over the Legal 
Aid Commission but continues to refuse to apologize for his 
remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we learned yesterday that 
taxpayers are on the hook for close to $34,000 in outside legal 
fees to defend the Legal Aid Commission in the Hillson matter. 
Combine that with the back wages, pension payment, 
prejudgement interest, the total bill for the unnecessary 
incompetence demonstrated in the Hillson affair approaches a 
quarter of a million dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Hillson offered to settle this claim for 
$94,000. That offer was rejected by the Legal Aid Commission. 
Does the minister consider that decision to refuse the settlement 
offer to be patently unreasonable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
opposition’s viewpoint about how you negotiate these matters is 
for the government to flip open the chequebook and say, how 
much? That’s not a responsible way to deal with public money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now on top of, on top of accusing the Legal Aid Commission 
of being party to a political vendetta, of deliberately breaking 
the law, the member from Saskatoon Southeast wants to add 
and they’re incompetent as well, Mr. Speaker. When is his 
apology going to be forthcoming, Mr. Speaker? 
 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the comment about 
incompetence was directed at the minister for not dealing with 
this matter earlier. 
 
Breaking the law is patently unreasonable. Refusing to settle a 
lawsuit when the cost to taxpayers would have been much 
lower is patently unreasonable. I don’t know what more proof 
the minister needs that something is wrong. And it’s time for 
him to do his job and get involved. 
 
The hard-working staff of the Legal Aid Commission deserve 
better. They are now under a cloud. Mr. Speaker, what will this 
minister do to remove that cloud? What will this minister do to 
be sure that those responsible for the incompetence 
demonstrated in the Hillson matter are held accountable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The member from Saskatoon 
Southeast, the opposition accused the Legal Aid Commission of 
being involved in a political vendetta. Again they repeat today 
that they deliberately broke the law, as opposed to a 
disagreement about what the law is, Mr. Speaker, that they 
deliberately broke the law; that they are incompetent. Some of 
the most distinguished council in Saskatchewan serve on the 
Legal Aid Commission, Mr. Speaker. And the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast wants to continue to call them incompetent 
lawbreakers involved in a political vendetta. 
 
And he says, what will the minister do to remove the cloud? 
Well I suggest the member from Saskatoon Southeast remove 
the cloud that he has cast over himself and over the 
commission, and make an apology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the cloud now 
extends to this minister, and it’s a cloud of incompetence as 
well. Mr. Speaker, will this minister commit now to making 
sure there are no further appeals by the Legal Aid Commission, 
no further money wasted, and that the judgment in the Hillson 
matter is paid promptly so that the taxpayers’ money is not 
wasted any further, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am under the growing 
suspicion that when the member from Saskatoon Southeast was 
rewarded with what he calls a patronage appointment and put in 
charge of the Legal Aid Commission by Grant Schmidt of the 
day, that he took his direction directly from the minister’s 

office. I can assure the members opposite again that it’s not the 
practice today. 
 
Again, again the member has said he would apologize for these 
remarks about a political vendetta if his fishing expedition 
showed no evidence of it. Where is the apology, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — If that minister would have done his job 
competently, the Hillson matter could have been settled for less 
than half of the final cost. Now we’ve spent over a quarter of a 
million dollars. Will this minister commit today that these funds 
will not come out of the legal aid budget and will not be taxed 
on those that can ill afford it, that are the recipients of legal aid 
services from Legal Aid? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I can assure the House and members of 
the public that there will be no reduction in legal aid services 
because of a personnel matter at Legal Aid. 
 
But I can also advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that federal 
investment funding in legal aid ended on March 31 of this year. 
The province has been backfilling to make sure that we didn’t 
lose lawyers, that we didn’t lose services. That is a much more 
pressing issue to legal aid services in this province than this 
matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen a history from this 
minister and this government of refusing to admit they’ve made 
mistakes, compound problems, and run up expensive legal bills. 
We’ve seen it in Klassen, Kvello. We’ve seen it in the 
Martensville matter. We’ve seen it in the SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] matter 
and a host of other things that are absolute, utter incompetence, 
that have ran up massive amounts of public waste and public 
dollars from the inability of this minister and that government 
to admit they’ve made a mistake and correct problems before 
they become huge, massive problems for the taxpayer. 
 
Will the minister apologize and commit to stopping this 
ongoing waste? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I had referred earlier to 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast’s relationship with Mr. 
Schmidt. As many of us know, one of the trustees of the 
Progressive Conservative war chest in this province is the 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

campaign manager, or was the campaign manager for the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast in the last campaign. And so 
out of all loyalty to the man who appointed him as leader of the 
Legal Aid Commission, you would think that the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast would like to get his talons off that money 
and let Mr. Schmidt use it to advance the cause of people who 
are willing to call themselves Conservatives in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. For ministerial statements, the Chair 
recognizes the Provincial Secretary. 
 

The 80th Birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, today is an historic day for 
all Canadians — the 80th birthday of Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada. Her Majesty has been our 
Canadian head of state for 54 years. In 2002 we celebrated her 
Golden Jubilee, 50 years as Queen. 
 
Her Majesty has dedicated her entire life to the Commonwealth 
of which we are a part and especially to the 16 countries of 
which she is Queen. Canada is blessed indeed to be one of those 
countries. 
 
The Queen’s role as our Canadian head of state is not just a 
formality. Her Majesty has visited Canada many, many times 
and considers our country to be her second home. She and 
Prince Philip have come to Saskatchewan six times — in 1951, 
’59, ’73, ’78, ’87, and then of course most recently just last year 
for our provincial centennial celebrations. 
 
On all of those visits Queen Elizabeth has shown how closely 
she follows Canadian issues and events, how familiar she is 
with our way of life, and how much she loves Canada. In return, 
Mr. Speaker, Canadians of all cultural backgrounds have 
repeatedly demonstrated their respect and affection for a truly 
remarkable woman. The Queen has placed her imprint on the 
history of the country. She has shown constant dedication, 
integrity, and devotion to duty. 
 
The Queen and the members of her family treasure their special 
link with First Nations. They genuinely understand and value 
the treaty relationships first established by Queen Victoria. That 
relationship is symbolized by the runner and cushion for the 
mace presented by First Nations to this Assembly on its 
centennial. They join the portrait of Her Majesty and other 
symbols of the Crown in this Chamber. 
 
In front of the Legislative Building is a very special tribute to 
our royal heritage: the bronze statue of the Queen on her 
favourite horse, Burmese, a horse born and raised in 
Saskatchewan and given to Her Majesty by the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police]. During her centennial visit in May 
of last year, the Queen unveiled this beautiful statue to 
commemorate her Golden Jubilee. It will forever be a reminder 
of the role played by Queen Elizabeth II in the history of 
Canada and Saskatchewan. 
 

[11:00] 
 
I’m pleased to announce this morning, Mr. Speaker, that 
individuals in our province have the opportunity until Sunday, 
April 30 to personally congratulate the Queen on her 80th 
birthday. You can either visit the Department of Government 
Relations website to electronically send a message, or you can 
personally sign a guest book at either the Legislative Building 
here in this building, Mr. Speaker, or at the Government House 
Museum and Heritage Property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
wishing Her Majesty a very happy 80th birthday, health, 
happiness, and many more years as our Queen. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
first of all I’d like to thank the minister for sending over a copy 
of his ministerial statement earlier this morning. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
pleasure for me to join the Provincial Secretary in wishing Her 
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II our best wishes on this her 80th 
birthday. 
 
The fact that the Queen has visited Saskatchewan six times is 
proof of the special place Canada and Saskatchewan have in her 
heart. The last visit by Her Majesty was just last year during our 
province’s centennial. And I think we all recall the pouring rain 
that Her Majesty endured to fulfill her duties, and that is just 
evident of her dedication to her role. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the 1987 royal visit, I had the honour of 
attending the royal performance at the Globe Theatre here in 
Regina and then went on to Kindersley to attend the luncheon in 
honour of the Queen and Prince Philip. And after visiting 
Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle a couple of times, that 
had a very special place in my heart, something that I will never 
forget. And as the minister stated, the Queen is truly a 
remarkable woman and has been devoted and dedicated to her 
duty for over 50 years. 
 
And I join the Provincial Secretary in encouraging the residents 
of our province to sign the guest book here at the legislature or 
at Government House. And, Mr. Speaker, in closing I ask all 
members of this Assembly to join me in extending Her Majesty 
health, happiness, and God’s blessings on this, her 80th 
birthday. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
62, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 62, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 63, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 63, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m tempted to ask for leave right now, 
but instead I’ll say simply next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to move first reading of Bill No. 64, The Income 
Tax Amendment Act of 2006. I would move that it be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 64, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the Bill be read a second 
time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government I will be 
tabling responses to written questions no. 903 to 907 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 903 to 907 inclusive have been 
submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Funding for Boards of Education 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to enter into debate about an issue that I think is critically 
important for the people of Saskatchewan and property tax 
payers right across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in entering this debate, or beginning this debate, I 
would like to speak a little bit about what I believe are the many 
challenges and the hard work that is being done every day 
across this province by people in the education and the learning 
system. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the fall we see countless numbers of 
parents going to the schools in their communities, their child’s 
fingers in their hand, and walking up to the school board and to 
the school building and entrusting to the teachers of the 
province the future education and learning of their child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that particular occasion is one where there’s a 
special commitment and bond between the parents of this 
province and their children and the educational system. And by 
and large, Mr. Speaker, the people that deliver the educational 
programs in this province live up to that challenge in an 
incredible and very positive way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also many people in this province who 
aren’t directly connected to the schools who have their children 
that are grown and perhaps who only see the part of the 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

education system that is reflected on their property tax bills. 
And, Mr. Speaker, those people are very concerned about what 
they see happening and what they’ve seen happening over the 
term of this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall when I was on the Melfort Board of 
Education, and had the honour of chairing it, that we used to 
have a relationship between government funding and local 
property taxes and that 60 per cent of the cost of delivering an 
educational program in our board’s jurisdiction, 60 per cent of 
the cost was delivered by the provincial government and 40 per 
cent of the cost of delivering that program came from the 
property taxes. Mr. Speaker, that was the relationship and the 
ratio that existed at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the term of this government’s mandate that 
has consistently and steadily eroded to the point where, in 
essence, 60 per cent of the funding for educational programs are 
now coming from property tax payers and 40 per cent are 
coming from the provincial government. Mr. Speaker, that has 
created severe difficulties for the property tax payers right 
across this province. 
 
Now I understand that there are jurisdictions where those ratios 
are slightly less or different, but I also know that by and large 
this is very symptomatic of what the ratio of provincial to local 
property tax payers’ funding has been over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is always difficult to know what is the exact 
perfect balance in taxation policy. I understand that there is 
always a mixture of taxation sources in any government’s 
jurisdiction. You have consumption taxes, profit taxes, property 
taxes, and those kinds of things. And some of them are less 
sensitive than others to the varying changes in the economic 
fortune of the people that have to pay those taxes. And certainly 
I believe that at long last the government recognized — when 
they made the announcements in Birch Hills — that they were 
going to provide special funding for agricultural land to get 
back to that 60/40 ratio that I spoke about that used to exist 15 
years ago. 
 
The minister opposite says that this never existed. Well I 
disagree. That used to exist very close to those numbers, and in 
essence that was the norm that was established over the years. 
Mr. Speaker, it never maybe existed in that minister’s memory 
because he certainly was part of the administration that 
dramatically changed it over the last decade and eroded that 
basic relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, we also know that there are 
jurisdictions whereby the property and the assessment of the 
property is very profitable, is very, very positive and in those 
jurisdictions under the way the formulas used to work that there 
were jurisdictions that were called zero-grant boards in that 
because of the nature of the assessment on property in those 
jurisdictions, that in essence no money was forwarded to that 
board from the Department of Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government then decided that there was going 
to be a mandatory restructuring of the way boards of education 
were going to be functioning in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, at the time we sort of expressed our concerns that there 
had been a great deal of emphasis placed by previous ministers 

of Education and I think reasonably well-received and 
encouraged that there should be voluntary amalgamations 
across this province, that the people who were delivering 
responsibilities for educational programs at the local level were 
those who best knew how to reorganize their boards in order to 
provide maximum benefit to the students that they served. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there was some pretty good track 
records of considerable progress being made in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Minister of Finance when he was the 
Learning minister, decided this wasn’t good enough and 
arbitrarily set a program of forced amalgamation across the 
province. When that happened, there was a great deal of 
concerns expressed from boards of education, from school 
trustees, from teachers, from LEADS [League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents], and school 
administrators, saying that this process was going to create a 
great deal of disruption and there needed to be some transition 
in order for it to be implemented. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
is shown that it would have made sense. 
 
The government did provide four and a half million dollars last 
year to do some bridging, particularly on extensions and 
validation of contracts that needed to be carried forward into the 
new divisions. But in this year’s budget there was nothing 
provided for in terms of transition. The boards simply were on 
their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to make this even more difficult for boards of 
education at this time, they’re in a process, now that they’re in 
the middle of this reorganization, to also implement something 
that the school boards association had been lobbying for. And 
that is, is that their fiscal year would follow the school year. 
And legislation is just on the order paper, is just forward in the 
House now, that enables that to happen. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
do support that concept and we think it will be positive in the 
long run. 
 
In the short run it is creating a tremendous amount of work for 
the administration of school boards as they bring together 
budgets from the individual boards that have been a part or are 
now part of the amalgamated boards. They have to deal with the 
financial statements of those boards coming forward. And I 
think that it’s being shown across the province, as we see the 
results of some of that work, that this is much more difficult 
than anyone thought it would be. They are having to bring 
forward operating statements. They’re having to bring forward 
balance sheets, and in many instances they’re finding deficits. 
They’re finding that there were assets on the books on 
properties in many locations that have not the value that is 
being shown on the financial statements. And so this 
amalgamated merge to the financial statement is very difficult 
to bring together. 
 
Coupling that with the fact they now have to go into a new 
fiscal year, so they’re preparing budgets for in essence eight 
months. They have to bring together all the assets in the 
communities. They’ve got to then determine what their mill 
rates are going to be, and they have to recognize that within 
most of these boards there is a fair bit of discrepancy on what 
were the mill rates of the boards previously. I know in the 
Northeast for example the mill rates previously ran from 15 to 
22 mills. And as a result they’ve now got to decide at what level 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

they’re going to bring together the new amalgamated mill rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to make this more difficult, we also then to make 
sure everything was very much complicated in this whole 
process, they are now moving into the new foundation 
operating grant structure. They’re moving to a system that 
would instead of having a great number of factors that go into 
the calculation of the operating grant, they are now minimizing 
those factors so that it moves towards a single value per student, 
if you like, for the operating grant — urban, rural, remote 
locations or otherwise. That, Mr. Speaker, is a matter for some 
debate. 
 
It has always been held in my opinion that it did indeed and was 
recognized that there were indeed extra costs to provide a unit 
of education in rural and particularly remote rural locations as 
compared to the concentrated urban locations. There also are 
arguments that would be said in the urban locations that they 
have a disportionate number of special needs students that 
require extra funding as well, and that debate is one that is 
ongoing. 
 
[11:15] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my point is this: at the end of the day in the 
budget that was tabled there was 11-extra million dollars of 
funding for the learning system K to 12. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
bottom line is, is when you look at the costs of providing basic 
educational services in this province, the $11 million is simply 
not going to be enough to provide the increased costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everywhere in the education system these 
costs are indeed occurring. In some places though . . . And I 
would argue that there is a special case that can be argued in 
rural locations, and that is because of the influence of the cost 
of transportation particularly on their system. In the urban 
centres they have all of the costs of heating and electricity and 
support staff and things of that nature, as they do in rural 
locations. But in the rural locations particularly with the fact 
that we’ve got oil over $70 a barrel, that we see diesel and fuel 
costs going up dramatically to transport students, we see this as 
a burden that is particularly onerous for the rural boards of 
education. And therefore, we’re ending up with situations that 
are untenable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to make this even more complicated and to further 
put extra burdens on people in the province, we see in some 
jurisdictions, and the most glaring one in terms of the total 
numbers is the Weyburn School Division — the Cornerstone 
School Division in Weyburn — who is seeing a decrease in the 
funding grant from the board or the Department of Education of 
$5.539 million, Mr. Speaker. It’s the largest decrease in funding 
anywhere in the province, and it’s particularly difficult to see 
this kind of a massive removal of provincial funding in one 
school year to any jurisdiction in the province. 
 
Now the government argues that’s because there is a zero-grant 
board in this jurisdiction in the new amalgamated issue. Now I 
fail to understand why this would impact in a comparison from 
last year to this year. If it’s a zero-grant board, they received no 
funding last year from the province of Saskatchewan either. So 
if there is no funding for that component of this board this year, 
it really is a comparison that should not explain this kind of a 

loss. I recognize and see that there is some student loss in the 
jurisdiction, some 2 per cent or 164 students. And that does 
explain a certain amount of funding that is not available 
because of the loss of population. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the amounts are simply outrageous in terms 
of the impact on the people in the Weyburn area. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the kind of thing that does little to have people 
understand and build support for the schools in their 
community. What people are going to see in that area is a 
massive shifting of money onto their property taxes. And that is 
going to create an environment whereby people again are not 
going to be as supportive as they should be of the great 
fundamental work that school divisions do and school systems 
do to provide education for children. 
 
So instead of having a discussion about the value of the 
education in these communities, what we end up having happen 
far too often is the discussion about the funding and the fairness 
of the funding of the education because the government simply 
has not provided adequate funding for the education system in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we’re going through such a massive 
restructuring of any provision of fundamental services, there 
has to be time to allow this to happen in a way that is 
appropriate and fair. And if indeed there has to be and it is 
appropriate that there’s a shifting of funding from rural to urban 
locations, if the argument indeed is valid and accepted that this 
should be done, then, Mr. Speaker, it’s got to be done in a way 
that looks after the fundamental funding of the costs of learning 
and the costs of providing basic services. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move today, seconded by 
the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for not 
providing adequate funding to all boards of education to 
cover the increased costs of delivering education 
programs, resulting in increased mill rates and further tax 
increases to ratepayers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for not 
providing adequate funding to all boards of education to 
cover the increased costs of delivering education 
programs, resulting in increased mill rates and further tax 
increases to ratepayers. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a pleasure to enter into debate this morning on the 
motion that my colleague has put forward regarding funding of 
the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try to spend my short time explaining 
a little bit to the people that are not only watching but may read 
the transcripts of this morning’s debate about how education is 
funded in the province of Saskatchewan. Because there has to 
be an understanding first of all before you recognize whether or 
not problems develop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the Department of Learning’s information 
that they circulate, they explain the provincial K to 12 operating 
grant by simplifying it to a formula. And basically what they 
say to the people and to everyone involved in education that the 
funding formula is simply A minus B equals C. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to clarify that A means it is the 
school division’s recognized expenditures. Okay, so that means 
that all of the costs of operating a school division whether 
they’re human resource costs, the teachers, the bus drivers, 
everyone that is employed by a school division. It is also the 
cost of classroom materials. It is the cost of physical education 
materials. It is everything that is involved in the operation of a 
school division. 
 
B is the school division’s recognized local revenues. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is determined, first of all, by the government. It is 
not determined by the local tax base. What the government does 
or the Department of Learning does is take the assessment of 
that particular school division and apply equalized mill rate to 
that assessment so that all school divisions are treated equally. 
That is what is meant by recognized local revenues. 
 
So now you have local expenditures, A, minus B, the revenues 
that can be derived by that formula of applying that uniform 
mill rate to the assessment, and the difference between that is C, 
which is the operating grant. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to enter into . . . a paragraph into 
the record here. This is put forward by the Department of 
Learning. And it helps to explain why school divisions, certain 
school divisions, are in the predicament that they are today. 
And the paragraph is this, and I quote: 
 

Since the total provincial operating grant is a fixed 
amount, the formula (A - B = C) must balance. Any 
increase in recognized expenditures must be offset either 
by an equal increase in recognized revenues, provincial 
grant or a combination of recognized revenue and 
provincial grant. Similarly, any adjustments that result in a 
grant increase for one or more than one school division 
can only be achieved by reducing grants to other school 
divisions by an equal amount.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that last statement I think summarizes what people 
are saying across the province when you have a decision made 
by this government to change the amount of money that is 
derived at the local level. They have made those changes to a 
significant number of school divisions. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
there are nine school divisions who actually are going to be 
receiving less grant. 
 
Now the reason for that, and the Minister of Finance, the former 
minister of Learning, understands this and I think he 
understands this quite well. When he says . . . He knows that if 
you are going to address an inequity in terms of the funding 

provided to students in a public school board versus those 
students in rural Saskatchewan — and there are some who 
would argue that it is more expensive to deliver an education in 
rural Saskatchewan — but if you understand the concept and 
agree with the concept that you have to make the student worth 
the same amount of dollars, Mr. Speaker, whether they live in 
Regina, whether they’re taking grade 10 in a high school here in 
Regina, or whether they’re taking grade 10 in Invermay School, 
the government has decided that the amount of grant provided 
for that student shall be the same. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that movement of recognizing an increased 
cost for a student is significant. It’s millions of dollars. And I 
had the opportunity to look at again the government’s website 
where they recognize the school divisions, the larger urban 
school divisions in Regina, in Saskatoon, both the public and 
the separate systems, Prince Albert. The amount of money 
allocated to those — I believe it’s six or seven school divisions 
— is about $18 million from the operating grant formula. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s more money than was put in by the Minister of 
Finance into the total operating grant formula. 
 
Now you remember, Mr. Speaker, the last sentence that I read 
from the government’s information says that if you increase 
money to a particular school division it is at the expense of 
another school division because the grant remains the same. 
They don’t adjust the grant. So what has happened to many 
school divisions, especially in Weyburn? In my area of 
Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker, the Good Spirit School Division, 
they have had a reduction in the amount of tax dollars that they 
will receive from the government by way of a grant. It’s been 
reduced. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at the same time the Good Spirit School 
Division has had a reduction in its assessment — small, but a 
reduction. So if you apply that formula that says that you take 
an assessment and you multiply it by a particular computational 
mill rate, or equalization mill rate, that number is now going to 
be smaller as well. So, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out from the 
information provided by the Department of Learning, where 
does the board of education receive its money? Where does it 
balance its books? The grant has been made smaller. There is a 
cost that in fact is increasing. 
 
My colleague from Melfort pointed out some of the increases 
that are taking place: the new contract for human resources, 
whether that be teachers or any of the other people involved in 
providing the education system; utility rate increases; or for that 
matter, Mr. Speaker, just regular cost of inflation. Those dollars 
are estimated to be significant. In fact I understand that the 
School Boards Association is suggesting that the cost of 
education in the province of Saskatchewan for the pre-K to 12 
system is going to be increasing by as much as 40 to $70 
million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I just indicated to you, the foundation 
grant formula has only increased by 11 million. If costs are 
going to increase by 40 million — we’ll stay on the low end of 
the range of projection — where does the rest of the money 
come from? 
 
Now I listened very interestingly this morning to the minister 
stand in his place and say there will be no tax increases in these 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

school divisions. Now tell me, how does he expect the board of 
education to provide a balanced budget? 
 
Now I understand the Minister of Finance does not understand 
the word balanced budget, but school divisions must provide a 
balanced budget. If they’re short a specific amount of money 
when they have prepared their budget, they have two choices, 
Mr. Speaker. They can reduce costs, which means cut staff, cut 
personnel, cut program, close schools, a variety of things that 
they can do. But, Mr. Speaker, those are all cuts that will be 
done at that local level. 
 
Now if they decide that due to the fact that, you know, the loss 
of a certain number of students across a whole division doesn’t 
mean it came out of one specific area where you can now 
reduce the number of teaching staff. Because if you have a 
classroom that had 19 students in it last year and today it has 16 
students in it, that doesn’t mean that you can cut a teacher, if 
you look at the whole school and now that it’s dropped 15 or 16 
or 17 students. So, Mr. Speaker, the choice that a board of 
education has is to go to the taxpayer because the grant, as I 
indicated, is fixed. So this government has decided that we’re 
not going to provide enough dollars to address all of the things 
that are coming towards the boards of education as far as costs. 
 
We listened to the Premier talk about 60/40 funding of 
education in rural Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is just 
not going to be accurate. And the reason it’s not going to be 
accurate is that the boards of education, predominantly in rural 
Saskatchewan, are going to be faced with a revenue shortfall. 
And if that revenue is required from the taxpayer, they’re going 
to apply it to the mill rate. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other things that this 
government has failed to recognize and one of them is the 
capital expenditures. Mr. Speaker, last year in the budget that 
we have looked at, the amount of money that was allocated for 
capital expenditure was about $37 million. That has been 
reduced, Mr. Speaker, this year to 21 million. Now inflation 
takes up all of that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are tremendous inadequacies and 
weaknesses in the system and I’m pleased to second the motion 
put forward by the member from Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s a pleasure to stand in the House and speak against this 
motion put forward by the opposition. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I 
would argue that this government has done more to ensure 
equitable funding of our education system and equitable 
learning opportunities for students than has been done in the 
past 60 years. 
 
This government has made significant changes to the K to 12 
education system to ensure that all K to 12 students here in our 
province have access to the best possible education 

opportunities regardless of where they live. And with that 
we’ve made significant changes in how we fund our education 
system to ensure it is accessible, equitable, and sustainable to 
all our students and ratepayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s response to the Boughen 
Commission in May of ’04 committed to a three-phase initiative 
to renew our education system here in Saskatchewan. We 
promised to restructure school division boundaries to create 
fewer, larger divisions with the capacity to deliver high-quality 
programs and service to all students. 
 
We said we would develop a new system of school operating 
grants that is simpler, fairer, and more transparent. And we said 
we would address the issue of property taxes and dedicate 30 
per cent of new and ongoing compensation on equalization 
from Ottawa to property tax relief to shift that balance off of 
education property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, boundary changes are now complete and we now 
have 28 school divisions where before we had 81. Former 
zero-grant boards have been amalgamated into larger divisions, 
and this has made financing and services for students across the 
province more equitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made substantial progress in our 
commitment to redevelop the school operating grant, guided by 
four principles — equity, simplicity, transparency, and 
accountability. 
 
In ’06-07 boards will receive more unconditional funding, more 
funding earlier in the fiscal year, and will have greater 
management flexibility. We have eliminated the urban-rural 
basic rate differential, resulting in a common basic rate for all 
students regardless of where they live. And this change is 
balanced by continued — and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like the 
opposition to listen to this — by continued recognition for rural 
schools through isolated schools and higher transportation rates 
and continued differentials for shared services and technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year provincial funding for K to 12 operating 
grants is up $10.8 million and brings our ’06-07 funding to 
$563.2 million. However, Mr. Speaker, the total provincial 
operating grant is a fixed amount. And as the member said, the 
grant is provided to school divisions using an equalization 
formula based on the principles of fairness and equity. 
 
The grant formula distributes funding to divisions based on 
need. School divisions with lower assessment and therefore 
lesser capacity to raise revenue locally receive higher levels of 
support, while school divisions with greater capacity to raise 
funding at the local level receive a lower level of support. 
 
These principles of fairness and equity have long characterized 
the foundation operating grant, and in recent times the 
development of highly assessed school divisions threatened to 
undermine the long-standing principles on which school 
division funding was based. Restructuring helped to re-address 
this concern, which also means the highly assessed areas — 
usually occurring as a result of natural resources such as oil and 
gas — would make a fair and equitable contribution to the 
provincial funding pool, provincial funding that would benefit 
all students regardless of local circumstance. 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

And as we said we would do in our response to the Boughen 
Commission, Mr. Speaker, we provided education property tax 
relief. Last year, Mr. Speaker, we announced education property 
tax relief for ’05 and ’06 totalling $110 million, and in March of 
this year our Premier announced a 53 million in targeted 
support for agricultural properties. This is ongoing, sustainable 
funding to support our farm families. Combined with the 
agricultural land share of the 55 million, this additional $53 
million will mean an overall 38 per cent reduction of the 
education portion of property tax on farm land. It will mean for 
our producers that the provincial local split on average, 
provincial-wide basis on education property tax will be 60/40 
now. 
 
The Premier also stated when he made his announcement in 
Birch Hills that this is a long-term commitment — that on 
average, provincial basis, the 60/40 split on agricultural land 
will be maintained indefinitely. And we will monitor this yearly 
to ensure that this commitment is met. Our Premier has 
delivered on this commitment that the status quo is not an 
option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also this government’s ongoing commitment 
to continue to work with boards of education and our education 
partners to bring the provincial-local 60/40 split on education 
funding to all classes of property tax. This is our long-term 
goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time, the single largest operating cost 
for school divisions is teachers’ salaries which account for 
almost half of all division costs. In 2005-06 and ’06-07, the 
government provided funding to fully cover the cost of current 
teachers’ collective agreement totalling $41.6 million. This is a 
significant cost that the province has borne alone to help 
mitigate further pressure on property tax base and local boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government continues to provide 
financial assistance to restructuring school divisions. In ’05-06, 
the government provided $8.5 million in funding to cover those 
transition costs that resulted from restructuring. This year we 
will provide a further 4 million for these costs, bringing our 
contribution to the one-time restructuring costs of 12.5 million. 
This funding has been provided so that the boards of education 
can direct their resources towards program delivery and service 
enhancement for students. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think we can agree that we have 
made substantial progress in our commitment to provide the 
highest quality education to all of Saskatchewan students 
regardless of where they live. 
 
We also need to be mindful that each year changes in enrolment 
and programs within school divisions, as well as changes in 
taxable assessment and provincial funding levels, can cause 
significant shifts in the allocation of funding. This year 11 out 
of 28 school divisions will receive grant increases in excess of 5 
per cent and 8 will receive grant increases up to 5 per cent. In 
other words, 68 per cent of our school divisions have received 
an increased grant in the 2006-07 year. 
 
As we anticipated, the creation of larger school divisions has 
had a significant impact on school division grants. Elimination 
of inequities caused by zero-grant boards has increased the 

taxable assessment for students, and their local revenue raising 
capacity is now benefiting the new larger divisions. However in 
this transitional year, this will result in significantly reduced 
provincial grants for 9 of our 28 school divisions. Allowing 
these changes to impact the grant funding is consistent with the 
principle of equity. The larger divisions blend urban and rural 
areas, allowing all school divisions to achieve similar 
economies of scale. This equalizing feature is fundamental to 
the allocation of the provincial operating grant. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the most significant 
determinants within the grant is student enrolment counts. 
Decreases in school division enrolment will result in decreased 
grant allocations. Conversely the reverse occurs for those 
school divisions that experience an increase in enrolments. 
Enrolment declines occur every year and have a significant 
impact on the grant a school division receives and the overall 
grant distribution. Student counts as of September ’05 are 
down, and only four divisions have been positively affected by 
enrolment increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we expect these enrolment declines may result in 
some reduction in staffing levels of . . . boards of education 
adjust to the lower enrolments and as we recognize that some of 
our newly restructured school divisions will be challenged to 
address issues as well as other challenges caused by 
reassessment and the elimination of zero-grant boards. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I do appreciate this opportunity to 
give a quick overview of the funding to Saskatchewan schools. 
Madam Speaker, the opposition is inaccurate in their comments 
and their allegations, and we’ll continue to support education in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. This 
is a very interesting debate that touches the very heart of 
Saskatchewan. It touches the people and the students and the 
children of this province. So I’d like to read a headline from one 
of my local papers dealing with this very issue. And the 
headline in the Carlyle Observer says, “Significant impact of 
the provincial budget announcement.” 
 
Now in itself that’s a fairly generic comment on the budget. It 
says it has a significant impact — doesn’t say good or bad. But 
the article itself really explains the feelings of rural residents as 
to what this government has done to education across rural 
Saskatchewan. It talks about: 
 

The provincial restructuring initiative and regional pooling 
has resulted in an estimated loss of provincial grant 
revenue to this area [southeast Saskatchewan] of over 5.3 
million dollars. 

 
And I’ll quote again: 
 

This is a loss of 56% of the provincial grant previously 
received for public education in the southeast. 

 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

And we’re talking the South East Cornerstone School Division 
— the Weyburn School Division — Madam Deputy Speaker. 
And they have taken a hit of 56 per cent of their provincial 
grant money. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is a huge hit. That means 
that the dollars that are going in to support education can only 
come from one other place, and that’s from the property tax 
payers of the southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
And while the minister in reading her speech may have said that 
there was changes in the oil and gas revenues, yes there have 
been in that area. But when the division sets the mill rate it 
doesn’t just target that on to those industries that have 
developed, on to the oil and gas industry. Everybody is affected 
by that increased mill rate. Whether you’re the smallest 
business person, the smallest farmer, whether you’re a 
homeowner working for the Department of Highways — 
whomever it may be — whether you’re a schoolteacher in the 
division, you pay that additional mill rate. And there will be an 
increase in that mill rate. 
 
The old Bengough-Weyburn Rural Division they amalgamated 
a few years ago . . . I don’t remember the name of that division, 
the new name that they had picked. Everybody just thought of it 
as Weyburn Rural or Bengough. And they’re going to face up 
to a 50 per cent increase in their mill rate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — South Central. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Now when you’re talking . . . The past 
minister says South Central. The individual families that are 
going to be paying that don’t simply look at the mill rate. They 
don’t simply look at what their assessment is. They look at the 
real dollars they spent on education property taxes last year. 
They look at the real dollars that they’re spending this year. 
And notwithstanding the government’s promise of some tax 
relief on property taxes — an ad hoc tax relief; nothing in place 
permanently; it’s year-to-year announcements — 
notwithstanding that, those families, farms, businesses, 
individuals are all going to face paying more money for 
education. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that goes counter to what the 
Minister of Finance was saying in question period — that there 
would be no tax increase. Madam Deputy Speaker, there most 
assuredly will be a tax increase for a good many people in the 
Weyburn School Division. 
 
It’s not like the Department of Education didn’t know about it, 
because I’ll quote again from this article in the Carlyle 
Observer. I quote: 
 

The Board [meaning the school division board] was 
proactive in sharing its concerns with [the] Department of 
Learning officials two months prior to the budget. 
Property tax relief for agricultural producers, although 
welcome by the Board of Education, provides no ability 
for the Board to reduce the burden of education property 
taxes to all taxpayers of the southeast. 
 

Most of the taxpayers in the Southeast will see a property tax 
increase even after you have subtracted any small amount of 
money that may have come from the Premier’s much-belated 
announcement on property tax relief. It was announced in the 
2003 election campaign and it’s finally, a little bit of it, going to 
be delivered this year. 
 
You know, so I understand the government members opposite 
look with some skepticism when members of the opposition 
stand and talk about issues. They seem to believe that members 
on this side of the House are unaware of the issues and don’t 
know what the real concerns are, you know. And I have to 
question whether the minister knows what the real concerns are 
when it comes to education, when she’s afraid to stray from a 
prepared text in talking on this very issue, madam. She had to 
read her speech because she was afraid to stray from whatever it 
was that her officials had written for her. 
 
I’d like to read from an editorial, also from the Carlyle paper by 
Jerry Mamer. Now Jerry was the former mayor of Stoughton, 
but that’s not what his claim to fame would be on this particular 
issue. His claim to fame on this, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
would be that Jerry was the long-time principal of the 
Stoughton K to 12 school, so very familiar with education, very 
familiar with education in the Southeast, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And he is a new . . . he would have been . . . His 
school would be within the boundary of the South East 
Cornerstone, the Weyburn School Division. 
 
And he goes on to say in his editorial, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and I quote, “This certainly looks like a cash grab to me.” And 
that’s exactly what’s happening, that the system that is taking 
place here is grabbing more dollars from the families in that 
school division. 
 
And as my colleagues have pointed out earlier, it’s certainly not 
the only school division because there’s eight or nine of them 
for a total of $13 million, which is more money than the 
Minister of Finance put in as additional money in this year’s 
budget in the Department of Education. 
 
So Mr. Mamer goes to say, “The school division in the 
southwest is rumoured to be thinking of eliminating up to fifty 
teaching positions.” So this affects not only property taxpayers. 
It affects not only students. It affects teachers very dramatically. 
And I know that the southeast school division is in a very same 
position. The South West School Division is looking at cutting 
up to 50 teachers. I know that the Weyburn School Division is 
looking at cutting up to 40 to 50 teachers. It’s going to have a 
huge impact across the whole area. 
 
That means student ratios are going to go up. Yes, there’s a 164 
less students in the Weyburn School Division. If you cut out 
even 40, that’s one teacher for every four students that were 
lost. I don’t think that student/teacher ratios in that division are 
1:4. So this is going to have a huge impact in the communities. 
It’s going to have an impact with those that are available to 
support communities in total, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr. Mamer goes on to talk about that 
“While there’s a moratorium on our schools at the present time, 
that will be coming off at the end of this year, and there will be 
significant closures of schools.” 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

You know, the minister talked about the level of support that 
the province provides for education. In the Weyburn School 
Division next year, there will be no level of support. The 
property taxpayers of that area will have to support the 
education costs 100 per cent on their backs. 
 
And schools are closed already. In the last two years 
Gainsborough School has closed. The Storthoaks School has 
closed. The Alida School has closed. And on the chopping 
block may very well be a couple of more schools — just in my 
constituency, not in the whole division. Carievale and Manor 
Schools would also be in jeopardy. So when the minister is 
talking about support, the province is not providing the 
necessary support. And it’s hurting the education of the students 
in southeast Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I am indeed pleased to enter into this debate today. 
This is an important debate about the future of education in our 
province and indeed very much allows us to highlight our 
vision and our belief of how we can make that education system 
more sustainable, how we can strengthen the ability for teachers 
to provide high-quality learning throughout all communities in 
this province, including those that are not blessed with a lot of 
the resources that we see in some of the divisions. 
 
When I was initially appointed as the minister of Learning just 
after the 2003 election, I had an opportunity to meet with a 
number of stakeholders from across the province including 
parents, including representatives of the business officials, 
including trustees. And it became clear as we had the discussion 
that there were some real difficulties within the system. 
Saskatchewan education is changing. In part it is changing 
because of a decline in student population numbers. 
 
In the last 10 years, we have seen about a 25,000 student 
population drop within the system . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well the member opposite says that the declining birth rate 
is the fault of the NDP government. That is an interesting 
argument when in fact declining birth rates are a phenomenon 
across the country. 
 
What we have seen though is 25,000 fewer children in the 
system. By necessity, you would argue then that there is a 
change going on within Saskatchewan’s school system, within 
the education system, that is certainly impacting more 
significantly in the southern part of the province where we are 
seeing a combination of urbanization and declining student 
population. Conversely, as you move further north what you see 
is pressure on the system to make sure we’ve got new facilities 
to deal with the growth of the student populations in other 
communities. 
 
So there are two issues at play within the system. One is a . . . 
[inaudible] . . . student numbers across the province, and the 
second is a shift within the province as to where those students 
are. 
 
The system that we had in place was really designed by 

Woodrow Lloyd when he was the Education minister under 
Premier Douglas. It was a system that was, at the time, in 1944 
. . . a major set of changes, the first major set that had really 
been undertaken since ’05. In 1944 they decided that they 
would embark on a — introduced rather famously in this 
legislature — a Bill simply called the larger school division 
Bill. This caused a number of amalgamations to happen at that 
point. I think they dropped from almost 1,000 school divisions 
down to at that point I think about a couple hundred I think is 
what they were at. And what we saw in 1944 was essentially the 
system re-stabilize. That worked fairly well as the province 
went through the ’50s and ’60s and remained largely unchanged 
until we introduced this last set of changes in the last two years. 
 
As a result of change not having been undertaken in that time 
period since Woodrow Lloyd had been the Education minister, 
one of the things that became obvious is that the systems that 
were in place were no longer working as accurately or as much 
as perhaps we would have hoped in terms of the benefit of 
students. And there were a number of areas where we saw the 
problem.  
 
First of all, the system became characterized by a number of 
disparities. There was a disparity in the ability for different 
school divisions to provide resources to the students in the 
schools. That disparity was in some cases as much as 25 to 1, 
meaning simply, some divisions had the ability to provide 25 
times the resources per student than others in the poorer 
divisions. 
 
The second problem that we saw is that the ability to raise 
money was also suffering from disparity. And so what we were 
not having any longer was a relatively uniform mill rate across 
the province. There was not a relatively uniform taxation 
policy. Instead we had a fairly significant swing of almost 10 
mills. Some divisions were charging as low as 13 mills. Some 
were charging as high as 24. 
 
And what we were seeing as a result of that is that when you 
take a look at what that means, property that was worth 
approximately half a million dollars is taxed significantly 
differently depending on where it was located within the 
province. From a taxpayer’s perspective that’s simply not fair. 
So we had a problem that the system was no longer equitable in 
terms of its ability to raise resources and no longer fair in which 
the way it was doing it. 
 
We had, in the late part of the ’60s, early part of the ’70s, come 
up with an equalization formula to try and sort some of this out, 
and it was called the foundation operating grant program. That 
program had a number of factors. I think there was some 20 
factors that were included within it taking a look at special 
needs, distance, sparsity, basic per-pupil rates, transportation 
factors, and a whole range of other ones. The formula however, 
because of the number of times we went in to amend it in that 
30 years since it was introduced, became so complex that it was 
very hard to predict what the funding was. 
 
So when I became the minister of Learning the one thing I 
heard time and again from every set of the stakeholders was, 
simplify the system, make it more transparent, make it fairer. 
And that was what we embarked on. 
 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

As a result of Ray Boughen’s work, one of the things that Ray 
Boughen had recommended is that we embark on full provincial 
pooling of all commercial and resource revenues. This would 
have had a significant consequence, particularly in rural 
divisions, that would have moved oil and gas revenue out of the 
rural regions to the benefit of all students throughout the 
province. While that would have certainly aided some of the 
poorer divisions in terms of meeting their needs, it was seen 
largely by stakeholders to confiscatory and as such we rejected 
that recommendation of Mr. Boughen’s. 
 
Instead what we embarked on was a regional pooling model 
which said you need not have line of sight to the nearest oil well 
in order to benefit from it, but indeed the larger communities 
around, within the regions, should have access to those 
resources. And as such, we embarked on these larger school 
divisions, going from 82 divisions down to 28 divisions. 
 
The result was a simpler system. We have a fairer system. We 
have a system today which is more manageable. And we have a 
system which allows for regional pooling of resources. One of 
the consequences of that is that, as the money is now being 
collected within the taxes, it is being shared somewhat 
differently within the regions. 
 
South East Cornerstone is an interesting example of this. Within 
the South East Cornerstone division today, we have a huge 
disparity within what the mill rates were. The city of Estevan, 
for example, had the highest mill rate within that newly 
reformed division at almost 22 mills. Conversely, just outside of 
Estevan in the south central area you’ve got a mill rate of barely 
15, barely 15 mills. So this is a huge difference — 6 mills 
within the neighbouring area. 
 
What this system of regional pooling will allow us to do is to 
come up with a relatively uniform mill rate. Simply put, that 
will mean certainly some mill rates will come up; some mill 
rates will go down. And that was very much what the objective 
was, was to reduce the tax burden that was being felt in some 
communities, particularly Estevan, and in this case we would 
also see the same in terms of Weyburn. 
 
It does however mean that some of the oil-rich, resource-rich 
areas that have a lot of commercial and pipeline activity are 
going to see an increase in their mill rates. This is part of what 
we are calling on them to do to support the education in the 
communities that simply don’t have derricks located in the 
middle of the downtown. I think it’s a fair system, and I think 
it’s an appropriate one. 
 
We have also embarked to increase the amount of funding to 
education in this budget. We have embarked to make sure that 
there is a simpler, fairer foundation operating grant system, that 
relies not only on per-pupil rates but takes into account still a 
number of factors. Undoubtedly we’ll need to account for 
special-needs students. We’re going to need to look at sparsity 
and density factors. We need to take into account transportation 
issues. There are a number of these issues that will continue. 
However it will not need to be the complex, convoluted formula 
that currently exists. 
 
[12:00] 
 

The other thing that we embarked to do was to provide this year 
in this budget $67 million worth of property tax relief 
specifically for farmers. And we did that because we recognize 
the problem that people are feeling and the unfairness that is 
perceived with the tax on farm land. This is not a reduction 
which is available to commercial owners; that’s true. It’s not 
available to the resource companies, and it’s not applied on the 
residential property beyond the 8 per cent. But that 67 million 
allows us to correct an imbalance in terms of how, particularly 
in rural areas, how the money is collected. 
 
I believe that the agenda that we laid out that is being carried 
forward by the Minister of Learning will provide us with a 
system that is simpler, that is fairer, that is more transparent. As 
we go through the transition, certainly there’ll be shifts within. 
But it is simply nothing more than fearmongering by an 
opposition to say that across the board that it’s either a tax grab 
or that it is going to result in higher mill rates. This is simply 
unfounded. Because it is a closed system, it will create shifts 
within it. Many divisions will receive more money. Some 
divisions will receive less money. It will be picked up by 
assessment, and that will be done on a differential basis. 
 
I think the members opposite are aware of that. What is 
essential in this however, I think, is that we take a look at this in 
a way which is accurate, which is fair, and is removed from the 
fearmongering which we’re seeing opposite. I would support 
the Minister of Learning and oppose the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. And one 
of the problems with speaking in fourth place on the Speaker’s 
roster is that most of the good material you wanted to use has 
already been covered by your colleagues. And I know that the 
critic for Education, the member for Melfort, understands this 
whole issue very well from a philosophical and technical basis. 
I know the member from Canora-Pelly covered a lot of the 
financial implications and the tax data and the enrolment issues 
that are going to be implicated by the amalgamation issue. My 
colleague from Cannington covered some of the human cost of 
this particular government initiative.  
 
But nevertheless, Madam Deputy Speaker, I wanted to take a 
few minutes to involve myself in this debate because from the 
perspective of southwest Saskatchewan, the constituency of 
Cypress Hills, lesser so maybe for the constituency of Swift 
Current, but part of Wood River, part of Thunder Creek, this 
amalgamation will be nothing less than a travesty for the people 
down there. For the students affected, for the parents affected, 
for the teachers who will be affected ultimately, for the 
communities that will be affected by school closures, and for 
landowners and property taxpayers throughout the entire 
constituency, this particular plan is a travesty because of the 
hardship it will bring to the constituents of the far Southwest. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, forced amalgamation of education in 
this province was really a Trojan Horse. It was given the 
appearances of equity and fairness. It was given the appearances 
of better education, better programming, more opportunities. 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

All of those things were promised as part of the forced 
amalgamation agenda. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe 
that it would be safe to say on behalf of the constituents of the 
Southwest constituencies, and specifically the Cypress Hills 
area, that none of those promises are likely to be realized 
without inflicting a lot of pain on the people of the region. 
 
What this amalgamation has produced are huge school districts. 
Nowhere is that more a fact of life than in the southwest part of 
this province. I would like to just show how that is true, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, by referring to this map that was pulled off the 
website of Saskatchewan Learning. And when you look at the 
Cypress Hills area which is now known as the Chinook School 
District Region 2. It is now at least one and a half times the size 
of the Cypress Hills provincial electoral constituency. That 
means, Madam Deputy Speaker, that there is roughly 
16,000-plus square miles inside the boundaries of Region 2 — 
16,000 square miles. 
 
I would argue, Madam Deputy Speaker, that if the 
one-size-fits-all approach had not been taken in this 
amalgamation process, the southwest part of the province ought 
to have been treated like the Far North. The scarcity of 
population, the vast geographical area, the distance to cover 
from community to community really makes us much more 
akin to the regions of the Far North. 
 
We’re not the same as communities immediately outside of 
Regina or Saskatoon. We’re not in a similar situation to the area 
around Humboldt. We’re not in a situation that bears any 
resemblance to Lloydminster for instance. The fact of the matter 
is that the southwest part of the province is completely unique, 
and this particular amalgamation model has created a travesty 
for the people that are affected by this particular huge 
geographical entity — 16,660 square miles — with an 
enrolment of 6,350 students which is about 250 students less 
than what had originally been projected for the area. But what 
makes matters even worse, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that the 
division is already estimating that its enrolment levels will drop 
by another 1,000 students in the next four years — 1,000 
students gone from the Chinook School District or division in 
the next four years. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to 
put those numbers together and to look at the impact on 
education and on the remaining students and the parents that are 
looking desperately for solutions to this dilemma, what that 
impact will be on those people given the loss of another 1,000 
students over the next four years. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, if I look at another piece 
of information from the Department of Education’s website, it 
talks about the operating grant. Now the operating grant that is 
coming to the Chinook School District this year is going to be 
down by $2.786 million. That’s a drop of 32.2 per cent from 
monies received by the school districts prior to this 
amalgamated division. A loss of 32 per cent of funding is 
considered to be fair and equitable? By whose standard? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I listen to the minister, and I listen to 
the former minister of Education — the current Finance 
minister — say that what they were trying to do is achieve 
equity. How can an imposition of a 32 per cent drop in funding 

on one geographical area of the province prove to be equitable? 
What kind of definition would allow for that set of 
circumstances? 
 
Grant decreases caused by negative-grant boards affecting the 
Chinook School District amount to $3.3 million. The taxable 
assessment is up just slightly — less than 1 per cent — and as I 
said, we’re going to lose 248 students this year from last year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this amalgamation effort, while there 
may have been some justification at some level, was simply too 
radical, too dramatic, and too singular-minded to really be about 
the best interests of students. There had to be a much more 
sinister objective. And I believe, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
this is a political, a political ploy, a tack by this particular 
government to impose its will on southwest Saskatchewan in a 
way that is going to be very detrimental to our communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to read just a few words into 
the record today from a story in the Shaunavon Standard on 
April 18, under the headline “School closure concerns.” Here is 
what the human element is all about here. One individual who 
attended this meeting said: 
 

“I don’t like this [one bit]” . . . “We’ve been down this 
road before with health care.” 
 
“We didn’t fight hard enough for our hospital . . . [and] we 
aren’t going to make that same mistake again.” 
 
“We aren’t going to lay down so you can walk all over us 
. . . 
 
. . . [Some suggested] that some schools within the 
division might not be viable in the future [and] that raised 
concerns among those in attendance. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have 63 schools in that massive 
area, 25 of which are on Hutterite colonies, leaving 38 public 
schools. Out of that 38 remaining schools, dozens of them 
frankly are schools of 100 students or less. Some are as few as 
50 students. We even have some that are fewer. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when those schools close, those young 
people are going to be at least 25 to 50 miles further removed 
from the next closest school. What are the options left to 
parents in that situation? Is it the agenda of this government to 
close schools to force people to relocate out of the southwest 
part of the province? I would dare say that will be the result, 
whether or not this government likes it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, at the way we’re losing population 
down there, soon we won’t have any reason to have schools of 
any kind, and it’ll be partially because of this government’s 
philosophy and its agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has elapsed and 
we’re entering the question and answer period. I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce guests, Madam 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. In the gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery today is a 
constituent of mine from Saskatoon, Paul Jacoby, who is a 
teacher at Nutana Collegiate. Paul not only is a very fine 
English teacher in our city, but he also is a great artist. Joining 
Paul today is his mom, Mrs. Jacoby. 
 
I think it was just a little before Christmas, Paul’s father passed 
away, and he was a very long-time civil servant, public servant 
in the province. He served with the Provincial Auditor’s 
department, I think, for over 30 years. 
 
And I don’t know when the last time Mrs. Jacoby was at the 
legislature, but I think we should all welcome not only Paul 
who has travelled here from Saskatoon, but his mom, Mrs. 
Jacoby, to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Funding for Boards of Education 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. My question is 
in fact to the member for the southwest corner of the province 
who in his comments made a fairly fanciful flight of rhetoric, 
accusing of many things. My question to him is simply this: if 
he believes it’s a travesty, if he believes that it’s a sinister 
agenda, will he commit the Sask Party to undoing the 
amalgamations and to freezing all school closures if they’re 
elected? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well that’s an interesting proposition. Maybe I 
should consider that. Madam Deputy Speaker, the fact of the 
matter is that this government could have looked very much 
more carefully at how it was going to design amalgamation. 
They’d had a process in place where they were encouraging 
voluntary amalgamations. There was momentum that was 
taking place. It was working quite well. And frankly, if they had 
allowed that process to move forward, we would have been 
satisfied, I think, with the operations or the outcomes of 
voluntary amalgamations. 
 
And I think that if you let the people make the decisions that are 
in their best interests, frankly quite often they come about with 
a better result than the government has managed in this 
particular instance. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Finance, the former minister of 
Education. If there’s anyone in this Assembly that can answer 
this question with certainty . . . And I heard that member 
heckling, calling across the way saying that he didn’t hear an 
answer. So let’s see how well he answers this question, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Is the minister prepared to guarantee the 
property owners of the southeast corner school division that 
they will not see an increase in their education tax for 2006? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I made it clear in question period today 
that there are sufficient funds being provided through the 
foundation operating grant. That in Estevan — the old Estevan 
Division, in the Sunrise Division — that there is no need for a 
property tax increase. And in fact, in the Estevan Division, there 
should be a property tax cut. 
 
This is very clear within the Weyburn . . . which members 
should know is within the Sunrise School Division. Shame on 
them if they don’t. There should be no reason whatsoever that 
Audrey Trombley and that school division need to increase the 
property taxes in the old Sunrise Division. There will however 
be property tax shifts within that amalgamated division, and 
there will be increased taxes as they move to a uniform mill 
rate, as they see some of the property from the old Estevan rural 
move in and move up to a uniform mill rate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. My question to 
the member from Canora who was the former president of the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association in our province. The 
member will know that the principles of the foundation 
operating grant have been in existence in this province for over 
30 years, and they have weathered a number of administrations. 
My question to him is: do you or do you not support the 
fundamental principles of the foundation operating grant which 
is about equity and fairness? 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, as I tried to explain to the 
members opposite about the foundation grant formula, you have 
to understand the components of A, B, and C if you are to 
understand the formula. And the member opposite has asked a 
question about understanding the foundation grant and 
understanding the actual recognized expenditures. 
 
The minister doesn’t quite understand that recognized 
expenditures are in fact not entirely all of the expenditures that 
a school division has. So to distribute money by a foundation 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

grant formula has been an accepted way and it needs to be 
improved. And therefore when you look at the fact that 
recognized expenditures are at least 15 per cent below the 
amount of expenditures that school divisions actually have, the 
member has to understand that there needs to be an 
improvement in that formula before you can adequately 
distribute the funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
You know, I’m listening to the hypothetical questions from the 
members opposite and I’m glad for their hypothetical questions 
because their questions recognize that the next government in 
Saskatchewan is going to be the Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But we would like to deal with today’s 
issues, not the future government, Madam Deputy Chair. The 
Minister for Finance says there will be no tax increases in the 
South East Cornerstone School Division. So I would like to ask 
the minister of Education, the minister of Education, since they 
cut the budget by $5.6 million there is no tax increase, how . . . 
Is the minister going to guarantee to the students and teachers of 
this division that there will be no program cuts, no teachers will 
be fired, no support staff will be eliminated, and no schools 
closure? 
 
My question is to the minister of Education. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Speaker, it’s been ongoing 
in this House that the Saskatchewan Party, whenever there’s a 
report put forward, they jump out front and say, it’s our idea 
and implement it. Well they did that with Vicq, but Madam 
Speaker, they avoided the harmonization issue. Now also, 
Madam Speaker, with the Boughen report, they also jumped out 
in front of it and said, implement, implement. There’s a number 
of them on record to say, implement the Boughen report. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m curious. Do they support provincial 
pooling? Do they support that recommendation also? Well, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the member from the opposition there, 
he criticized me for reading a speech. Well maybe when I’ve 
been here as long as he has, I’ll have the practice and I can 
stand up and wing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — My question is to the member for 
Cannington. Does the member not understand the difference 
between the old Sunrise Division and the new South East 
Cornerstone Division? Does he not understand how the 
difference in the mill rate affects, or is he purposely, is he 
purposely attempting to draw a different conclusion? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. I 
certainly do understand what happened in southeast 
Saskatchewan with the forced amalgamation of five school 
divisions. What it means is that a significant number of people 
in that school division are going to be facing real dollar 
increases in their property taxes — very, very real property 
taxes. 
 
In fact is the one school division, old school division, is looking 
at a 50 per cent increase in their property taxes — a 50 per cent 
increase. That’s while their schools are being closed; their kids 
are being forced to be bused for hours on the bus. All of this in 
the name of that member’s — when he was the minister of 
Education — idea of better savings and better education. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, his program is not going to deliver 
better education to the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, my question is to the current 
Finance minister, the former minister of Learning. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the minister implied in his comments in the 
Boughen report that there was this huge number of school 
divisions that were outside of the average in the province. 
 
And I note from the Boughen Commission that the report of 
Mr. Boughen indicates that the average mill rate in the province 
in the year that he provides the data was 19.1. My question is 
very simple. Can the Minister of Finance tell this Assembly 
how many school divisions were beyond 4 mills, either positive 
or negative below that 19.1? So could he answer the questions 
to indicate the number of school divisions that were outside a 4 
mill plus or minus factor of a 19.1 average as provided in the 
Boughen Commission report? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am amazed to hear the Sask Party say 
that they believe an 8-mill variance is an acceptable variance in 
terms of this province. That is a huge, huge amount of money 
that they believe should be allowed to exist. It just shows that 
it’s really about looking after their core constituents and not 
worrying about fairness and equity and transparency. 
 
What I also find interesting is how quickly they have backed 
away from the Boughen Commission recommendation for full 
provincial pooling of resource revenue that we all know would 
have been seen as confiscatory in many of the rural areas, 
although it would have been to the benefit of Saskatoon and 
Regina and the larger divisions. For shame on that member for 
suggesting an 8-mill variance is an acceptable variance. Let us 
hope we never see that party in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister of advanced 
education and learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, my question 
is to the member from Canora who also is a former president of 
the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, and obviously is 
an expert on the foundation operating grant. My question to 
him, given that he is so enamoured with the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for question and answer 
period has elapsed. I thank all members for the spirited debate. 
We will now move forward in the agenda. I remind members 
that they will have time for further debate. Order. Order. 
 
Committee of the Whole. I do now leave the Chair. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Faith Alive Ministries World 
Outreach Centre Inc. Act 

 
The Chair: — The Bill before the committee is Bill No. 301, 
An Act to provide for certain degree granting status for Faith 
Alive Ministries World Outreach Centre Inc. 
 
Questions of the Bill? Seeing no questions of the Bill, I would 
move the preamble. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: An Act to provide for certain degree granting 
status for Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach Centre Inc. 
 
I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Chair, I move that the committee now 
report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moosomin that we now report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. Carried. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Orange Benevolent Society 
Amendment Act 

 
The Chair: — The next Bill before the Assembly is Bill No. 
302, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The Orange 
Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan. 
 
I move the preamble before the Assembly. Any questions of the 
Bill first? Seeing no questions, move the preamble. All those in 
favour? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 
Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan, Bill No. 302. 
 
I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. I move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The member has moved that we report the Bill 
without amendment. Is that the favour of the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
 
The Chair: — The next Bill before the Assembly is Bill No. 
303, An Act to repeal The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995. 
Are there questions of the Bill? Seeing none, I would move the 
preamble. All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 303, An Act to repeal The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Ms. Junor: — I move that this Bill now be reported without 
amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The member has moved that we now report the 
Bill without amendment. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. If I could now invite a member to ask 
the committee to rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Chair, I move the committee rise 
to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — So moved. It has been moved. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[12:30] 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 
Chair of committees. 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Faith Alive Ministries World  
Outreach Centre Inc. Act 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 301 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I move that Bill No. 301 be now read third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that Bill 301 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Orange Benevolent Society 
Amendment Act 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 302 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 302, The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment Act be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that Bill 302 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 

Bill No. 303 —The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the committee to report to you Bill No. 303 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall Bill 303 be read a third time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 303, The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview that Bill 303 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the hour of the day 
and the fact that some of the members of our Assembly are 
about to proceed to celebrating a holy weekend of the 
celebration of Easter in the Ukrainian rite, I’d like to wish those 
hon. members Chrystos Voskres and move adjournment of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1246 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
 Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1247 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1247 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1247 
 Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1247 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1248 
 Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1248 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1248 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1248 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Earth Day 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
 Foam Lake Company Active in Biodiesel Industry 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
 Federal Commitments Regarding the Kyoto Protocol 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
 LeRoy Student Wins First Prize in National Competition 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
 Communities Pull Together to Help Evacuees 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
 Drake’s 2005 Citizen of the Year 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
 First Graduates of New Nursing Education Program 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Budgetary Policies 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1252 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1252 



 

 Funding for Hospital Construction 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
 Status of Agreement Concerning Lakes’ Low Water Levels 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
 Former Member’s Settlement with the Legal Aid Commission 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 The 80th Birthday of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 62 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1258 
 Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
 Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1258 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Funding for Boards of Education 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1260, 1268 
  Higgins ...........................................................................................................................................................................1262, 1269 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................1263, 1269 
  Thomson ........................................................................................................................................................................1265, 1269 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
  Atkinson.........................................................................................................................................................................1268, 1270 
PRIVATE BILLS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 301 — The Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach Centre Inc. Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
 Bill No. 302 — The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment Act 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
 Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach Centre Inc. Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
 Bill No. 302 — The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment Act 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
 Bill No. 303 —The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


