
















































Hansard: April 05, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 35A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 983 
 April 5, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills 
regarding their concerns with the condition of Highway 32. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s signatories come from the communities of 
Prelate, Leader, and from Provost, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens of the province regarding the issue around 
Avastin, the lack of funding by this provincial government, the 
whole issue around two-tier health. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a number of people from 
Balgonie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the government’s refusal to fund the drug Avastin. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Tisdale and 
Porcupine Plain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 

to bring a number of pages of a petition of people who are 
concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Leask, Muenster, 
Rosetown, Humboldt, Margo, Drake, Guernsey, Eatonia, and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from citizens of Biggar who are concerned about the 
possible reductions of the health care services in their 
community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Springwater and Biggar and 
district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
families across Saskatchewan concerned that Saskatchewan is 
the only province besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that does 
not have a children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today live in northeast Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Calgary. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to read a 
petition from people that are concerned with the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous and Young. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about the 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 55. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 55 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Arborfield, Codette, 
Tisdale, and Star City. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 6, 7, 64, 67, 638, 639, 644, 
and 645. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 24 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole of this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Bill is waived for 
Committee of the Whole. The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 24 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 18 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 



April 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 18 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND  
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 19 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of this Bill in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. When shall this Bill be read 
a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 19 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: for the fiscal year 
2005-2006, how many snowmobile licences were sold in 
Saskatchewan? 
 

And I have similar questions for the years 2004-2005, 
2003-2004, 2002-2003, 2001-2002. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: for the fiscal year 
2005-2006, how much revenue was generated for the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association from the sale of 
trail permits on snowmobile licences? 
 

And another question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: for the fiscal year 
2005-2006, how many snowmobile trail permits were 
sold? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2004-2005, 2003-2004, 
2002-2003, and 2001-2002. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 40 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development: for the fiscal year 2005-2006, how many 
snowmobile licences were sold? 

 
And I have similar questions for the years 2004-2005, 
2003-2004, 2002-2003, and 2001-2002. 
 

Also for the Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development: for the fiscal year 2005-2006 
how much revenue was generated for the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association from the sale of trail permits on 
snowmobile licences? 
 

And a final question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall no 
day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2006 

To the Minister of Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development: for the fiscal year 2005-2006 how many 
snowmobile trail permits were sold? 
 

And also for the years 2004-2005, 2003-2004, 2002-2003, and 
2001-2002. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you the Consul General of France in 
Toronto, Mr. Philippe Delacroix. He is seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery. This is Mr. Delacroix’s first official visit to our 
province. This morning he met with the Minister of Agriculture 
and Food and the Minister of Industry and Resources and the 
associate deputy minister of Industry and Resources. And we 
also hosted him to a lunch this noon hour. 
 
Later this afternoon he will be meeting with the vice-president, 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership and the executive 
director of the French education and languages branch in the 
Department of Learning. 
 
Members may be aware that France has the fifth largest 
economy in the world and is our second largest foreign investor 
in Canada. We have an excellent trading relationship. We 
export uranium to France and we import wine, French wine, 
from France. 
 
The French relationship with this continent of course dates back 
to 400 years when Samuel de Champlain established the first 
settlement at Ile Ste-Croix. And we’re glad that the Consul 
General is here to help us celebrate the 100th anniversary of this 
legislature here in Saskatchewan. Would members please 
welcome the Consul General. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And of course seated with the Consul General 
today is our own Dr. Michael Jackson. Welcome back, Dr. 
Jackson. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery we have four northern champions that are 
visiting the city today. They have also got some business on a 
wide variety of fronts and I want to especially welcome Randy 
Stomp who’s the vocational counsellor with the Gary Tinker 
Federation and as well George Ward who is the executive 
director of the Gary Tinker Federation and really a very, very 
good supporter, a very strong advocate for disabled people. 
 
[13:45] 
 
And one individual from Cumberland House who’s the 
vice-chairman of the Gary Tinker Federation has got his class 
1A driver’s licence and has worked very hard and tells me that 
he started his effort in life after he got hurt, being challenged by 
a doctor to sit in a wheelchair or work very hard. And he’s done 

a tremendous job of that and is indeed a great credit to the 
North and to the Gary Tinker Federation. And that’s the 
vice-chair of the federation, Mr. Clinton Carriere of 
Cumberland House. And of course the namesake of the Gary 
Tinker Federation was Gary Tinker himself. 
 
And these folks travelled a long ways and coordinated a trip to 
Regina. They’ll be here for a couple of days. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So that’s a Pinehouse story that I want to tell Gary, and of 
course he likes it because he’s from Pinehouse originally. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
these very fine group of people that are advocating and fighting 
for many of the rights and the respect that the disabled 
community in the North and across Saskatchewan want and 
deserve. So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to give a big, 
warm welcome to our special guests from the North. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Annual Dinner 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night the Saskatchewan Party held their annual leader’s dinner 
and what an event it was. Over 1,000 people strong listened to 
the young, dynamic leader of the Saskatchewan Party, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
That member spoke of a vision for our Saskatchewan economy, 
a vision to keep our young people here and a vision for the 
future of this province. I will read from a news story on CJME 
this morning. Mr. Wall was “Speaking to over double the 
amount the Premier had done the week before . . .” Double the 
amount the Premier had at his dinner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can understand why over 1,000 people would 
want to come to hear a positive message from a party with new 
ideas for our province. And, Mr. Speaker, we can also 
understand why there was a considerably smaller crowd for the 
Premier. No one wants to hear the old, tired, worn-out message 
from the NDP [New Democratic Party]. They are tired of 
unfulfilled expectations that has become the trademark of this 
socialist government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Although it was difficult to hear, I do believe 
that the member used the name of a member incorrectly, but I 
was not able to hear that. But I’d remind the member of that. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Last night the Leader of the Opposition 
broke from tradition by holding a fundraising party right here in 
the capital city instead of the city of Calgary. And present at the 
dinner was the Sask Party leader’s former boss and political 



April 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

mentor . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. 
Member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And present at the dinner was the Sask 
Party leader’s former boss and political mentor, Grant Devine, 
introduced along with former Mulroney cabinet minister, Mr. 
Bill McKnight, and apparently a number of former Devine 
members from the legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that they were all in town . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It appears . . . Order please. 
Order. Order. Member for Saskatoon . . . Order. Order please. 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, they were all in 
town to reminisce about the good old days and see how their 
protege is coming along. And, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t 
disappoint them. The Leader of the Opposition hearkened back 
over 20 years and pledged that with a Saskatchewan Party 
government, the province would be open for business. 
 
For those of us who remember the Conservative Party campaign 
slogan from 1982, we wonder if Mr. Devine had a hand in 
crafting and drafting that part of his eager pupil’s speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the old boys from the 1980s were clearly 
impressed with just how far their bright-eyed staffer has come. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party leader is quite the little 
trooper. Mr. Speaker, the boys are back in town. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Nakawe Saulteaux Festival 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday I had the honour of attending the fifth annual Nakawe 
Saulteaux Festival at the Nibwakawigamig Education Centre at 
the Kinistin Saulteaux Nation. The festival is a showcase of the 
Nakawe culture and language. 
 
Students from Pleasantdale Central School, Star City School, 
Tisdale school, Fishing Lake First Nations, Yellow Quill First 
Nations School participated in workshops that were lead by 
Mary Machinskinic and Frances Scott on making beaded colour 
bracelets and the importance of colours and the Saulteaux 
words; a hoop demonstration by Kinistin band member Patrick 
Nippi assisted by the Kinistin Nakawe singers; a storytelling 
workshop by language instructor Albert Scott;, Kinistin 
Nakawe traditions by Peter Nippi who spoke of the changing 
times and the importance of the Nakawe language and culture; 
and the Kinistin health staff . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask . . . Order. I would just ask 
for order so that we can hear the member’s statement a little 
more clearly. Thank you, members. Member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Kinistin health 
staff who provided information on the Kinistin traditions and 
healthy lifestyles talking about previous food First Nations 
people ate. 
 
During the afternoon there was a Nakawe concert which was 
done in Nakawe and featuring the nursery to grade 9 students 
singing songs and the presentation of art and crafts awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was truly a showcase of the Nakawe 
Nation and an educational opportunity for the students and 
spectators attending this cultural event. I’d like to thank Chief 
Thomas, band members, and school staff for the invitation to 
attend. I was honoured. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 

Leprechaun Trap for Budget Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As you can imagine, during the past several weeks I have 
received a lot of advice and helpful suggestions about the 
upcoming provincial budget. 
 
I rise today to thank a group of grade 1 and 2 students in Ms. 
Bonnie Conly’s class at Georges Vanier School in Saskatoon 
for their advice. While recently visiting the school, the member 
for Saskatoon Eastview and I learned of an interesting project in 
which the students were building leprechaun traps for St. 
Patrick’s Day. 
 
Once the students figured out just exactly what it was that a 
Finance minister does, they thought that their project could be 
useful in helping me do a better job for the province. After 
some tough negotiations it was agreed that in exchange for a 
very interesting book on lizards that they would send me the 
best leprechaun trap of the class so that I could catch a 
leprechaun and his pot of gold, and that the province could 
benefit from even more prosperity than we’re currently 
experiencing. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Amy Bantle for her 
leprechaun trap and her story about the goody leprechaun. 
When I announce the budget tomorrow, I expect that all 
members of the Assembly will be pleased to see just how it is 
that young Ms. Bantle’s advice on trapping leprechauns has 
worked and how we will use our new-found wealth to create an 
even better place to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask all members to join me in thanking 
Ms. Conly and all of her grade 1 and 2 students for their 
generous gift. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And I want to remind all members that props 
are not to be used in the Assembly. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress Hills. 
 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2006 

Condition of Highways in Southwestern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “Southwest roads are 
dangerous” reads the headline of a recent front-page story in a 
Maple Creek newspaper. The facts behind the story come from 
Chris McMillan of Consul. 
 
A few weeks ago Chris was driving his new car from Consul to 
Maple Creek. He met a semi-trailer unit near the Cypress Lake 
turnoff and found himself in a rather dangerous situation due to 
the severely deteriorated condition of Highway No. 21. As a 
truck passed, a chunk of pavement flew up and pieces caught 
the front bumper of Chris’s car, bounced off the hood and the 
windshield on the driver’s side before it became airborne once 
again, and landed on the road behind the car. Now Chris’s new 
vehicle needs a new windshield as well as some bodywork on 
the front end. 
 
This story is one of but many I’ve heard regarding near misses 
and unavoidable incidents that happen daily on the crumbling 
highways of southwest Saskatchewan. It’s impossible to miss 
the potholes, the loose pavement, and the trouble spots unless 
you’re driving down the centre of the road. And, Mr. Speaker, 
in the interests of highway safety, that’s really not a good 
option. 
 
There’s heavy industrial traffic on these roads in southwest 
Saskatchewan due to oil and gas development work. The traffic 
has increased dramatically over the last few years, but the road 
maintenance has not kept up with the impact. This government 
simply refuses to reinvest an adequate portion of its annual tax 
and royalty windfalls to assure the safety and convenience of 
the motoring public. 
 
The people of the Southwest who are forced to use Highways 
21, 13, and 32 have been advising friends and neighbours to 
take alternate routes where possible. And even ambulance 
operators are choosing longer routes to avoid the dangers of 
these roads. That, I suggest, is a fact you should keep in mind 
when you come to visit our area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Fundraising for Breast Cancer 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Breast 
Friends is a non-profit organization dedicated to fundraising for 
breast cancer relief. The project began with 10 women from 
Foam Lake but swiftly expanded to involve other organizations 
as well. 
 
To raise funds, the organization published For the Breasts of 
Friends, a cookbook developed from a banquet menu in Foam 
Lake — a cookbook, Mr. Speaker, that I purchased myself. It is 
an impressive compilation of recipes and ideas which we are 
still experimenting with. 
 
Word spread quickly and it became available in many medical 
facilities across Saskatchewan. Eventually, Mr. Speaker, sales 
expanded to other provinces and the book became a Canadian 

bestseller. Mr. Speaker, this cookbook fundraising effort has 
been so successful that Breast Friends has recently reached 
$200,000 in donations. 
 
The organization’s major donations have supported such groups 
as the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, the Canadian Cancer 
Society, Prairie Women on Snowmobiles, Breast Cancer Action 
Saskatchewan, the Hope Centre in Saskatoon, and numerous 
Saskatchewan hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the organization will soon release its second 
cookbook entitled For the Breasts and the Rest of Friends, the 
initial proceeds of which are intended to furnish the Foam Lake 
palliative care unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 
the Breast Friends for their fundraising efforts and wish them 
continued success for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Ministers’ Comments in the House 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday again we witnessed 
another incident of this tired old NDP government 
disseminating false information. After witnessing the Deputy 
Premier apparently lose his grip on reality on Friday and stand 
and accuse the member from Saskatoon Northwest of 
deliberately misleading the House in response to an agriculture 
question, on Monday we were once again presented with an 
inaccurate view of the facts when the Minister of Advanced 
Education stood and informed the House that SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
was reconsidering their waiting list management fee. 
 
The next morning, Saskatchewan residents were able to read in 
The StarPhoenix and Leader-Post that SIAST had no intention 
of making any changes to their waiting list management fee. 
 
And finally yesterday, the Minister of Agriculture stood in his 
place, fired up the blame thrower . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The Minister of Agriculture stood in his place, 
fired up the blame thrower and stated that opposition MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and Saskatchewan MPs 
[Member of Parliament] were telling farmers in the northeast 
area of the province that they had no choice but to venture out 
into muddy fields to try and harvest a crop last fall or they 
would not be eligible for crop insurance, even though he is the 
only member of this Assembly that Crop Insurance takes 
direction from. 
 
At least we know that that minister has some creativity and 
imagination. It would just be nice if he would use it to help 
Saskatchewan farmers instead of making up stories to cover his 
own shortfalls in the areas of compassion and competence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I have been contacted by a 
mother from Biggar who has seen first-hand the impact the 
nursing shortage in Saskatchewan has on her daughter. Bobbie 
Haynes’s daughter finished her schooling last October and 
started working as a nurse in a hospital in Regina shortly 
thereafter. Mr. Speaker, her mother writes, quote: 
 

She worked so hard to get through the very difficult 
program and was so looking forward to working and now, 
after only a few short months, she is already facing 
burnout and looking for something else to do. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how does this NDP government expect to retain 
young nursing graduates when they are getting burnt-out within 
the very first year of employment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
had the opportunity to meet with various nurses throughout the 
province over the last little while, and I’ve heard stories, Mr. 
Speaker, of nursing graduates moving into the system and 
having to take up significant workloads, Mr. Speaker. And I 
applaud those who have been able to deal with the pressures 
that have been put forward on them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this issue is one that this government has 
been working on for several years. And in December, in 
December 2005, Mr. Speaker, we issued the action plan relating 
to the health workplace. And, Mr. Speaker, that action plan is 
addressing the issue not only of the shortage but of the efforts 
that are being made in the workplace to improve circumstances 
for nurses throughout the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, Bobbie Haynes believes, quote, 
“. . . the situation is nearing crisis proportions . . .” but this 
minister won’t admit the severity of the problem. 
 
Ms. Haynes’s daughter looks after eight very ill patients every 
day. Her friend who is a nurse in the cardiac ward was 
responsible for 14 cardiac patients one day. Ms. Haynes says, 
quote, “These numbers are unacceptable for any nurse let alone 
a new nurse with very little experience.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can nurses give good care when they are sick 
themselves? When will this minister do the right thing and 
commit to better nurse to patient ratios? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. This government considers the care of Saskatchewan 
people in our hospitals, long-term and institutional 
environments, as a priority, Mr. Speaker. The health of 
Saskatchewan residents is of great interest to this government, 
Mr. Speaker. And for those who care, for those who need care, 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing a tremendous amount to assist them 
in doing the work that they themselves wish to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the action plan in the health care workplace take 
into account several years worth of study, consultation, and 
review. And, Mr. Speaker, that report brought out in December 
addresses some of these issues. We will be working with the 
nursing profession over the course of the next year, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that we’re able to implement strategies that 
are brought forward in the action plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses say the Saskatchewan health care systems need 600 new 
nursing positions to bring the province up to professional 
standards. And, Mr. Speaker, this minister refuses to commit to 
those targets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bobbie Haynes’s daughter is not alone. Ms. 
Haynes writes that several of her daughter’s classmates feel the 
same way and will be getting out of the profession before it’s 
too late for them. Her daughter is heartsick over the current 
situation and truly does not know what to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bobbie Haynes has serious concerns about the 
state of health care in this province and the impact the nursing 
shortage is having on young women like her daughter. 
Saskatchewan already has the worst nursing retention rate in the 
country. If these conditions continue, Saskatchewan will 
continue to fall further behind. Is the minister’s intention to 
finish last? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much again, Mr. 
Speaker. The members opposite have been fairly critical over 
the last couple of weeks with regards to the question of nursing 
shortages in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s an 
acknowledgement that of course nursing shortages across 
Canada are causing significant pressures within the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s virtually no unemployment amongst nurses 
anywhere in Canada. Mr. Speaker, to fill 250 vacancies or to fill 
the 600 positions that SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 
targets, Mr. Speaker, is not a matter of waving a magic wand or 
snapping our fingers and immediately putting somebody into 
those positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day the minister of advanced learning 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2006 

and employment announced a number of bursaries that are 
useful in this regard. Mr. Speaker, today I have announced 
funding for more than . . . for 500 new, continuing, 
in-return-for-service bursaries, Mr. Speaker — $5 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Funding for Hospital Construction 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard the new 
NDP policy on rural hospital construction, and I’d love to 
summarize that for you — first they make you wait; then they 
make you pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Health is penalizing the people in 
Humboldt for his department’s delays and mismanagement. 
And what will happen if Humboldt can’t commit to the extra 
money, Mr. Speaker? Well here’s what the minister had to say: 
“It could be delayed further if the community share does not 
reach the commitment we have asked for.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the people of Humboldt being penalized 
for the NDP delay and mismanagements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I don’t know where the member opposite comes up with the 
language about penalizing. Mr. Speaker, the policy that we are 
talking about is a policy that’s been in place since the early 
1990s. Communities across this province have participated in 
fundraising efforts to support the community facilities in their 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are numerous communities across this 
province who are fundraising today for projects that are not yet 
announced for approval to proceed with planning or for 
construction. Mr. Speaker, we are firmly committed to 
supporting the people of Humboldt in the development of their 
new facility. We want to work with the community, the regional 
health authority to ensure that the facility is the best possible 
within the resources available, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, how in the world does that 
minister think that asking for 5 million additional dollars in 40 
days is working with the community? The minister said 
yesterday that in other projects where the costs have increased, 
the architect has been asked to scale down the project. Has that 
been the NDP strategy all along: string the people along until 
they have to accept a smaller hospital? Is Humboldt going to 
have to accept a smaller hospital? This seems to be the way of 
every NDP promise — that first they make it look very good 
but the promises always have strings attached. 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier said yesterday the federal Throne 
Speech had all the right words, but he was waiting for some 
action. Well so are the people of Humboldt. They’re waiting for 
some action. Will the people of Humboldt get a break from this 
government for their hospital instead of a 40-day deadline? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The comments of the member opposite are just not credible 
when reviewed with the facts. Mr. Speaker, when this, when 
this project was, Mr. Speaker, when this project was first 
discussed with the people of Humboldt and the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When this project was discussed with the regional health 
authority and the people of Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, the 
estimates that were discussed at that time for the construction of 
the hospital there were considered very realistic. Mr. Speaker, 
in the last two years we’ve seen significant inflation in 
construction costs that affect schools, highways, even garages 
in the member’s backyard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is happening now is the project has not yet gone to tender. 
The exact dollar values are not yet known, Mr. Speaker. When 
the tenders come back, the regional health authority wants to 
know that there’s a commitment from the people at the local 
area to reach their 35 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the 40 days is to 
find out if that commitment is there and, if not, what do we do 
to make up for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this is nothing more than 
another NDP shell game. You pay your money, and you take 
your chances, but the carnival barker always seems to want 
more and more and more. If the minister sincerely wants the 
Humboldt hospital project to go ahead, could he possibly 
change the funding formula? What he’s asking for right now is 
nothing short of a rural health tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister change the funding formula, or 
will he keep playing an NDP shell game while he’s holding all 
the people in the Humboldt community hostage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the early 1990s, this government came up with a policy that 
allowed for community participation in the decision-making 
process and the delivery of health care facilities across this 
province. Mr. Speaker, many communities have participated in 
this process of raising money and participating in the planning 
process. Mr. Speaker, that planning process has been well 



April 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

developed with many projects. I wonder if the member opposite 
is concerned about that planning process and which steps she 
would not have taken in developing the facility in Humboldt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I did yesterday — we know that there are 
some new capital dollars coming forward in tomorrow’s budget 
— I ask the member opposite: if there’s money there for 
Humboldt, will she support the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Anticipation of Budget Policies 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, two years ago almost to the 
day, this NDP government received a scolding in the form of a 
newspaper column, and I quote from it: 
 

This government has a very tenuous grip on reality. If 
voters are dismayed today, they should be. Everything the 
government is doing runs exactly counter to what the NDP 
has campaigned on . . . nowhere in Calvert’s platform will 
you find a mention of a higher provincial sales tax . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Finance minister to show that he 
can do a better job than his predecessor. If he can’t reverse the 
NDP broken-promise tax grab now, when he’s sitting on a 
mountain of money, when will he do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the budget I will present 
tomorrow will be balanced in its priorities. It will be balanced 
on the bottom line. It will provide us with a significant set of 
changes to improve our business climate in this province. It will 
make major new investments in our social programs, and it will 
continue to pay down a debt that was built up by the previous 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget that I present tomorrow will be worthy 
of the member’s support, and I will encourage him and all of his 
colleagues to support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — How can it be worthy of my support 
when he doesn’t even answer the question, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 
Speaker, this minister can distance himself from his predecessor 
with this budget. This new Finance minister can erase the 
cynicism created by his predecessor who said and I quote: 
 

I suspect that anyone who talks about tax hikes is not . . . 
[likely] to be very popular during the course of an election 
campaign. 

 
Mr. Speaker, before gouging the people to the tune of $150 

million with a PST [provincial sales tax] increase, the Premier 
told business audiences that there would be no tax increases. 
Mr. Speaker, will the new Finance minister chart his own 
course and right the wrong, or will it be the same old NDP: say 
one thing and do another? Which is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that I 
would like more to do than to be able to reduce our sales tax in 
this province. It is regrettable that today almost four points of 
that seven point sales tax is needed just to pay interest costs on 
the debt built up by the previous administration. It is interesting 
to note that we will continue to be calling on taxpayers to put 
$550 million just towards interest costs on that debt, not to 
mention what we’ll be calling on them to reduce debt. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a number of 
requirements within our financial plan to meet, not the least of 
which is paying down a debt that was built up by the previous 
administration, continuing to pay interest costs built up on a 
debt by the previous administration, by making new 
investments in health care that those members call for on a daily 
basis. To make new investments in our families, within our 
social programs, and within our communities, this budget I 
present tomorrow will do those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we will all be waiting with 
bated breath to get the answer from the minister on how much 
the nationalization of the potash mines in the 1970s added to 
this provincial debt. I hope the minister will reply just with that 
information tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 44,000 children living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. After dithering for 14 years, this NDP 
government raised the basic food allowance for the first time 
last year, but they did not index it to inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
Surely this government has the resources to index it this year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third quarter financial report shows this government has a 
windfall of $988 million more than it expected. Mr. Speaker, to 
use the minister’s language, how many sleeps will the poor 
have to wait before the basic food allowance is indexed to 
inflation? How many sleeps will ordinary Saskatchewan people 
have to wait before they see a tax break from this NDP 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget that I present 
tomorrow will be balanced in its priorities, and it will be 
balanced on its bottom line. It will make sure that we make 
significant new investments in the business climate of this 
province and in our social programs. It will be a good budget 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
What I would encourage those members opposite to do is take a 
real good, hard look at that budget when it comes down and 
find in their hearts and find a way to vote for this budget that 
moves Saskatchewan forward socially, economically, and in 
terms of the overall development of this province. That is a 
challenge for the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Federal Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we saw the Throne Speech from the federal 
government, and it promised separate and more effective farm 
stabilization programs — something we wanted to hear. It 
promised disaster relief programs — something also that 
farmers were waiting for. It promised to work with producers to 
achieve long-term competitiveness and stability. The question 
that farmers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Member for Melville . . . Order 
please. Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government has made commitments, and we’ll all be 
here — that side and this side — to hold them accountable for 
that. What will this minister tell farmers tomorrow? Tell them 
today that they have something to be optimistic about and 
something to help get through this summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly in the Throne Speech yesterday there were allusions to 
agriculture. But I want to say that one of the problems is that 
there is nothing concrete from the federal government — 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. The $500 million that was mentioned in 
their campaign, Mr. Speaker, has no base in it at all. There is no 
sense of where and how that will be spent. Will it be just put 
into funding current programs? We don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we meet with the federal minister . . . and 
we met with him just recently at Harrison Hot Springs. It was 
very clear that he did not have the say about where and how that 
money might roll out. And it wasn’t indicated in the Throne 
Speech. 
 
So farmers in this province and farmers across Canada and 
provincial ministers, provincial ministers all across Canada are 
saying, is there anything there? When is it coming and how 

much is it? Will it help? Mr. Speaker, we don’t get that from the 
feds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this morning APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] was on 
the steps of the legislature, and they were informing the public 
of exactly what happens to a loaf of bread. Mr. Speaker, the 
farmer receives 6 cents a loaf for bread. Out of $1.35, Mr. 
Speaker, $1.35 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. I would ask . . . I once 
today already mentioned use of props. I would ask the member 
to deliver the prop to a Page. 
 
Order please. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I was saying, the farmers lose 2 cents a loaf. I know 
how they feel. I just lost the whole loaf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this morning 
and outside speaking to APAS . . . And what APAS was trying 
to do was inform the urban public just how bad it is in 
agriculture and who’s making something on that loaf of bread 
and who’s not making and who’s losing. And the Minister of 
Agriculture went out and again continued to point the finger at 
the federal government and take no responsibility for 
Saskatchewan farmers. He absolutely ignored the problem from 
the NDP government and said it’s all the federal government’s 
fault. Well, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has made 
commitments. What commitment will that minister make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s important to know, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 
government has made no solid commitments. And I would like 
to read the segment of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. He did 
not, he did not tell the farmers that they should buck up this 
time, but he did just give them a few empty words. Let me put 
them out here: “[The] Government recognizes the unique 
challenges . . .” 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — From the federal Throne Speech, we 
have the words of the federal government saying that they have 
plans, that they’ll take action, that they’ll deal with short-term 
needs, that they’ll create separate, more effective farm 
programs. Well in the meantime, what do they say farmers 
should do? Buck up. What do they say, what do they say we 



April 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

should do? What do they say we should do? Suck up. No, we’re 
not doing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members, including the 
minister, to be judicious in the use of language. Order please. 
Order. Member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that minister is amazing. We saw this NDP government — 
when AIDA [agricultural income disaster assistance], CFIP 
[Canadian farm income program] and then the CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program was put together — 
we saw that government actually completely gone from the 
scene, had no input into it. And the federal government 
designed the program for Saskatchewan. And what have we 
got? A program that doesn’t work. 
 
Now what do we see from that Ag minister with a new federal 
government, a new federal minister, one that should be at the 
table having input for our farmers? He does nothing but point 
the finger and badmouth the federal Minister of Agriculture. 
How are we going to have any input into the new program 
when he goes down east? Will the minister explain that to us. 
How does he expect to have any respect for the federal 
government speaking like he’s been speaking in this House the 
last week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — A word of caution also to the member for 
Saltcoats in terms of inflammatory language. I recognize the 
Minister for Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly the member opposite and his party are acting as 
apologists for the federal government today, and they have a lot 
to apologize for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that that 
party came into government saying they would do something. 
We need action. We need it now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the loaf of bread, on the label of the loaf of 
bread that APAS was selling, they did not say, write your MLA 
or your provincial government. They know where the problem 
is. They know where the solution is. Mr. Speaker, it’s in 
Ottawa. They say write your MP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do more. We’re going to Ottawa, 
and we’re going to talk to that federal minister, and we’re going 
to talk to the other MPs. And we’re going to do everything we 
can to get them to put that solution forward in concrete terms 
and to do it now. That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re doing it next week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe the minister should read the column in pretty 
near every rural newspaper this week. It’s an article under the 
headline and I quote, Mr. Speaker: “Wartman shouldn’t lecture 
farmers.” And let me quote further from the same article: 

 
. . . maybe anyone sitting in a cushy government office in 
Regina making a six-figure salary would want to be 
[more] careful . . . [as] coming across as condescending. 

 
Well the minister has offended every farmer in this province, 
offended every farm family in this province, and now he’s 
working on offending the new federal government and the new 
Ag minister that we need, Mr. Speaker. We need the federal Ag 
minister to come to bat for our farmers, and we don’t need that 
minister offending those people at a time of need in 
Saskatchewan. Will the minister apologize for what he has said 
towards a federal Agriculture minister, heal relations, and get to 
the table and make a program we need in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order. Order please. 
Order. Order. The . . . Order. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, clearly there is the 
evidence; they are simply apologists for the federal party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really can’t give any credibility to the Sask Party 
columns that they put out there. Mr. Speaker, last year they 
were paying to take two words out of Hansard and stretch out a 
big story that they concocted, saying that the Minister of 
Agriculture was saying, farmers going broke because of 
business decisions — completely made up by the Sask Party. 
No credibility, Mr. Speaker. No credibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, APAS is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order please. The 
Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
APAS is saying, write your MP. They know the solution is at 
the federal government. The national government in Canada 
must support farmers as national governments do in the US 
[United States] and the EU [European Union]. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Swift Current on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Request leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for leave to the members 
here. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the all the 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2006 

members of the Assembly a special guest that has joined us 
halfway through question period from my constituency of Swift 
Current, the chief administrative officer as we used to refer 
when we were working together at that point not too many 
years ago. The city commissioner and an excellent one for the 
city of Swift Current, Mr. Matt Noble has joined us. I wonder if 
all members would help me welcome him to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table from 
the Office of the Provincial Auditor a report to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan on the financial statements of 
Crown agencies for years ending in the 2005 calendar year, 
dated April 2006. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Use of Personal Names 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I also wish to advise that during 
oral question period I was able to discern members calling other 
members by their own personal names. That is something that 
should not go on, and if it carries on, I will have to interrupt 
oral question period to put a stop to that. So I ask that not to be 
done. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate the work 
of the policy field committees on the Economy as well as on 
Crown and Central Agencies, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The House stands 
adjourned until Friday, 10 a.m. . . . Thursday, Thursday 1:30 
p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................984 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................984 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................984 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................984 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................984 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................984 
 Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................985 
 Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................985 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................985 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................986 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................986 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................993 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Annual Dinner 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................986 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................986 
 Nakawe Saulteaux Festival 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................987 
 Leprechaun Trap for Budget Day 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................987 
 Condition of Highways in Southwestern Saskatchewan 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................988 
 Fundraising for Breast Cancer 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................988 
 Ministers’ Comments in the House 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................988 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Nursing Shortage 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................989 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................989 
 Funding for Hospital Construction 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................990 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................990 
 Anticipation of Budget Policies 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................991 
 Federal Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................992 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................. 994 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Use of Personal Names 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................994 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


