






















































Hansard: March 31, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 32A  FRIDAY, MARCH 31, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 907 
 March 31, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I begin to 
present to this Assembly a number of petitions regarding the 
drug Avastin and how it can assist individuals dealing with 
cancer. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
good folks from the community of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today again I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents and others concerned 
about the condition of Highway 32 between the communities of 
Cabri and Leader. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Prelate, Leader, and as far away as Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
number of pages of a petition of citizens concerned about the 
safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Carmel, Wadena, 
Rose Valley, Humboldt, Saskatoon, and Muenster. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens who have deep concerns over the implementation of a 
two-tier health system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Estevan, Shellbrook, 
Saskatoon, Meota, and Oxbow. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise to 
present a petition from constituents who are opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Sonningdale and Biggar. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in Assembly this morning to present a petition. The petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Pinehouse. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise to present a petition on the people looking for help with 
Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain its Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closures. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again in the legislature 
today to present a petition regarding the funding of the cancer 
drug Avastin. I will read the prayer for relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by extremely concerned 
citizens from the constituencies of Greystone, Riversdale, and 
Fairview. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
government’s decision not to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Saskatoon and Meadow 
Lake. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 7, 64, and 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005 how many people were nominated through the 
Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program and in which 
category were they nominated? 

 
And also the same question for 2005-2006. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day 37 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005 how many people immigrated to Saskatchewan 
and did not apply through the Saskatchewan immigrant 
nominee program? 

 
And also the same question for 2005-2006. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on 
day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: for the fiscal year 
2004-2005 how many people, including dependants, 
immigrated to Saskatchewan through the Saskatchewan 
immigrant nominee program? 
 

And also, Mr. Speaker, the same question for 2005-2006. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: did management of the 
department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk and to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the years 2001-2002? 

 
I have the same question for 2000 and 2001. 
 
I also have a question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how did the department monitor 
any established programs or controls to mitigate fraud risk 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in 2000-2001, 
2001-2002? 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I still have a number of 
questions to the Minister of Health for that same day 37. This 
one is: 
 

Does the management of the department have any 
knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activities within the department during the year 
2000-2001? And number two: if so, what is the nature of 
this activity? 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

I also have the same question for the year 2001-2002. 
 
Another question: 
 

What did management of the department find as a result of 
its monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud or detect fraud for the years 2000-2001? 

 
Same question for 2001-2002. 
 
And my final question for day 37. I shall ask the minister: 
 

Is the management of the department aware of any 
allegations of fraud or any illegal activities within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2000-2001, such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? And number two: 
if so, what is the nature of this activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, the same question will be asked for the year 
2001-2002. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what did management of the 
department find as a result of its monitoring of any 
established programs or controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department in the years 
2002-2003, such as information received from employees, 
former employees, customers, clients, suppliers, or others? 
And if so, what is the nature of this activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: does management of the 
department have any knowledge of any actual or suspected 
fraud or illegal activity within the department during the 
year 2002-2003? If so, what is the nature of this activity? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how did management of the 
department monitor any established programs and controls 
to mitigate fraud risks or help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2002-2003? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: did management of the 

department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or help prevent or detect fraud in the 
year 2002-2003? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for 2001-2002 as the 
previous ones that I had asked, and the same for 2001-2002 and 
the years 2000 and 2001. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is my pleasure 
today to introduce to the Legislative Assembly His Excellency 
Markús Örn Antonsson, Ambassador of Iceland to Canada. Mr. 
Antonsson is accompanied by Mrs. Steinunn Armansdottir, also 
of Iceland, and also accompanied by a familiar face to this 
Assembly, and that is Mr. Jon Örn Jonsson who is the honorary 
consul of Iceland in Saskatchewan. And with them also is 
Debbie Saum, chief of protocol. 
 
Members of the Assembly, you may know that Icelanders have 
a very strong work ethic. Their workweek is one of the longest 
in Europe. Icelanders have a great love of history, literature, and 
language. Per capita they publish more books than any country 
in the world. An interesting thing to note is that every child 
from Iceland has to know how to swim before they can graduate 
from elementary school. 
 
His Excellency today will be meeting with the Lieutenant 
Governor, will tour the Legislative Building, will meet with the 
president and CEO [chief executive officer] of Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, and will also be meeting at the 
Regina Research Park. 
 
In keeping with the work ethic, he will then travel to the Quill 
Lakes area to the town of Wynyard where he will participate in 
a spring celebration called Thorrablot. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I would ask you to welcome His 
Excellency Markús Örn Antonsson to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with you, Mr. Speaker, and all members and in extending a 
welcome to His Excellency, Ambassador Antonsson to the 
province of Saskatchewan. We welcome your visit, sir. 
 
We have as you will know, deep Icelandic roots in our province 
— a large Icelandic community. I know that community will 
celebrate your visit just as we celebrate the ties between our 
province and your nation and future opportunities that we may 
pursue together. And so on behalf of the government I want to 
welcome you to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition we want to join with you and the Premier in 
welcoming His Excellency to the Legislative Assembly today, 
and our guests also, the honorary consul, Mr. Jonsson. We wish 
him well in the meetings that he’s going to have later this day. 
 
And in Wynyard, as the Premier has mentioned, there are a 
number of people in our province who proudly boast Icelandic 
roots. And even more importantly today, there is the 
opportunity for an even better relationship, economically and 
otherwise, between our countries and also between 
Saskatchewan and Iceland. So we join with all members in 
welcoming you here today, Your Excellency. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Environment, the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s also my 
pleasure to welcome the Ambassador of Iceland to 
Saskatchewan. And as the former Norwegian consul who 
worked very closely with Mr. Jonsson on behalf of many issues, 
I just want to say: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure and my honour to introduce a individual seated in 
the east gallery, a constituent from Canora-Pelly. Harvey 
Malanowich is a long-time resident in the Canora area. He and 
his wife Stella reside on their family farm. 
 
Harvey and I know one another for probably 20 years. I was 
talking with Harvey this morning and I didn’t realize that he’s 
spent 12 years on the Canora School Board, nine of those years 
at a time when I was there. 
 
He’s been the reeve of the RM [rural municipality] of Sliding 
Hills for over eight years, so over 20 years of service to the 
people in Canora. He’s also been on so many boards and 
agencies that I wouldn’t even start to begin to list all of the 
accomplishments of Harv. 
 
Harvey and his wife Stella, as I have indicated, have three 
children: Clayton is a grain buyer in the community of 
Shellbrook, Chad is a member of the Saskatoon police force, 
and Candace is an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
member as well. So tremendous young individuals who I’ve 
had the opportunity to meet many, many times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A final accomplishment in Harvey’s many attributes of course 
is that at the recent SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention Harvey was elected as the new 
representative on the SARM board representing division 4. And 
he replaces of course Jim Hallick who has moved up to the 
position of vice-president, Jim also being from the constituency 
of Canora-Pelly. 

So I’d ask all members to join in welcoming Harvey 
Malanowich to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to the rest of the members in the House I’d 
like to welcome a special guest in the west gallery. Gunnar 
Passmore of the sheet metal workers is here visiting us today. 
He’s a strong advocate for sheet metal workers and all workers 
here in this province and he’s a frequent visitor of this 
legislature. So I’d ask all members to welcome him here today, 
thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Junior Achievement Awards 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I recently had the great pleasure to 
attend the Saskatoon Junior Achievement Awards. Junior 
Achievement is about inspiring and educating young Canadians 
and helping them to understand economics while developing 
business and leadership skills. 
 
It seems to be working, Mr. Speaker. Among the many 
interesting products marketed there were aquarium candles, 
cellphone jewellery, and a miniature putting green you grew on 
your desk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the participants and 
winners of this year’s Junior Achievement awards. Students 
from Holy Cross High School and Walter Murray Collegiate 
Institute in my Saskatoon Eastview constituency were very well 
represented among the finalists. Between the two schools they 
were winners in 15 categories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Holy Cross High School won this year’s 
SaskEnergy Educator Award. As well, Mr. Speaker, the 
Professional Leadership Award went to Seema Grover, a grade 
11 student at Walter Murray. The Achiever of the Year is Nick 
Purich, a grade 12 student from Walter Murray. 
 
And the Company of the Year was Aili, a junior achievement 
company that produced customized T-shirts and a 
coffee-shop-style newsletter for which they sold advertising 
space. The President of Aili is Michael Zhang, a grade 11 
student at Walter Murray. Mr. Speaker, I also wish to 
acknowledge all those associated with junior achievement in 
Saskatoon, in particular program manager Les Morrison. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

Congratulations to Estevan Hockey Champions 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
the Pee Wee A Prairie Petro Chem Bruins from Estevan won 
the provincial Peewee A Tier II title in Tisdale — that’s a 
mouthful — with a two-game, total points win of five goals to 
four. 
 
And on Wednesday, March 29 they went on to the South 
Central Minor Hockey League championship against the 
Avonlea Thunder. After losing the first game 9 to 5 in Avonlea, 
the Bruins bounced back on home ice to win 3 to 1 then battled 
to a 5-4 victory on Wednesday night to capture the title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to sponsor a hockey jersey, and this 
year I sponsored Connor Fox, who plays for these champions. 
To Connor and the entire team, I extend my best wishes when 
you travel to Grand Forks for your final tournament of the year 
on April 13. Congratulations and thank you to the team and of 
course to the coaches and parents who work tirelessly in 
support of our young people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

2005 Summer Games Legacy 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 2005 Canada 
Summer Games will leave a significant and lasting legacy. The 
capital legacy includes upgrades to 17 sport venues and the 
deepening of Wascana Lake. The asset legacy includes the 
donation of more than $600,000 worth of sporting equipment to 
more than 100 sport and community organizations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as Chair of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative, I want to mention the human legacy of an expanded 
commitment to volunteerism and to thank the more than 6,000 
volunteers who contributed so much to ensuring the games’ 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I attended an event where games’ 
organizers announced a projected surplus of over $3 million 
from the games, a surplus that will be used to create the 
building dreams and champions legacy program. It uses the 
financial surplus and combines it with commitments from the 
community organizations to create a wide range of programs to 
foster excellence in youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I especially want to acknowledge Bob Ellard, Mo 
Bundon, and John Lee of the host society of the 2005 Summer 
Games. They have done an incredible job. And I want to thank 
them along with their partners in government, community, and 
corporate sectors for this legacy of the games that will benefit 
future participants in sport and culture for all Saskatchewan 
youth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Spelling Principles 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I note that 
under the government motion for the 75-minute debate today, 
the American spelling of labour is used. L-a-b-o-u-r is the 
Canadian spelling of labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this may seem like a trivial point but I think it 
reflects the fact that this government has lost its way. This 
government has lost its Canadian identity. First, the government 
goes to the US [United States] for SaskTel Mobility billings and 
only Broe from Colorado can do ethanol in Saskatchewan. Now 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] is privatizing cancer care. 
Next it will be trying to Americanize our labour laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, using the American spelling in the Saskatchewan 
legislature as part of the Dominion of Canada is an affront to all 
Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I am wondering, Mr. Speaker, if this is 
not indicative of this government’s hidden agenda. Mr. Speaker, 
language is an important part of culture. We have many 
similarities with our American neighbours but we clearly have 
many differences — differences that create our unique 
Canadian culture, like our affinity for irony, Mr. Speaker. I find 
it quite ironic that this government that calls itself a labour party 
should use the American spelling of labour. 
 
I believe it’s a tradition in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, to use 
Canadian spelling for all our communications and I would hope 
that this tradition continues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Documentary Inspired by Athletes 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, today I’d like to 
recognize the exceptional work being done by Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix journalist and athlete Jason Warick and other 
running enthusiasts in Saskatoon and in Kenya. 
 
In 2004, Mr. Warick travelled to Kenya to train with marathon 
great Kip Keino. Mr. Warick, a provincial record holder in both 
the marathon and 10-K race, quickly befriended Mr. Keino and 
learned of his work in his hometown of Eldoret, Kenya. Mr. 
Keino — who is an Olympic champion — has built an 
orphanage, an elementary school, a dairy and tea farm, and a 
training camp for aspiring runners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the generosity of Mr. Keino and other Kenyan 
athletes motivated Mr. Warick, the Saskatoon Runner’s Club, 
and Brainsport Running Club to begin collecting shoes for 
young runners in Kenya. So far several hundred pairs of 
running shoes have been donated to athletes in Kenya, 
Mozambique, and Niger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, opportunities for young people in Eldoret, Kenya 
are severely limited by their inability to attend high school in 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

their community. Upon learning of the need for a high school in 
Eldoret, Jason and the Saskatoon community sprung into action. 
Their efforts to date have raised approximately $24,000, 
two-thirds of the money needed to build this essential 
institution. And this effort is a continuing one. In May, Kip 
Keino’s son Martin will be visiting Saskatoon to participate in 
the Saskatchewan Marathon and to raise funds for the new high 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jason’s experiences in Kenya have inspired a 
documentary appropriately entitled Run which was screened 
last week here in Regina. 
 
I’d like the House to join me in congratulating Jason Warick, 
Mr. Keino, and their partners for their commendable efforts to 
improve life for communities in Africa and to wish them 
continued success in these very worthy endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Fraud in Government 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, today marks the last day of March. And you know 
what the month of March was? It was Fraud Prevention Month 
across Canada. Ironically enough, March is also the month that 
the NDP government finally came clean on fraud within their 
government — 43 cases of fraud to be exact, totalling nearly $2 
million. 
 
This unprecedented amount of fraud and theft would have gone 
unnoticed had the Saskatchewan Party not submitted nearly 500 
questions on fraud. What was the NDP’s response to these 
questions? They stonewalled and refused to answer. And this 
was after the Premier jacked up his communications staff and 
budget by a half a million dollars. He said it was to answer 
questions in a timely manner, but we all know that isn’t correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tired, old, worn-out NDP government has 
given the people of Saskatchewan 43 new reasons to ask: when 
is the Premier going to screw up his courage and call an 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Growth in Swift Current 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Every 
day the party opposite, led by the member from Swift Current, 
tell the world what terrible economic shape Saskatchewan is in, 
that there’s no opportunity for young people, that it’s a terrible 
place to do business. It’s no wonder Saskatchewan has a PR 
[public relations] problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan is booming, and the opposition leader’s 
hometown of Swift Current is booming right along with it. At 
least that’s what the Swift Current mayor says. She says that 

last year Swift Current experienced a $70 million construction 
boom. According to the city’s director of business development, 
it was a record year even without the building permit for the 
new $32 million Cypress Regional Hospital. 
 
And the city expects the growth to continue this year, Mr. 
Speaker. According to the Swift Current Chamber of 
Commerce executive director, the city has made great strides in 
attracting businesses and attracting and retaining families and 
workers. Plus the executive director says that since 2003 there 
has been a lot of growth in the city, not just in the public and 
health sector but also in the business sector. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition lives in a boom 
town, but he would never admit it. And this disconnect between 
reality and the Saskatchewan Party posturing is just one of the 
reasons why the members opposite have no credibility 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Treatment of Seniors in the Health Care System 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
before the Assembly the case of a 93-year-old Carmichael 
woman who should have the undivided attention of this 
government, of the health care system, and does not. Her name 
is Hilda Krohn. As I said she’s 93 years old, and she suffers 
from cranial shingles, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, she was 
rushed by ambulance to the Swift Current Regional Hospital. 
The hospital however, Mr. Speaker, decided for whatever 
reason that it was acceptable to discharge her at midnight. At 
midnight she was discharged from the hospital with no place to 
go. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: is that the kind of health 
care our seniors can expect from his NDP government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
case that the member from Swift Current is raising today is not 
one that I am immediately familiar with. I am however aware 
that the regional health authorities have the day-to-day 
responsibility for managing the care within the regions and the 
communities and that the regional health authorities take their 
responsibilities very seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I accept the invitation of the member opposite to 
have a look at this case, review it with the regional health 
authority officials and report back to the member opposite at the 
first opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the case 
demonstrates for all of us in the Assembly though is that while 
it’s had an acute effect on Mrs. Krohn — and we’ll hear more 
about it shortly — this is indicative of what’s happening with 
the health care system under the NDP government. 
 
In the space of 24 hours, Hilda was bounced around from 
hospital to hospital. In fact, Mr. Speaker, she was in and out of 
three different hospitals in the same time span. Once discharged 
from Swift Current, she went to Gull Lake by ambulance, 
where she had a bed for 12 hours. And then it was off to Maple 
Creek by ambulance for another bed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The family is happy with the work of hard-working, caring, 
health care professionals that attended to her, but the problem, 
Mr. Speaker, as there are not enough beds . . . And one of the 
ministers over there has just been heckling about whether this 
is, whether we raise this to be, I think he said, phony-baloney. 
That’s what he’s been saying from his seat. Well I can assure 
that minister and any member over there that, for the family and 
for Hilda, nothing about this is phony. They’d like some 
answers from this NDP government. Why are they treating 
seniors like this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think what the case raised by the member from Swift Current 
indicates that we have a very complex system that from time to 
time faces challenges that are difficult to manage in emergency 
situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health system in Saskatchewan deals with 
approximately 30,000 people per day, Mr. Speaker. The health 
system actually is serving the vast majority of those people in 
extremely compassionate, caring, and reasonable ways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And fortunately when things go wrong, we have systems in 
place to be able to identify what has perhaps gone wrong and 
set in place ways to correct those. Mr. Speaker, I will review 
this with the regional health authority to determine what 
happened and to learn from this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week in this Legislative 
Assembly I raised concerns on behalf of the people of Swift 
Current in southwest Saskatchewan about bed shortages — 
long-standing issues with respect to bed shortages — and the 
bed shortages were also now impacting on long-term care. 
These shortages in southwest Saskatchewan raised last week, 
raised over months and months, are the reason behind the 
problem that we raise again this morning. 
 
The Minister of Finance says it’s about grandstanding. That 

minister from the North says it’s phony-baloney. You know 
what, Mr. Speaker? Because for them, for them it’s just 
everything is politics. For them, their answer to Hilda is that, 
Mr. Speaker; their answer to Hilda is that it’s all 
phony-baloney. 
 
We’re asking this question not only on behalf of her, but on 
behalf of patients across this province who for months have 
been saying and their families have been saying there’s a bed 
shortage, there’s a nursing shortage. Is this how seniors can be 
expected to be treated by the NDP health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the vast majority of Saskatchewan people are aware that 
the health system in this province treats seniors extraordinarily 
well, Mr. Speaker. And while we face pressures from time to 
time in various parts of the province, Mr. Speaker, overall we 
have an extremely positive system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should know that in fact 
Saskatchewan has the second highest number of long-term beds 
per 1,000 people in the country, Mr. Speaker. Only one 
province has a greater number of long-term care beds per 1,000 
people, Mr. Speaker. That’s a significant commitment. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. It should be one at a 
time, occasionally two or three but not five or six. The Minister 
of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated on an apples-to-apples comparison per 1,000 
population, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the second highest 
number of long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well notwithstanding the apples-to-apples 
comparison, Mr. Speaker, here are the facts for Hilda and for 
too many seniors who need long-term care. The decision has 
been made that she’s . . . Right now she’s in a medical bed. 
She’s in an acute care bed in Maple Creek. That’s the last place 
she was bounced to. It’s been decided that she needs a 
long-term care bed. That’s what the family has been told. The 
family’s been told she needs a long-term care bed, but there is 
not a long-term care bed. 
 
Two years ago this NDP government closed 90 hospitals and 
long-term care beds, and they fired 40 nurses. Do you 
remember that, Mr. Speaker? And those people in this province 
said the result is going to be incidents like this. The result is 
going to be bed shortages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister, to the Premier if he’d 
like to answer one: do they now admit that their decision to 
close 90 hospital and long-term care beds and fire 40 nurses two 
years ago was wrong? Will he admit that, Mr. Speaker? 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite know we are now one week away from a 
provincial budget to be brought down by the Minister of 
Finance in this Chamber. The members opposite will also know 
that the Department of Health, Saskatchewan Health, has 
received significant dollars appropriated for the purposes of 
supporting Saskatchewan people and seniors, Mr. Speaker. The 
budget delivered next week by the Minister of Finance will not 
be any different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Population Statistics and Policies 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
under this NDP economic policy, recently we’ve seen six 
straight months of job losses in Saskatchewan. This week, 
we’ve seen the number of population losses. We’ve lost 2,000 
people in the last quarter. Now the Saskatchewan schools are 
expecting an enrolment loss of over 3,000 students in each of 
2004 and 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one devastating number after another 
for this government. When will they realize that they must take 
immediate action to reverse these very damaging population 
trends in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You know, Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis 
in this legislature, you need to check the facts as presented by 
the opposition. On a daily basis, you need to check the facts. 
Now the member just stood up and said we’ve had job loss in 
the province. Well I don’t know which province he lives in, but 
the province that I live in has help-wanted signs right across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. There are jobs in this province 
everywhere. 
 
We did a little survey on the websites last week. Jobs going 
wanting in Saskatchewan on that morning, nearly 6,000 jobs 
available in Saskatchewan. Right in the Leader of the 
Opposition’s hometown — he ought to go home and find out 
about this — we read that there’s a boom going on. We read 
yesterday in the Regina Leader-Post there are between 2- and 
300 jobs available in Swift Current, Saskatchewan today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now you just got to, you just got to check the facts because it’s 
just not credible when they stand up and speak in this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier, if anyone, should 
know . . . is that it’s one thing to have jobs posted in the papers, 
but it’s another thing to have young people left in this province 
to fill those jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that our 
employable-aged people are all leaving for better opportunities 
in other jurisdictions. Children in our schools — our elementary 
and our high schools — are leaving this province as well with 
their parents. Mr. Speaker, we’re losing about 3,000 students a 
year in this province. That’s over 17,000 in the last six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t . . . It’s bad enough that these children 
and their parents are leaving this province. That also means that 
there’s fewer jobs for teachers in this province. It means 
teachers will be leaving this province, and they’ll also be taking 
their families with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s failed economic policies are 
directly responsible for the loss of students and teachers in our 
province. When will they admit that they need to change what 
they’re doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, some years ago, some 
years ago some of us used to enjoy this little television program 
called the Muppets. And they had these two old fellows in that 
program; they used to sit up in the balcony. I think they’re 
called the Waldorf and Astoria — grumpy old men. Every time 
I look over here I see Waldorf and Astoria all over the place — 
grumpy old men. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we hear this constant 
negativity. You bet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Members will come to order. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, you bet this government is 
concerned when we see our young people travelling to other 
parts of Canada to find their future — you bet. And we’ve put a 
plan together to address this. We’ve got our economy humming, 
so there are jobs in this province. 
 
We have outlined a significant plan of action to improve our 
competitive edge, to work with our Aboriginal community, to 
build the educational opportunities, to institute a population 
strategy program under immigration. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government believes in telling the Saskatchewan story and 
telling it with positive, good news to it, Mr. Speaker, unlike 
those negative nabobs across the way that can only go about, 
only go about criticizing and bringing down the hopes and the 
futures of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
Kermit the Frog knows what this Premier doesn’t know; you 
can’t build an economy when all your young people are leaving 
for neighbouring provinces. Mr. Speaker, over the next decade, 
there is going to be a significant decline in enrolments. In our 
province, it’s projected that we are going to lose 21 per cent of 
our school-aged children in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government stop watching The 
Muppet Show and instead come up with some decent economic 
policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, while the Leader of the 
Opposition has been watching The Simpsons — and I’m told he 
watches The Simpsons a lot — you know what we’ve been 
doing? You know what we’ve been doing just in the last little 
while? 
 
We’ve established Student Employment Experience. We’ve 
established Green Teams. We’ve built the Leaders of 
Tomorrow program. We’ve got Gradworks going in the Crown 
investment corporations. We’ve created Youth Opportunities 
Unleashed. We’ve set up the young entrepreneurial foundation, 
a $25 million foundation over five years that’s got access from 
a lot of young people. We’re developing the Your Future is 
Here program. And we’re working with our REDAs [regional 
economic development authority] in terms of youth 
employment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve set out a plan to sharpen our competitive edge, to 
work with our Aboriginal communities, to build in terms of 
skills training and access to education, to build a population 
strategy around immigration, Mr. Speaker, and to work on 
telling the story. 
 
Now what is their plan, Mr. Speaker? Cut the taxes, ruin the 
labour laws, and get a — what is it? — a new brand. That’s the 
plan; get a new brand. Mr. Speaker, it’s not satisfactory. It’s just 
not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Condition of Highway 15 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the Minister of 
Highways explain to this House why the Highway 15 from the 
junction of Highway 20 east to the town of Semans has been 
closed down? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to take 
notice of the question. I wasn’t able to hear the question, but if 
the member would like to repeat it again, I’d be more than 
willing to respond. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River . . . Order please. Order, order. Order. Hon. members, we 
need to have a situation in the House where the questions which 
are put are able to be heard. So I’ll ask members to come to 
order so that the member for Arm River-Watrous can re-put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Highways. Can the Minister of Highways explain to 
this House why Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 20 
east to the town of Semans has been closed down? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank that 
member for the question. I believe that that stretch of highway 
had some work done on it in the recent past. And the work 
appeared to not be able to do the job; it structurally has broken 
down. And I am told that it is part of the program for this 
spring, and I am assuming that as soon as construction crews 
can get on, they will repair what appeared to be faulty material 
when it was repaired in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — To the Minister of Highways, that particular 
piece of highway was rebuilt last year — I would imagine — at 
considerable cost to taxpayers. The residents in that area were 
finally ecstatic to have a highway that they thought they could 
use for a number of years after travelling on a highway that had 
been neglected for a number of years. To their dismay, the 
highway is breaking up and closing down. My question to the 
Minister of Highways: how much money did you spend . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member would remember to 
restate his question through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, how much did the Government of 
Saskatchewan spend rebuilding that highway last year only to 
have it shut down this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the 
member opposite that I do understand the inconvenience that 
the breakdown of that particular piece of road has created for 
the people in that community. I can say that there are times 
when faulty materials or faulty application or conditions of 
weather can create a breakdown of work that has been done. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

people of this province, that the contractors who do work on our 
highways in an annual basis are, for the most part, very 
qualified. They do good work. I would want to say the people 
that supply the asphalt and that supply all the materials supply 
very good quality. Sometimes there are breakdowns. This 
happens to be one of them. 
 
Now the member may be chirping from his seat and is a little 
upset that this has occurred. But I can tell you this, that our 
construction crews will be on that road and we will be 
rebuilding it to the standard that people in that area would 
expect. Mr. Speaker, that’s the role of the Department of 
Highways, and I think they do a very good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 

 
Crop Insurance Premiums 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, later 
today we’ll be introducing a motion to delay the payment of 
outstanding crop insurance balances beyond tonight’s deadline. 
Through this Act, we can remove one nail from the coffin of 
farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government likes to talk about what others 
can do. Well here’s one thing that that minister and that Premier 
and that government could do to help the farmers that are up 
against it out there and can’t meet this deadline. Will they 
support our motion today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer 
is no; we will not. Mr. Speaker, very clearly we have been 
providing information for those farmers out there who have 
received the benefits of crop insurance and who owe their bills 
to the company. Mr. Speaker, we have been very clear that the 
deadline is the 31st. And we have offered terms for those 
people, Mr. Speaker, so that it will help them deal with it. 
 
We carry them debt-free until October 31, Mr. Speaker. From 
October 31 until March 31 there is moderate interest. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in that time they have opportunity to go to Crop 
Insurance and to make arrangements for payment, which 
include a 25 per cent down payment and then arrangements that 
will bring it to a close by June 30, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We learned today 
that the Premier is running around or sitting at home watching 
reruns of the Muppets. Well I think that Agriculture minister 
must be watching Wile E. Coyote or something to get up to 

speed on the Ag file because he certainly doesn’t understand it. 
And he doesn’t understand what’s happening out there. 
 
We have a number of farmers — and he’ll admit to this — that 
cannot meet the deadline tonight. They can’t meet 50 per cent. 
They can’t meet 25 per cent. They have no cash, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s the dilemma that they’re caught in right now. What 
adds to that dilemma that if they cannot meet the deadline by 
tonight, they do not have crop insurance. They cannot apply for 
the spring cash advance, so therefore they’re probably out of 
business. Is that satisfactory to the Premier, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, they brag of Tommy Douglas and his 
compassion for Saskatchewan people. What happened to that, 
Mr. Speaker? Where did that compassion go? Let’s have a little 
feeling for the people in rural Saskatchewan and do one thing 
that we could to help them out, Mr. Speaker. Will the Ag 
minister do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
have a fair bit of time this morning to debate that issue, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to talk about the facts as what the member 
from Saltcoats-Melville’s talking about, and the facts are like 
this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to refer to the document that’s been presented by 
the Saskatchewan Party on the code of ethics. And it speaks to 
the dismantling of false information, Mr. Speaker, and it says 
this that: 
 

Members shall use care to avoid dissemination of false 
information and shall not knowingly do so. 

 
Mr. Speaker. And I’ll be asking at the end of this question 
period that there be an action by the Leader of the Opposition to 
address one of his members. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, just on the date of March 24, the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest says this. He says that 
“They have no ability to provide not only the basic needs of 
food and clothing . . . ” and money, but there are other issues 
that these children get to them in sports, activities, and 
recreational things — not at all, it says. And this is a quote, Mr. 
Speaker, about no money for foster parents is what he says. 
Then he goes on to say, and I’ll answer this question further, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
if the member for Yorkton is living in the past or what, but he’s 
not Ag minister any more. In fact I’m not sure we have one, but 
I’ll ask my question anyway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give some quotes of the present Ag 
minister and some of the things he’s said in the past. And I 
quote: 
 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

We must recognize that farms are businesses and that 
those farmers are making business decisions . . . 

 
He’s right on except the fact that they don’t have any money to 
make those decisions with and they can’t meet their payments 
and their deadlines. Another quote and: 
 

Good financial planning would say that you have to go to 
your financial institution [and] . . . make sure you can pay 
. . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again it shows the Ag minister does not 
understand just how bad things are in rural Saskatchewan. He’s 
got to have a little compassion here. Give them a little time. 
Will he do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
today the member from . . . the Leader of the Opposition talking 
about the Saskatchewan Party’s code of ethics. Mr. Speaker, we 
have the member from Saskatchewan northwest, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan northwest, who says, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order please. Order 
please. Order. The member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . from Saskatoon Northwest, Mr. 
Speaker, who made a number of false statements in this House, 
Mr. Speaker, false information, false information on what 
happens with foster homes, Mr. Speaker. False information, Mr. 
Speaker, in relationship to whether or not there are support 
services for families in the province, Mr. Speaker. And 
yesterday in a scrum, false information, Mr. Speaker, about 
whether or not there are beds available in Saskatchewan for 
treatment in this province, Mr. Speaker. False information, Mr. 
Speaker, on a number of fronts. 
 
And I say to the member of the opposition today, misleading 
. . . The false information of this House, Mr. Speaker, 
contravenes the exact code of ethics, and I ask the member, the 
Leader of the Opposition today to ask for the removal of the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest from this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, on the false information that he has 
provided to this House and to the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t a clue why that 
member’s on his feet, but then when he gets up, he hasn’t a 
clue. He hasn’t a clue what we’re talking about here today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program isn’t working. It’s not reliable. The banks 
won’t lend money on it; farmers can’t go get an operating loan 

saying I’m in the CAIS program. And, Mr. Speaker, farmers are 
telling us, we’ll pay our crop insurance premiums with grain. 
We’ve got grain on hand, but we can’t move it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have an example this morning of a 
farmer that’s trying to re-rent his land to another farmer. And he 
offered to go with no rent, and he offered to pay the taxes, so 
the renter was getting it for nothing. The farmer had to refuse 
because there’s no money to be made out there, Mr. Speaker. 
And they come to an agreement that the landlord would pay the 
renter $8 an acre. That’s how bad it is out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture and not the member 
from Yorkton, the foundation for agriculture is crumbling. Will 
that NDP government do something finally to help rural 
Saskatchewan, to help farmers in this province, to help farm 
families survive till this fall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ll have the entire morning, Mr. 
Speaker, to debate Mr. Strahl’s buck up comment in Yorkton, 
and we’ll debate that in a little while. But what we want to do, 
Mr. Speaker, is we want to talk this afternoon . . . we want the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, to come clean, Mr. 
Speaker. We want the Leader of the Opposition to come clean. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. The 
Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked the Leader of the 
Opposition to honour his own code of ethics that he has for all 
his members of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because 
in his code of ethics he says, when there in fact has been 
information that has been falsely disseminated, and knowingly 
so, there should be an action. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Opposition that he should be 
removing from this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, from this House, 
should be removing the member from Saskatoon Northwest on 
his comments that he made, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to foster 
parents, as the statements he made, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
the issues of support services for families in this province who 
have addictions and for the statements he made yesterday in the 
scrum about whether or not there were beds available in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — A point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member mind just holding his 
point of order until we get to orders of the day? Ministerial 
statements. Introduction of Bills. Stand no. 1. 
 
On the point of order, the Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, today the Deputy Premier, the member from Yorkton, 
was taking the opportunity to replying to agricultural questions 
in question period and inferring that a member of this Assembly 
was deliberately misleading the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that everyone understands that that is not 
proper conduct. And I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to direct the 
member from Yorkton, the Deputy Premier, to retract his 
statement and apologize to the House for his accusations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader on the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the point of 
order raised by the Opposition House Leader, let me remind the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and ask for your consideration the points 
that the Deputy Premier was raising in his question to the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
He was asking whether the Leader of the Opposition will follow 
the code of ethics adopted by his party in reference to the 
conduct . . . in reference, in reference, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, must have order. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, not once did I hear the 
Deputy Premier use the phrase that the hon. member was 
intentionally misleading this House. He referenced the 
comments made by the member in this House and outside of 
this House. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it is inappropriate to find 
the Deputy Premier out of order. His comments were clearly in 
order. He was not accusing the member of intentionally 
misleading the House. What he was asking the Leader of the 
Opposition to do is to act on his code of ethics of his party as 
decided by his party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order please. Members from 
time to time . . . order please. From time to time in this 
Assembly the emotions rise and members ought to be cognizant 
of just how much provoking they are doing during their 
statements. I was listening to the language very carefully. In 
this case, as has been in many cases, the members made . . . the 
member from Yorkton made a statement which made certain or 
drew certain allegations quite similar, to what I’ve heard over 
the last two weeks, to others. 
 
I also noted that the member did not accuse anybody of 
deliberately misleading and I made that as a very fine 
distinction, whether intention is implied or not. So I therefore 
consider this a dispute of facts that the member’s, from Melfort, 
point is not well taken. Order. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order please. Order. 
Order please, members. Order please. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Members I would ask that 
the schoolyard games be over for the day. I would ask that the 
member for Canora-Pelly withdraw the offensive word that he 
fired across the centre of the Assembly at this time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will withdraw that 
remark. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. And now we will . . . 
Order please. Now we will carry on with written questions. 
Order. I would ask all members . . . Order. Order. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Fairview, the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 631 to 650 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 631 to 650 inclusive have been 
submitted. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Faith Alive Ministries 
World Outreach Centre Inc. Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to stand in this Assembly to speak to the petition 
brought forward by Faith Alive Ministries out of Saskatoon. 
 
Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach Centre is a 
non-denominational church that was incorporated in the 
province of Saskatchewan in 1980. It’s of Pentecostal and 
charismatic persuasion and has been personally involved with 
ministry since its inception . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I just want to be able to hear 
what the member is saying. The member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, the gentleman who sent the letter of 
request, Mr. Pierce, has been personally involved with the 
ministry, with the Faith Alive Ministries ministry since its 
inception. The ministry with K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
and Bible college has been at its present location in Saskatoon 
for 17 years, and for 24 years has had a two-year program of 
religion and theology along with strong emphasis on integrity, 
honesty, and good work ethics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Pierce points out that many graduates of this 
practical theology course have pursued careers as teachers, as 
firefighters, police officers, social workers, and government 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

employees. But they’ve also had First Nations chiefs go through 
their college, band counsellors, drug abuse counsellors, 
missionaries, and pastors. They’re a member of the Canadian 
Bible College. And they’ve come forward with a petition, Mr. 
Speaker, due to the changing times and they’re requesting of the 
Assembly that the Legislative Assembly provide them with the 
authority to award certificates, diplomas, and confer degrees in 
religious studies and theology at their Faith Alive Bible 
College. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that their petition is 
certainly one that is commendable, one that this Assembly 
should support. 
 
And therefore at this time I move that Bill 301, The Faith Alive 
Ministries World Outreach Centre Inc. Act be now read a 
second time and referred to the standing committee on private 
members’ Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that Bill No. 301, The Faith Alive Ministries World 
Outreach Centre Inc. Act be now read a second time and 
referred to the standing committee on private members’ Bills. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill stands referred. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Orange Benevolent Society 
Amendment Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to rise and 
speak to Bill No. 2, the Orange Home benevolent society 
amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Orange Home society is certainly an 
organization that I think many people are familiar with. I 
believe it was established back in the mid-’20s, early ’20s, and 
has done great service for the community of Indian Head and 
the province. It’s a one of a kind organization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Its motto — and I was just not expecting to speak quite so early 
because I didn’t expect the government to pull their motion — 
but its motto is, it’s easier to build boys and girls than try and 
fix men and women. 

 
And that’s certainly been kind of the way they’ve conducted 
their business — bringing people from all over the province and 
some of the youth from our province and working with them, 
putting them through the school system in Indian Head and 
extracurricular activities. 
 

I think one of the most significant things when I was looking 
through the website regarding the Orange Benevolent Society is 
they have never received 1 cent from either provincial or federal 
government. This home has operated on their own doing this 
work for people of Saskatchewan through fundraising and 
fundraising only. 
 
And I think it’s a real credit to this organization, number one, 
the work that they do, but also the fact that they’ve been able to 
do this work over the last many decades — from the early ’20s 
— just through the generosity of people throughout the 
province but also the hard work of the people that are connected 
with the society. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the petition certainly, as when I looked at it 
and looked through what they are asking, looks like it’s a very 
good idea — allowing them to grant money to people that are 
passing through their home and moving on to whether it’s 
post-secondary education and things like that. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I would move that Bill No. 302, the Orange Home benevolent 
society amendment Act be now read a second time and referred 
to the standing committee on private member Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that Bill No. 302, The Orange Benevolent 
Society Amendment Act be now read a second time and 
referred to the standing committee on private members’ Bills. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill stands referred. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 303, The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act be now read a second 
time and referred to the standing committee on private 
members’ Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview that Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool Repeal Act be now read a second time and referred 
to the standing committee on private members’ Bills. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Motion No. 3 — Crop Insurance Premiums 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
enter into the debate brought on by the fact that this government 
and this Minister of Agriculture has refused to extend the 
deadline for crop insurance beyond this . . . today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are truly not ordinary times in agriculture. 
Producers are facing what is the worst farm income crisis in the 
100 years that we’ve been a province. At a time, Mr. Speaker, 
like this when producers are losing their farms and worrying 
about where they’ll find the money to put in a crop this spring, 
this NDP government is only compounding their problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, grain and oilseed prices have fallen 27 and 26 per 
cent respectively from this time last year. The real price of 
wheat has been in decline from about $400 a tonne in 1992-93 
dollars in the early 1950s to under $200 or less than half that in 
2003. And lately even the more high-valued commodities have 
followed suit. 
 
This Ag minister, Mr. Speaker, who told farmers they’re going 
broke because of business decisions is now telling 
Saskatchewan producers that this NDP government won’t even 
extend the deadline for crop insurance to help them out in their 
hour of need. Mr. Speaker, this is almost beyond belief. It’s 
callous and cynical beyond belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the minister chirps from his seat that it’s not true. Well it 
certainly is true. The deadline passes today. Producers that 
haven’t at least found a substantial percentage of their 
premiums will be out. And those producers, Mr. Speaker, will 
not be eligible for 2006 crop insurance. In other words, they 
will not be able to get funding when they go to their lenders. 
They will not be eligible for spring cash advance. They will be 
out of business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Without crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, these producers will 
certainly not be able to obtain lines of credit. The first question 
the bank asks these days when a producer or grain grower goes 
to get funding to put in his crop for the year is, can we have an 
assignment of your crop insurance? And these producers will — 
to a man — have to say, no because I can’t get crop insurance 
this year. And the banks in every case will say, too bad then; 
run along. Not having crop insurance may even detrimentally 
affect the producers’ return from the CAIS program if indeed 
they’re among the lucky producers that even receive one. 
 
In the past, Crop Insurance has taken the time to consult with 
producers and decide to extend deadlines to better serve 
producers. But this government has refused to do that in this the 
worst time in agriculture in the history of the province. 
However, it didn’t stop them from spending $26,600 on mailing 
out threatening letters to producers telling them that they will 

not receive crop insurance if they haven’t paid by today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that only covers, that 26,600 only covers the 
postage on those letters. I suspect that it costs that Crop 
Insurance Corporation at least $10 a letter to get those letters 
out, over and above the cost of postage. So add another 35,000 
or so to that twenty-six six, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is despicable and disgraceful and almost beyond belief that 
it’s . . . This government, Mr. Speaker, has driven a wedge into 
the centre of this province so deep between rural and urban 
people that, even though agriculture is still one of the major 
contributors to our economy in this province even in these 
horrible times, most urban people believe that agriculture is a 
drag on our economy and on our society. This NDP government 
has done that intentionally, Mr. Speaker, in a cynical manner 
over 15 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely inexcusable behaviour from a 
government. To turn half of the population of the province 
against the other half is unbelievable. But this government has 
done it. This NDP government has done that and they drive that 
wedge so deeply into the heart of this province that the 
divisions may be irreparable. I don’t know how you re-educate 
people in urban Saskatchewan, generations removed from 
farms, that agriculture is a major contributor. Even the Leader 
of the Liberal Party recently in debate with me — a debate 
sponsored by the real estate association — said and I quote as 
closely as I can remember, he said that agriculture is like an 
anchor that drags us down. That also is inexcusable, Mr. 
Speaker, and cynical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government intentionally tries to break 
our farmers. They know that agriculture will never support 
them again after the things they have done, and so they 
intentionally drive farmers from the land. They do that in a 
cynical, intentional, and disgusting manner, Mr. Speaker, that is 
not worthy of the government of this province. 
 
Our neighbours to both the east and west have taken steps to 
make their crop insurance programs more flexible and more 
affordable, to better assist producers through these difficult 
times. Manitoba has added excessive moisture insurance to its 
crop insurance program to help producers deal with the spring 
flooding that the province experienced the last year or two, to 
assist areas that were hit with heavy rain. Alberta invested a 
further $20 million to reduce premiums for Alberta producers. 
 
In Saskatchewan, this NDP government annually announces 
that crop insurance premiums will be going up and crop 
insurance coverage will be reduced. This has been a pattern for 
the last four years at least, Mr. Speaker, and we expect that it 
will continue. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there is no consolation for our 
producers who have watched their premiums increase in the 
past years while their coverage has decreased. And now, they 
can’t even get an extension on the payment deadline to enable 
them to have crop insurance for 2006. 
 
The program has been so eroded that without the fact that they 
are ineligible for financing without crop insurance, they 
probably wouldn’t want it anyway but they have to have it in 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

order to operate. And this government cynically holds that over 
their heads and will break those producers in a systematic 
fashion who cannot afford to pay at least a substantial portion of 
those premiums by the end of business today. 
 
This NDP government seems intent on managing the death of 
Saskatchewan agriculture instead of looking at ways to assist it. 
They seem to look for any little thing that they can cut or take 
back from Saskatchewan producers that will further put them in 
trouble with lending institutions and make it even more 
impossible for them to meet their financial commitments. 
 
It was this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, that closed rural 
service centres, depriving Saskatchewan producers of 
agronomic advice. 
 
It was this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, that removed spot 
loss hail from crop insurance — unlike other jurisdictions in 
Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was this NDP government that waited until the 11th hour 
every year to fully fund their share of the CAIS program. 
 
It was this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, that clawed back 20 
per cent of the farm fuel rebate, citing difficult financial times, 
and with government revenues at an all-time high they have 
refused to give back what they took. This Agriculture minister 
was the one who claimed that fully funding the CAIS program 
and ensuring some assistance for Saskatchewan producers was 
akin to throwing money away. 
 
It’s time, Mr. Speaker, that this minister stopped throwing 
temper tantrums and slapping federal Agriculture ministers with 
one hand while holding out the other for money. The new 
federal government has been in power for a matter of weeks and 
already this minister and that Deputy Premier have driven a 
wedge so deep that Saskatchewan will have a problem dealing 
with this federal government on agricultural matters. They did 
that by misquoting the Minister of Agriculture and spreading 
that word as quickly as their moccasin telegraph could carry it. 
 
While there are responsibilities that belong to the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, this government denies its own 
responsibilities for producers and has done so for far too long. 
These cuts that I have alluded to were not the decision of the 
federal government. They were made by this NDP government 
and this Agriculture minister. 
 
Saskatchewan is a province that was born from agriculture and 
that has grown with agriculture, and a province, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time, under this government, that refuses to recognize the 
huge potential of agriculture to continue this growth into our 
next century. 
 
A single Saskatchewan farm, Mr. Speaker, injects enough 
money into the provincial economy to pay the salaries of over 
three Saskatchewan residents, based on average Saskatchewan 
salaries. At a time when these producers are at the mercy of 
international markets and are trying to compete with the 
treasuries of the US and Europe, where is this provincial 
government? They even refuse to do the very basic, minimum 
things that they could do to help our producers through this time 
of need. 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move the motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to extend the 
deadline for crop insurance. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this motion will be seconded by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek and seconded by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to extend the 
deadline for crop insurance. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased 
to be able to join in with the member for Thunder Creek today 
to talk on one of the many important issues in the ag industry 
out there and the problem that farmers are having out there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the deadline comes due tonight for the 
crop insurance premiums from last year to be paid up, I think 
we see a number of farmers that tonight or tomorrow morning 
are going to feel that much worse than they already did today, 
knowing that they can’t meet that deadline and that the 
provincial government had absolutely no sympathy for them 
and absolutely no help for them in their time of need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first thing we have to realize that these times 
right now probably haven’t been this bad or seen this bad in the 
last 70 or 80 years, maybe even longer, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
sure even in the ’30s if things were this bad on the farm because 
everything has changed dramatically, Mr. Speaker. I believe in 
the ’30s that farmers’ and farm wives’ biggest job was making 
sure they could feed their families. But the debt load wasn’t 
there, Mr. Speaker. Their problem was they had no money, they 
had no cash, and were right up against it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, farmers today are right up against it, in fact 
are losing in many cases everything that they’ve worked their 
whole lifetime, their wife has worked their whole lifetime for, 
and their families have worked their whole life towards — that 
is their pension plan — and it’s disappearing very quickly. And 
what happens from that NDP government over there? 
Absolutely no compassion, absolutely no sympathy to the 
problem. In fact they just say, that’s the way it is. They’ll have 
to make out on their own. That what the Ag minister and I 
guess the Premier himself agrees that it’s their problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deadline’s coming tonight. And we’ve asked 
and asked and asked that this Ag minister would bend a little 
and come to an agreement where farmers could even just have 
an extension of say, three months. 
 
In many cases, their bins are full of grain or half full of grain. 
They’ve got a large quantity of grain from last year’s harvest 
and yet can’t move that grain or if they can, it’s worth very 
little. And we’re putting them in a position where they have to 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

wholesale that grain to make this commitment so that they can 
have crop insurance for this year — but also, Mr. Speaker, so 
that they can qualify for a cash advance, a spring cash advance, 
which they absolutely need out there right now to be able to put 
a crop in this spring. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about crop insurance premiums 
from last year that aren’t paid right now and won’t be paid in 
many cases. I believe the other day they said the number was 
3,800 and the minister himself has said that some of those have 
found and scratched and raised the money to pay the premium 
or part of the premium. And the rest are still out there. And I 
believe that would leave — if his numbers are right — about 
2,800 to 3,000 farmers out there at this point that can’t meet 
that deadline tonight at midnight and are going to be in dire 
straits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is right at a . . . just a spot 
where they have nowhere to turn. And it’s not just farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not just farmers. It’s farm businesses of all kinds 
— fuel dealers, businesses, car dealers even out there, Mr. 
Speaker. Machinery dealers are up against it because as every 
day goes on and the markets are slowing down out there, their 
businesses are slowing down because farmers don’t have 
anything to spend at all — any cash to spend to any positive 
movement out there. 
 
We’re all hurting in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that’s something that the Premier should take note of. I 
believe that’s something the Ag minister needs to take note of. 
And it’s certainly something that the whole NDP government 
should be taking notice of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to not have a cash advance this spring, for many 
farmers the last few years is what they’ve actually functioned 
on. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they can’t afford crop 
insurance and they don’t get a cash advance, I think many of 
them are going to throw the keys on the table or go to their 
banks — like some have this last while — and throw the keys 
on the desk of their banker, and say, you have it, you take it 
back; I have absolutely no way of making my payments; I have 
absolutely no cash to put this crop in. And that’s where we are 
at this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was really disappointed. We have a new federal 
government right now. We have a new opportunity for this 
government to work with that new federal government. 
Whether they agree with their politics or do not agree with their 
politics, we need them to get along with this government to help 
our farm families in Saskatchewan. 
 
Because number one, it’s our responsibility to get through to the 
federal government that we need help in a time of need, which 
we’re at right now. And the last thing we need is bad relations 
between the Agriculture minister from Saskatchewan, the 
Premier from Saskatchewan, and the Prime Minister of the 
federal government and the federal Ag minister. The last thing 
we need is bad relations between those two. 
 
[11:30] 
 
We just saw a Liberal government get beat in Ottawa where 
relations between that government and this provincial 

government were at an all-time low because this government 
continually bashes the federal government because it’s their 
fault for everything that goes wrong in Saskatchewan with 
agriculture. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, sure the federal government has a 
responsibility, and sure that at times they haven’t been there for 
us. But at the same time this provincial government has ran for 
the last 14 years, have ran and put their head in the sand and 
said, we’re not helping with any problems in agriculture 
because it’s not our responsibility. 
 
CAIS funding is a real good example, Mr. Speaker, where they 
hold out until the very last minute so that a farmer can’t even go 
to the bank and use CAIS as collateral and say, I’m in the CAIS 
program; I want an operating loan. That isn’t a possibility 
because the provincial government hasn’t been funding their 
share until the very last minute. 
 
In fact right now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know if the NDP 
government is going to fund their share of CAIS for the 2006 
season. We have no idea. So a farmer in Saskatchewan right 
now that’s up against it has nowhere to turn but maybe throw 
the keys on the desk and, Mr. Speaker, they have absolutely 
nowhere to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the things we say and do affect what 
happens with the optimism that’s in agriculture and the mood 
that’s out there where farmers are up against it, farm wives are 
up against it. And why I keep mentioning the farm wives, Mr. 
Speaker, is because at many cases, and we hear of this all the 
time lately, where farm wives are the ones that are taking the 
brunt of it. 
 
The farmer gets to the point where stress has completely 
overloaded him. He doesn’t want to answer the phone. He 
doesn’t want to go to town. He doesn’t want to go to the post 
office for sure, in case there are more dunners there and more 
bills that he can’t afford to pay, Mr. Speaker. And all this time 
the farm wife has to try and help her husband get through these 
bad times, but she also has the family to look after. But at the 
same time she’s also going through the same stress. And farm 
families are very proud people, Mr. Speaker. And they don’t 
easily admit that they’re up against the wall and that they need 
help. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying today is that that’s 
the times that you need a provincial government that cares, a 
federal government that cares. And right now, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Minister of Agriculture from the province of 
Saskatchewan saying very negative comments about the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, I could just see every farmer in this 
province shudder when those remarks came out. Because what 
happens, it gives the federal government an out, really, in 
helping Saskatchewan farm families. Because when the 
Agriculture minister from Saskatchewan offends the federal 
government — the new federal government — where relations 
could have been renewed and we could have had much more 
optimism, when you go out of your way to offend those people, 
it’s easy for them to turn their back on us and say, well the 
provincial government in Saskatchewan won’t work with us at 
all. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s exactly the opposite of 
what we need right now. 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

We need a provincial government that will go to bat for our 
farmers, take our cause to Ottawa and say, what can we do, how 
can we help our farmers? And even if it’s just till this fall, Mr. 
Speaker, we get to point A. To point B, we’ll worry about that 
later. But we need to get through till this fall. 
 
And many farm families haven’t that opportunity because, 
number one, they can’t get a cash advance because they can’t 
get crop insurance. And that’s something this provincial 
government can control. Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things that 
happen in agriculture that are out of the control of the provincial 
government. We admit that, we understand that, we know that. 
Many of us on this side are farmers or farmers from the past. 
We understand. But there are things that this province, this 
provincial government could do to help farm families out there. 
 
Not one thing is major, but a lot of little things would certainly 
add and help to what is happening out there. Spot loss hail was 
one, Mr. Speaker, that that government — and I believe it was 
the Deputy Premier, was the Agriculture minister — that cut 
spot loss hail. In his wisdom, he thought he would cut that out 
of the budget for whatever it cost this provincial government. It 
was a good investment, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy Premier 
saw fit . . . We saw him get up in question period, which was 
. . . I’m not sure if the minister is all right. 
 
I would question sometimes just where he was going. He wasn’t 
even answering questions on agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
He was the farthest thing from agriculture as we could reach. 
He was pointing his fingers at members over here. 
 
And I guess maybe what’s happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that really we have a government here that is not caring of 
agriculture and by the signs of what the Deputy Premier did 
today, they just don’t care about what’s going on. They really 
don’t care for the families that are up against the wall. They 
don’t care for the kids out there that have to see what’s 
happening within their families — the breakups that are going 
on out there. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a very sad, sad situation 
in many cases. 
 
And many farmers out there . . . I’ve had calls and other 
members on this side of the House have had calls from farmers 
that, a year ago even, were very stable, were up to current with 
all their bills. And now we’re getting calls this spring that for a 
first time . . . And that’s a shock for farmers out there that have 
never had bills carry over till the next spring. It’s a shock to 
their system to have to be in this spot. They’ve heard of other 
farmers and other farm families being in this situation. But until 
it hits you, you really don’t understand just how bad things are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting calls — and some of them, Mr. 
Speaker, they want to talk for a half an hour, three-quarters of 
an hour — they know, especially in opposition, there’s no one 
button that we can push. But they have to have somebody to 
talk to, to share what’s going on out there and to expand with us 
and ask us if there’s anything that could be done to help them 
from this point of time until at least this fall, until maybe things 
will improve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all understand that it’s grain prices are low and 
world subsidies are hurting our farmers here. I think we would 
agree with the Agriculture minister on that front. But that’s 

really in a way out of our control also, and it’s certainly out of 
the control of our farm families. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re here today and we are here to try and 
get this government to pay attention to what’s happening out 
there in agriculture. I know and I understand, there’s very few 
of the members opposite that really understand agriculture — 
one being the Minister of Agriculture who, as we go day to day 
and ask questions, shows that he really doesn’t understand the 
Ag portfolio. 
 
And I know he’ll say he’s working hard at it and he may be, 
Mr. Speaker. But he certainly shows by some of his answers 
when he says things like, well it’s a business decision, this is 
decisions that farmers are making — well it’s decisions farmers 
are making because they have no cash. They may have bins full 
of grain out there; they may have bins half full of grain out 
there. But number one, in many cases, they can’t move that 
grain. There’s nowhere to sell it. And number two, when they 
do move it, it’s at fire sale prices because the buyer know he’s 
got the farmer at his mercy. And that’s the point of time when 
you need your governments at both levels to help you from 
point A to point B. 
 
Now we had a grain and oilseed payment here not long ago, Mr. 
Speaker, and a lot of farmers didn’t get that payment and aren’t 
going to get that payment. The problem being that if they did 
qualify for a CAIS payment, Mr. Speaker, and through no fault 
of their own there’s been a clawback, the CAIS program will 
get a hold of them and say, Mr. farmer, you received X number 
of dollars from us — 5,000, 7,000, 10,000, whatever the 
number may be; it doesn’t matter. The money was used to pay 
bills. Now they’re being asked to turn around and pay that 
money back. 
 
Well the number one problem, Mr. Speaker, is there isn’t a farm 
family in this province that still has that money. That money 
went to good use. It helped pay bills and it helped those farmers 
get through this winter to this point, if they got a payout. And 
the CAIS program — don’t get me wrong — is not working 
well at all but where those payments have come and then these 
farmers are being asked for a clawback or asked to pay that 
money back, can you imagine, Mr. Speaker? What a day that is 
when you go to the post office and receive this letter from CAIS 
saying, we made a $7,000 payment or a $10,000 payment last 
fall, say November, and now, Mr. farmer and farm family and 
kids, we want that money back; we made a mistake. 
 
And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, that program is so flawed that 
even the bureaucrats don’t know how to run it. They don’t even 
understand it, Mr. Speaker. And it’s very frustrating for all of us 
on this side that represent farm families and for the farmers out 
there to understand how a program could be put in place that 
doesn’t work for our Saskatchewan farmers. It’s not there when 
we need it so what good is the program? 
 
And you know why that situation has arose? That situation has 
came to be because that government and the ministers of 
Agriculture for the last number of years, going back to Mr. 
Upshall . . . I can remember when Mr. Upshall was in that 
portfolio and said, farmers, it’s your problem; you’ve got to do 
it yourself. Or, it’s the federal government’s responsibility. 
 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

I went on a tour with Mr. Upshall down east, and that was his 
message to the federal government. We balanced our books in 
Saskatchewan, but we’re not going to help our farmers out at a 
time of need. It’s all the federal government’s fault. Or they’ll 
turn, point their finger at us on this side of the House and say, 
oh it’s the opposition crying wolf. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every member on this side of the House at 
some point of his constituency represents farm families that are 
up against the wall. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad, sad day when 
the provincial government does not have the compassion — the 
compassion to help farm families to the tune of at least making 
a point of going out of their way to get along with the federal 
government when they need assistance for farm families. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that comes partly along with not 
understanding the Ag portfolio and not understanding 
agriculture. And I suppose maybe you could also go further, 
Mr. Speaker, and say well it really doesn’t rely on any votes for 
them, because they represent very little of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a shame that a provincial government would play politics 
with farm families who are up against it. And at this point, 
many of them are going to either be going bankrupt . . . they’re 
going to throw in the keys and walk away. And again we lose 
real, very resourceful people that have in many cases 100 . . . 
Century Farm Award sign on their gate. And they’re having to 
leave this province, Mr. Speaker, under an NDP government. 
That is something that that government should be totally 
embarrassed to have happen under their watch. 
 
I remember back, Mr. Speaker, my parents talking about the 
caring of the governments and the Tommy Douglas at that time. 
I believe my mother at one time voted for Tommy Douglas. Not 
twice — I said once, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She did because she 
felt that Tommy Douglas had compassion and cared for people. 
And I’ve heard that from others. But those same people today, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, do not vote for the NDP because they feel 
this is not a caring, compassionate government as we see under 
the Ag portfolio. 
 
And it’s too bad, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s downright sad when 
we see long-time residents of Saskatchewan having to pack up 
the belongings and take off. And actually many of those farmers 
right now, Mr. Speaker, the real sad part of it is they’re 50, 55, 
60 years old, maybe even older. Their pension plan just went 
under, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have the luxury like we do to 
have a pension plan or public sector workers that have pension 
plans. They don’t have that luxury because when they go under 
and go broke, there is absolutely nothing left. 
 
Can you imagine what you must feel like when you know your 
family . . . you can’t even support them to buy groceries. You 
have to pick up, load up, and head out, and in most cases to 
Alberta or somewhere where they might get a job. And I wish 
them well when they have to do that but, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
sad, sad situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember when I was younger and just started 
farming, probably in the ’70s, and there was an auction sale. 
There’d be an auction sale in our area, and it was a gathering 
time at that time. It was a good time because somebody was 
retiring. They had got to a certain age and they were retiring. 

They were selling out for good dollars. Their land was going for 
good dollars. The machinery was going for good dollars. We 
would all be there. It was kind of like you were visiting your 
neighbours and wishing them well and bon voyage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today farm auctions are a tragedy. We saw 
the farm auction in my area, the Stockholm area, the other day, 
Mr. Speaker. We had a family that purchased land, machinery, 
buildings, in the millions of dollars. This was a very big 
venture. And I believe that the people when they come in had 
good intentions and felt . . . maybe not understanding 
completely the agriculture file, but spent millions of dollars of 
investment dollars into our area saying, there’s got to be money 
out here to be made. So, Mr. Speaker, what the man and his 
wife were saying is we feel that it’s worth investing in 
agriculture out there. It’s worth taking the risk and putting our 
capital into there. 
 
And what do we see a short three years later? And knowing that 
they’re going to lose millions, I would believe, Mr. Speaker — 
and I can’t back that up with fact — but I know they took a 
great beating on what they received for the land and the 
improvements they’d put into that land. They’d improved the 
land dramatically. 
 
And the machinery, Mr. Speaker. In fact some of the stuff, 
some of the farmers have told me, probably went for possibly 
10, 20 cents on the dollar. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
tremendous loss for somebody to take. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
shame because what happens then is there’s not investment 
dollars to go into agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the quotes that the Minister of 
Agriculture has had in the past make me really wonder if it’s 
not that they don’t understand agriculture, or if it’s just that they 
don’t want to understand agriculture and do not want to support 
it in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Ag minister, November 7: 
 

Mr. Speaker, if we were to put those hundreds of millions 
of dollars that are drawn up in the CAIS program, and 
those hundreds of millions of dollars that really are a 
product of an inequitable system that put Saskatchewan 
paying five or six times the provincial per capita average, 
Mr. Speaker, it would be akin to throwing those dollars 
away and not investing them in the future of agriculture. 

 
That’s quite a statement when you think of that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — to put money into our farm families in 
Saskatchewan is like throwing money away. So I guess we 
understand why, Mr. Speaker, there is no compassion over there 
and there’s no really caring of what’s going on in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Another quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Minister of 
Agriculture: 
 

We must recognize that farms are businesses and . . . those 
farmers are making business decisions about the kind of 
inputs that they will . . . [be putting] in. 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

Well yes, they’re business decisions. But business decisions 
have to be made with the amount of capital that you can afford 
to invest in your crop that you’re going to grow or into your 
agriculture business. And, Mr. Speaker, it just shows that 
there’s no caring or compassion with the government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another quote: 
 

“We’ll be providing the support that there is through our 
current programs and we think . . . those programs will 
meet the basic needs and we have no intention of doing 
any kind of ad-hoc program at all at this point,” . . . 

 
That was from our present Agriculture minister, Mr. Speaker, 
September 14, 2005. So at that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
were already talking about the problem but were not dealing 
with the problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe what has happened this week 
has, Mr. Speaker, has done a lot of harm to provincial-federal 
relations. And when we have a provincial government that has 
no new ideas and will not stand behind one of the industries in 
Saskatchewan and then turns on the other hand and blames 
everybody else for their problems — it’s either the federal 
government or it’s the farmers’ problem; it’s the weather; it’s 
somebody else’s problem — and accepts no responsibility for 
it, I would say that the first thing we need is a provincial 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford to let rural Saskatchewan die out 
there. We need rural Saskatchewan in conjunction with urban 
Saskatchewan to make this province grow like the other 
provinces around us seem to be doing. We see the job numbers 
out and the population numbers out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
job numbers in BC [British Columbia] are growing 
dramatically. The job numbers in Alberta are growing 
dramatically. In fact to the east, our neighbour to the east with 
about one-third of the resources at most that we have here, their 
job numbers are growing. And yet what happens when we get 
back to Saskatchewan? We’re losing people. The population’s 
dropping, Mr. Speaker, and everything is behind in 
Saskatchewan. It’s just like we’re a have-not province, really, in 
the middle of a boom everywhere else. 
 
And that’s probably the farthest thing from the truth. Oil and 
gas in this province are doing very well and other industries are 
doing very well. And it’s at that time, Mr. Speaker, we need a 
government with enough foresight to put this all together, to 
find a way to bring the people back that have left, bring new 
people back to Saskatchewan, grow our population. And let’s 
get by this defeatist attitude, that we can’t hear and we seem to 
just really appreciate being a have-not province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I join with the member for Thunder 
Creek in asking the provincial government to reconsider and 
extend the deadline for crop insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — We have a motion 
that’s being moved by the hon. member for Thunder Creek and 
seconded by the hon. member from Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to extend the 
deadline for crop insurance. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the vote on the motion? I recognize 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to give note that following my talk, I 
will be moving an amendment, Mr. Speaker. And the content of 
the amendment that I will be moving is this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That all the words after “this Assembly” be deleted and the 
following words would be substituted: 
 
commend Crop Insurance for its flexibility and payment 
options by allowing producers with amounts owing on 
their 2005 crop insurance premium to make an initial 
payment of 25 per cent by March 31, 2006, with the 
remainder of the balance then payable upon arrangement. 

 
That is the amendment that I will move. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s very important to clearly state the 
facts in this issue. Because as the members opposite have noted 
— and I agree with them and I understand — that this is one of 
the most difficult times that farmers in this province have faced 
over decades, perhaps one of the most difficult times in the 
history of this province in terms of the ability to deal with 
issues that are far beyond their control like world prices, like 
the changing value of the dollar, weather-related issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have consistently taken pieces, parts of what 
has been said in Hansard and brought forward to the public 
statements that are composed of their ideas and a quote of one 
or two words that I have made or perhaps other members have 
made. Mr. Speaker, this to me really is, from my view it is not 
politically ethical kind of actions that they have been 
undertaking. 
 
And it bothers me from a number of perspectives. One, Mr. 
Speaker, is that when we are dealing with people who are in 
trouble, it is very important to be able to communicate with 
them effectively, to work with them effectively. And you know, 
the member opposite talked about there being a wedge driven 
between rural and urban people. I regret to say that members 
opposite have had that hammer in their hand driving that wedge 
just as hard as they could drive it, Mr. Speaker. And that 
includes paying for ads out in rural newspapers that say things 
like, Minister of Agriculture says farmers going broke because 
of business decisions. And they only put that piece in quotation 
marks because they took it out of context, Mr. Speaker, which 
is in my view completely inappropriate and is unethical, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do think it’s important to put the facts 
on the table. And, Mr. Speaker, there is a clear reference in 
Hansard where I used those two words, business decisions, and, 
Mr. Speaker, it was about as people are preparing to farm, 
they’ll make business decisions around the kind of inputs that 
they will use for their seeding in that given year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s try in this time where farmers need the support of this 
House — not just the government but of this House — to be 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

careful in our statements, to be thoughtful in our statements, 
and not to try and drive that wedge for simple political partisan 
reasons. And unfortunately that has been what has been 
happening over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a crop insurance program . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the hon. 
member but . . . Members, members of the Assembly, members 
of the Assembly, I would ask for order please. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the Minister of Agriculture. He has the right 
to be heard, and I’ve asked for members to please keep their 
voices down. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have a crop insurance program that has provided effective 
risk management for 45 years. And over those years, Mr. 
Speaker, we have done I think a tremendous job in this province 
under a variety of different governments of making sure that 
that program is credible, that it is supportive of farmers in their 
business, and that it provides the kind of risk coverage that they 
need. 
 
Today that program is in place, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
provided, as to our agreement, the funding that is needed to 
make that program viable. We also have, Mr. Speaker, rules in 
this program that make it credible. I had a phone call to my 
office from a farmer the other day who said, we stand 100 per 
cent behind your position on the deadline. We think that is 
responsible government. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by far the vast majority of people who are in crop 
insurance, who help pay for that program by their premiums, 
those people, Mr. Speaker, are counting on the integrity of this 
program and are counting on others to also make the payments. 
And if they can’t make the full payments, to make 
arrangements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had two members of the executive of SARM in 
my office yesterday, and we were sharing our concerns about 
the current situation and wondering is there anything further 
that we can do. And they painted a picture that is probably quite 
accurate in terms of what is happening in some situations, 
where farmers are in dire straits and they get a letter from Crop 
Insurance — whether it’s a registered letter or a letter just 
providing information — and in their frustration, Mr. Speaker, 
they may not look at it. 
 
And so we needed to do everything we could to try and make 
sure that farmers not only knew that the deadline is today and to 
let them know as well that they do have payment options. And 
so to that end, we called around. I called around to radio 
stations last night in the province to make sure that at least they 
would get that clear announcement that there were payment 
options available for them and that they needed to get in and 
make those options. 
 
It is important, Mr. Speaker, that they make the payments, that 
they get in and at least put the 25 per cent down because that, 
Mr. Speaker, enables them then to also apply for the potential 
cash advance from the Canadian Wheat Board. And that also is 
very important for farmers to have that option, and also it 
provides them with a certain security in dealing with their 

lenders in the upcoming year. These are important components 
of the program and how it functions in this province. 
 
It is also important, Mr. Speaker, in that we have a second part 
of the business risk management program in CAIS. And with 
CAIS — by buying crop insurance, by having that insurance — 
if there is loss, then the insurance helps keep the margins up. 
These programs are dovetailed in order to be supportive of each 
other. 
 
And so again it is, as much as possible we have advised and 
tried to provide information to farmers encouraging them to 
enrol in the programs. 
 
I do have to question the mischievousness of the attacks today 
on myself and on this government because in the scrum the 
other day, after the member from Saltcoats had raised this issue 
of payments, he was asked by reporters . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to read to the Assembly the comment that was made by 
that member. When asked by reporters whether a couple of 
months extension was going to help these farmers if they were 
at extreme risk, Mr. Speaker, what he said . . . Would it help 
them from going under, he was asked. And this is what he said, 
and I quote, “No,” he said. And that’s the quote — no, it would 
not help them. 
 
So given that, I really question the attack today and just see it as 
one more attempt to hammer that wedge between myself and 
farmers and farm families, and between our government and 
farmers. 
 
Now it’s very, very important to know that over the two years 
that I have been Agriculture minister, that I’ve travelled 
extensively in the province meeting with many farmers, with 
farm families, and have developed many good, solid 
relationships. I know that the previous minister did the same. 
And we know that there are those strong relationships which 
will continue and which we’ll continue to build on. We have 
not only built on them on a personal base, but we have done it 
by the kind of programs that we have offered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everybody in this House — opposition 
members included — can read the budget figures, and they 
know that this NDP government in Saskatchewan has provided, 
in the last two years, over $1.32 billion in agriculture support, 
Mr. Speaker. That, Mr. Speaker, amounts to in this past year 
$700 million — $700 per capita — far beyond what any other 
province is providing for their farmers and farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government made those payments, 
supported agriculture, invested in agriculture. Why? Because 
we understand agriculture, and we care about what is happening 
to the people and to this industry. Very clearly we have put our 
money right where our mouth is, Mr. Speaker. We have made 
the payments and provided the support. And I can tell you that 
we will continue to do that. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, as well that we have often dealt with 
— as the opposition has attempted to drive a wedge between the 
NDP and farmers — we have dealt with a lot of revisionist 
history. And it’s important for us to be clear about what some of 
that relationship is, Mr. Speaker. Because clearly, as we have 
moved through this last decade, there have been some very, 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

very severe hits that this province has faced because of our 
federal government. And I want to be clear that the NDP in 
those struggles clearly was on the side of farmers and farm 
families. 
 
And I have to be very clear as well. I heard the member from 
Elrose-Rosetown area say clearly the other day that, when it 
came into the House, that he stood up for the Crow rate. That’s 
good. The NDP were clearly backing the Crow but, Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government pulled the subsidization rate 
for agriculture transportation, grain transportation, pulled it out 
of this province. It was supposed to be an agreement for 
perpetuity. It was taken out. 
 
The sum total of the effect of that . . . 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Members, I 
know there are strong feelings on this issue, but it is getting 
very difficult for members of the Assembly to be able to hear 
the Minister of Agriculture. I would ask for order. I recognize 
the Minister of Agriculture. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the net effect of that — and we’ve made this very clear over the 
years in our relationships with the federal government, past 
federal government, and also in discussions with our current 
minister, federal minister — that the net effect of this was to 
pull at least $500 million a year out of the Saskatchewan 
economy. And farmers are still paying to export the commodity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not right. The federal government had an 
agreement. They reneged, and they did not, Mr. Speaker, they 
did not provide for farmers the kind of funding that would build 
value-added industry in this province. They just simply pulled 
$500 million out of the economy, and they have used that to 
help build their surpluses over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also . . . And in 1999 we travelled down 
there, down to Ottawa, a joint group of government, opposition, 
and farm leaders. We travelled to Ottawa to make clear to the 
federal government what the impact of their decision to take the 
subsidies out — a unilateral decision to take the subsidies off 
agriculture — what the impact of that was. What was it? The 
impact of that decision was $1 billion a year. Mr. Speaker, that 
is money that has been taken directly out of the farm economy 
by the federal government. 
 
So when we talk to the federal government, when we talk to the 
federal government, what we are saying, Mr. Speaker, is that 
they are accountable for much of the loss that this province has 
been facing. And we are saying to them: be accountable; put it 
back. Put the funding into this province and help us build the 
industry. Help us support the industry in a difficult time like 
this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look at the programs that we have. I look at 
the investments that the people of this province continue to 
make in agriculture and will continue to make in agriculture in 
the business risk management side, in the support side with 
payments like we made through BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy], in the investment side, payments like we are 

making for the meat strategy to help build that. The loan credits, 
Mr. Speaker, the PST [provincial sales tax] coverage for inputs, 
the no tax on the diesel fuel that is used in farming — all of 
these are supports that this government and the people of 
Saskatchewan provide for agriculture. And they are vital to help 
keeping this industry, which is so important to the whole 
economy of Saskatchewan, thriving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today it is hurting. It is hurting badly. But I can 
tell you also very clearly that it is not this provincial 
government that can make up the shortfall. 
 
We have seen payments in the last two years, payments from 
the federal government, that have come into this province . . . a 
year ago at this time, $280 million. Mr. Speaker, when I talked 
to farmers about that $280 million, they were clear. It didn’t 
solve the problem. It helped out a little bit. They were 
appreciative. And, Mr. Speaker, the $290 million that is going 
to grains and oilseeds producers is not solving the problem 
either. 
 
Now we’ve had a range of asks from people who are active in 
the agriculture industry or who are knowledgeable in the 
industry, everything from the APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan] request for $75-an-acre payment 
which on cultivated acres would be about $3.1 million and on 
seeded acres about 2.6 billion or 3.1 billion on cultivated acres. 
Mr. Speaker, those numbers are larger than the whole federal 
government budget. But they have identified the depth of the 
need here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is huge. It is far beyond the capacity of the 
provincial treasury, and the members opposite know this. They 
admit it, but then they turn around and try and hammer a wedge 
between the provincial government and the agriculture industry 
and farmers by saying, well you know the province is just 
dishing it all off on the federal government. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, we have come to the table with the dollars. 
We will come to the table with dollars, all that this treasury can 
afford. But we, Mr. Speaker, as a province — as a province — 
we cannot, Mr. Speaker, compete with the national treasuries of 
the United States, the national treasuries of the European Union. 
That’s a fact. 
 
We are dependent on our federal government. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when that federal government tells us that there’s 
going to be an additional $500 million rolling out, everybody in 
this province — the farmers of this province — are saying, 
now, we need it today. We are saying we need it today. Five 
hundred million across this country will not solve the problem. 
It will not make the difference. 
 
Farmers are saying clearly, it’s not about getting subsidies; we 
want to be paid for our work, for our commodity. That’s clear. 
But today they’re trying to compete against farmers who are 
getting huge subsidies. They’re competing in an international 
market that makes it unfair for the farmers in this province, for 
the farmers all across this country. And we need — our farmers 
here and across Canada — need this federal government to put 
this industry as a high priority, not somewhere beyond the five 
top priorities but as a high priority. 
 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

Our Premier has raised this with the Prime Minister recently. It 
is one of the highest priorities that we have in this province, and 
it has been made clear in setting the agendas in our discussions 
with the federal government. But I can say very clearly, we 
need our federal government to come to the table. We now have 
a large number of government MPs [Member of Parliament] 
sitting in this province. I believe, I believe that those members 
care about the farmers in this province. I believe that. And I 
want to see those Conservative members of parliament stand up 
to their government and challenge the government to do what 
they said they were going to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I was in Yorkton, when I was in 
Yorkton . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
Minister of Agriculture, but order. Order. I ask for order. The 
member has the right to speak, and all members have the right 
to hear him, so please come to order. I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, when I was in Yorkton at an event that one of 
those MPs put on — Mr. Breitkreuz — very clearly the federal 
minister and I were standing together on a number of issues. I 
know that he referenced me in his speech. But also when he was 
asked about what they were going to do, he was very clear that 
though he cares — and I believe he does; I know he does — he 
was very clear that he did not have anything to offer those 
farmers that day. He was very clear that there was a budget 
process that they were going to have to go through. And when 
pressed by the farmers —when pressed — he said, you’re going 
to have to buck up. 
 
Now the members opposite say that that’s not the case. Well I’d 
like to quote from a newspaper article today in The Western 
Producer. Mr. Speaker, from The Western Producer . . . I was 
not alone in hearing this. The member from Yorkton heard it. 
Eight hundred other people heard it, Mr. Speaker. And though 
there is denial from the other side very, very clearly, this is 
what Mr. Wells from the NFU [National Farmers Union] heard 
as well. He says, that’s . . . He said, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 
know why the members opposite are getting so exercised about 
this. I mean Mr. Strahl very clearly made this statement. He 
made it because he is saying, he can’t act today. He needs time. 
Well I’m telling you what he said. He said: 
 

“That’s why I’m encouraging farmers, just . . . to buck up 
and get into the program (CAIS) . . . ” 
 

Because all we’ve got for this year is the CAIS program . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . No, the quote was: 
 

. . . Buck up and get into the program . . . get what you can 
out of it while we devise [another] . . . new . . . ” 
 

And it goes on from there. But that is the quote. And, Mr. 
Speaker, all I said the other day in this House, and what I will 
say again today, that’s not good enough. It’s not good enough to 
just say but . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members, I’d ask 
members on both sides of the House to please calm their voices 

and give the Minister of Agriculture a chance to be heard. Other 
members who want to get into the debate will then have an 
opportunity to speak. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. What this . . . And I 
perceive him to be a very thoughtful and caring minister. What 
he said was not good enough. He needs to press his colleagues 
in cabinet. He needs to press his government for more. Why? 
Because the 500 million, as I have said, will not solve the 
problem. 
 
And do you know what he needs to do that, Mr. Speaker? Do 
you know what he needs? He needs these people to push him. 
And he needs us to push him. Why? Because he’s got to have 
that pressure in order to put pressure where it belongs — on 
Finance, on the Privy Council, on the Prime Minister — to 
make sure that this becomes a priority item. That’s what he 
needs. He needs the pressure from us in order to do that. You 
know that. You’ve got to realize that that is exactly what’s 
needed. 
 
Now I believe fully that that minister cares — as I care — for 
the farmers of this province and for the farmers of this country. 
Why? Because they are a vital part of the economy of 
Saskatchewan and Canada. And we know, Mr. Speaker, we 
know clearly that they work hard. They produce well, but they 
are not getting paid what they should be paid for their 
commodity. 
 
We know this, Mr. Speaker, and we want to see that rectified, 
and we need our federal government to help us rectify that. 
Why? Because, Mr. Speaker, they are the ones who are capable 
of doing it. They have the legislative power, and they have the 
financial power. And we need them to come to the table, and 
we need them to do it quickly. It’s not a little Band-Aid today 
that’s going to make the difference. It’s not. Mr. Speaker, what 
it is, is some very, very clear, thoughtful support from all across 
this country. 
 
What it needs is a change in understanding of how the 
agricultural economy has to work. You cannot have on one side 
of farmers . . . Mr. Speaker, if the federal minister clearly takes 
a hold of this, we will see a difference. But I can tell you, 
yelling from the opposite side here isn’t going to help rectify 
the problem. That I can say for sure. 
 
What I can also say is that we will continue to work together 
with the farmers and the farm organizations of this province to 
make sure that everything is being done to make the larger 
changes that will make a difference. We know that there are 
programs in place that can be effective if they are changed. But 
we also know that the federal government must invest more 
money in this vital industry. 
 
And we also know that they must make some structural 
changes. You cannot have a system where you’ve got this one 
vitally important component that is being starved today. You’ve 
got a component that feeds into that, that is making good profits 
— the input side. You’ve got people on the other side of that 
who are doing quite well. 
 
The problem is that farmers can’t set their prices. They’re price 
takers. And they have to pay the price that is charged for what’s 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

there on the input side. And then they have to take whatever it 
is that’s paid to them for their product. And they’re competing 
with those federal treasuries of Washington and of the European 
Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to stand together in this province and 
across this country. And we need our federal government to 
come to the table and actually make a difference by what they 
can do with their financial power and their legislative power. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have been there, and we will be there. 
Mr. Speaker, that is very clear. We have been there more than 
any other province, more than any other province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, at $700 per capita, Mr. Speaker, far, far 
outpaces what any other province is doing. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as the crop insurance program is concerned, 
we’ve heard the members opposite talk about the changes that 
the other provinces on either side of us have made to crop 
insurance. Well I can tell you very clearly that they don’t have 
the same challenges that we do here. This is not Alberta and this 
is not Manitoba. This is Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me just draw an example. I believe it’s in the ’05 year 
where the new programs, the RIC [revenue insurance coverage] 
that the Alberta government has added to their crop insurance, 
the RIC program which puts a floor price and pays out at the 
end of the year if it’s not met. That program cost them, in 
administration, $20 million I believe in ’05, and then it was 
about $78 million in payouts. If we had run that same program 
here, exactly the same parameters on the program, it would 
have cost us $22 million in administration and well over 400, 
almost $500 million in payouts for the same program. 
 
Now I tell you, this is one of the realities that the members 
opposite just don’t seem to get, don’t faze, don’t care about, I 
don’t know what it is, but this is a unique province. And I can 
tell you very clearly that as a unique province we have also 
been building a unique program in the crop insurance program. 
We have been developing new programs that will help farmers 
meet their needs and we have been putting those programs 
forward and they have been responding well to them. We have 
been continuing to develop those programs and we will 
continue to adapt the crop insurance program as we move 
ahead. 
 
Now the other question that has been raised here — and I do 
want to address this one again as I have in the past — and that’s 
spot loss hail. Very clearly, there are independent brokers who 
sell hail insurance in this province and they were appreciative of 
the change that was made. And I’ve had brokers talk to me and 
say how much it has meant to them to have the opportunity to 
sell the hail insurance without the Crop Insurance Corporation 
selling spot loss. 
 
You also have municipal hail which is owned by the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. And 
municipal hail, though they can quite easily compete with the 
crop insurance spot loss hail program, they also say — and they 
say they can live with that — they also say that it does make it 
more difficult in administering and paying out. But all that said, 

I have assured the members opposite, I have assured the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and APAS 
that we have taken this issue to review it and to bring it forward 
to deal with in the upcoming year. And we will take the best 
advice from our consultations and from our farm support review 
committee and we will work with that. And, Madam Speaker, 
when we have dealt with that, we will bring this forward for 
consideration. 
 
So we are responsive. We listen to what the needs of the 
farmers are, and we seek to comply where we can. We also 
listen to other businesses in this province and try and be 
responsive and responsible with them. 
 
So all I can say in summary, Madam Speaker, is that on this 
very, very important issue of trying to provide for farmers the 
best of support, we recognize that there have always been some 
farmers who are not able to pay their crop insurance bill. There 
always have been. But I can also say clearly that we provide 
them with an opportunity to pay a portion of it by the deadline 
and to make arrangements moving out from there. We do 
provide that support and that option, and we will continue to do 
that. We also are very careful to inform them as fully as 
possible about when the deadlines are and what those deadlines 
actually mean to them and to their business just in case they’ve 
been stressed and can’t do it. 
 
The other thing I want to say is in dealing with this Agriculture 
portfolio at a time when it is so difficult for many farm families, 
I think it is important that the opposition at least try and stick to 
the facts and not take things out of context and twist them 
around and put paid advertisements out into the public that 
really, from all my view of life, I would say are completely 
unethical. And I think they need to take their ethical paper and 
really look at some of the actions that they’re taking and 
re-examine what they’re about. Because you know, if we pull 
together, if we pull together, you know, we actually will be able 
to make a difference for the people of this province, for the 
farmers of this province. 
 
Madam Speaker, that’s what I intend to continue to work for. I 
know that’s what my colleagues in this NDP government 
continue to work for. We do want to see a strong agriculture 
industry. We are investing for the future — millions of dollars 
every year — and we are helping to make some of the 
transitions that are so important. We’ll continue to do that. And, 
Madam Speaker, we do hope, we do hope that the opposition 
Sask Party will stop pushing their doom-and-gloom attitude out 
there and will really stand together and stop trying to drive a 
wedge between the government and the people, and really 
enable us to work together to make a difference and to have a 
united voice in pressing on our federal government. 
 
With that, Madam Speaker, I would like to move the 
amendment which I read out earlier and that is that I move, 
seconded by the member from Yorkton: 
 

That all the words after “this Assembly” be deleted and the 
following words be substituted: 

 
commend Crop Insurance for its flexibility in payment 
options by allowing producers with amounts owing on 
their 2005 crop insurance premium to make an initial 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

payment of 25 per cent by March 31, 2006 with the 
remainder of the balance then payable upon arrangement. 

 
I so move, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food and seconded by the member from 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier: 
 

That all the words after “this Assembly” be deleted and the 
following words be substituted: 
 
commend Crop Insurance for its flexibility and payment 
options by allowing producers with amounts owing on 
their 2005 crop insurance premium to make an initial 
payment of 25 per cent by March 31, 2006 with the 
remainder of the balance then payable upon arrangement. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I want to just take a few minutes to speak on the 
motion in support of the amendment that the Minister of 
Agriculture has put forward. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, first and foremost that I think that 
there’s very little disagreement in this Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, about the importance of having both the national 
farm program for producers across Canada and in our own 
province today to have good support, solid programs; both on 
revenue insurance, both on market insurance, and also to ensure 
that we have some kind of a disaster program in Saskatchewan. 
I don’t think there’s any question, Madam Speaker, about what 
we need to do here in our province. 
 
And I would say to this House, Madam Speaker, and to the 
members across that there has been a great deal of work in this 
province that has been undertaken to try and make it better for 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Some of that work, Madam Speaker, has been not only driven 
by members on this side of the House. There has been from 
time to time occasion, as I’ve said in other speeches that I’ve 
made in this Assembly, that we have had the support of 
members opposite to try to make a difference in helping farm 
families across Saskatchewan. And this is not a different 
occasion today. 
 
And at the end of the day, Madam Speaker, when you take a 
look at the kinds of investment, as the Minister of Agriculture 
has already alluded to, there has been tremendous investment in 
agriculture — both at the national level and at the provincial 
level — and per capita, as the Minister of Agriculture has 
talked, there has been a tremendous commitment here already 
made. 
 
Now some would argue that it isn’t enough, that there should be 
more. And I think collectively on this side of the House, we’ll 
argue that we should change the formulas because our 
Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan people shouldn’t be 
disadvantaged by the current formula of 60/40 that’s in place. 
 

We all know that in this province we’ve had the kinds of 
disasters over the last number of years that have required a 
significant draw on the crop insurance program. This province 
has met its commitments on the crop insurance program. 
 
Some would argue that we should be enhancing our crop 
insurance program to cover a larger portion of insurance for 
producers in Saskatchewan. And I don’t think anybody would 
argue that we shouldn’t attempt to try do that. It is a common 
goal that we have in this Legislative Assembly, irrespective of 
what your political affiliations are or the nature of which you 
have a relationship with the national government. 
 
I think that at the end of the day we want to see farm families 
with stronger insurance programs. We want to see them with 
better revenue and we want to see them competing in a 
marketplace today that’s even and stable. That’s what we want 
in this Assembly, Madam Speaker. 
 
And I think the question is, whether or not and how are we 
getting there . . . and how are we getting there. And we’ve 
attempted that in a variety of different ways. We finally have in 
Canada — whether members would agree or disagree about the 
quality of — the national program and the agricultural policy 
framework. We finally have one. And most of us would agree 
that there’s lots of adjustments that we need to make to them 
and we need to change them. And collectively I think, through 
the efforts of this Assembly, we should try to do that. 
 
And I want to just highlight a couple of areas, Madam Speaker. 
We have, I think today, both agreed — on this side of the House 
and on the other side of the House and members of the 
opposition — that really we should do something about the 
60/40. And we should work collectively on the 60/40. 
 
And our Minister of Agriculture and this province is on record 
that we should move to something that’s . . . an 80/20 would be 
more favourable to Saskatchewan producers. And we’ve got the 
member from Saltcoats who is the Ag critic, Saltcoats-Melville 
who’s the Ag critic, he’s on record too to say that we should be 
at an 80/20 formula today in the province. And we have other 
members of the opposition that have said, on time to time in the 
speeches that they make, that we should be changing the 
formula and it should be 80/20 with . . . The federal government 
should be providing a greater opportunity for Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
So we don’t have any debate on that piece, Madam Speaker. 
We’re in agreement that we should have a change in the 
formula and it should be 80/20. We don’t have much debate in 
this Legislative Assembly, Madam Speaker, that we should 
change the concepts of the agricultural policy framework on 
revenue insurance — that it should be a crop insurance program 
with some kind of a modification to CAIS or maybe an 
improvement on CAIS is what many of us would argue and 
attached to that would be some type of a disaster component. 
 
There’s no debate in this Legislative Assembly that we should 
have a change in the principles of that particular package. And 
collectively we’re on record on this side of the House to say 
that we should have those three components fixed, and we have 
members on the opposition who are exactly on the same page. I 
mean I’ve heard the agricultural critic say just recently that we 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

should have in Canada a disaster program and that in fact that 
disaster program should provide sufficient dollars to this 
province and to other provinces across Canada where in fact 
there is hardship. And clearly today we have hardship in 
Saskatchewan and associately we should try and build a 
stronger disaster program for our Saskatchewan, Canadian 
producers. So there’s no demur in the debate, Madam Speaker, 
on those issues. 
 
The issue I think that we’re busy debating today is, will we see 
some changes to what we’ve all been . . . all we’ve been 
working collectively for to try to achieve. Because there is no 
secret today that the lion’s share of how these programs need to 
be supported are national. We both agree on that. 
 
And so when we talk a little bit today about the crop insurance 
program, we should remember that there was a strong lobby a 
few years ago for us to get out of a portion of crop insurance, 
where they said that the hail portion . . . People said to us that 
the Government of Saskatchewan should not be investing in the 
spot loss hail piece. And that argument was advanced by a 
number of members who are currently still sitting on the other 
side of the House who said the Government of Saskatchewan 
should not be in the private sector’s face. They should get out of 
there. 
 
And so we took that under advisement and spoke with a number 
of people across the province and we gradually moved out of 
that, Madam Speaker, because we got that kind of information 
from people across the province and the members opposite that 
we were interfering with the private sector. 
 
And we had a very strong lobby from the municipal sector in 
this province who supply a very large portion of crop insurance 
to us as farmers across the province, of which many of those 
premium payments that are paid actually support men and 
women who work in our communities across the province in the 
municipalities. And so for members opposite today to stand up 
in their place and say what we should do is we should put in 
another 25 or $30 million or whatever that number might be to 
relieve producers of some of the hardship that they have, it’s a 
laudable task that we should undertake. And we should 
probably move down that piece. 
 
But what it does state, Madam Speaker, is that the people of the 
province are again going to be subsidizing the crop insurance 
program, and it flies in the face of the philosophy of our 
members opposite. So they need to be clear about what they 
want us to do. Do they want to join with us and do some work 
on putting additional dollars into the crop insurance program 
that are subsidized, experience some of the feedback that we’re 
going to get from the private sector and the municipal sector in 
the province, and join with us in saying, yes we should do that. 
 
[12:30] 
 
And it would be most appreciated, I think, in this House if we 
would have members of the opposition who would stand up and 
say, you know, we believe that this is exactly the approach that 
you should be taking, that the province of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Saskatchewan should be subsidizing hail insurance in 
this province. And in fact we think that you should take money 
out of the provincial treasury in spite of what the municipalities 

and the private sector are doing. And it would be good one day 
to just have a couple of the members from the opposition stand 
up and make those comments. 
 
But I’ve yet to hear them with that kind of . . . [inaudible] . . . 
But we need to go there. I don’t disagree that we need to go 
there. We should go there and we should examine it. And the 
Minister of Agriculture has in fact undertaken to do that over 
the next several months and see what kind of support we’re 
going to get from the members opposite when we get to that 
particular piece. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, we also know that in order for us to 
change the landscape of Saskatchewan, we’re going to need 
those support programs in place. And I was at the Yorkton 
event along with the Minister of Agriculture and a number of 
members who sit in the opposition benches who come from 
rural Saskatchewan today, and we heard the speech that was 
given by Minister Strahl. I had an opportunity to actually spend 
a half an hour with Mr. Strahl at my constituency office in 
Yorkton to talk about a variety of different areas of which we’re 
working collectively on. 
 
And I’m not for a minute suggesting, Madam Speaker, and I 
don’t think the Minister of Agriculture is for a minute 
suggesting that we shouldn’t work co-operatively with the 
national government — absolutely we should. There is 
absolutely no way that you can build any kind of a framework 
in Saskatchewan around agriculture without a co-operative 
working relationship. And all we want to do, Madam Speaker, 
is to try and sort out in which direction we can work 
collectively with one another in order to enhance and build a 
stronger national framework for our producers. 
 
And so I think when the Minister of Agriculture got up to give 
his speech and when he finished his comments, Madam 
Speaker, he then took some questions a few minutes after he did 
his press scrum. And one of the questions came from an 
individual from the Nipawin area where they had the huge 
flood. 
 
And he said, Mr. Minister, we appreciate all the good work that 
you’ve done for the people of the province or for Canada. We 
know that you’re working hard to change the CAIS program 
and we expect that this will happen in short order for you. And 
then he said, we want to know whether or not you’re prepared 
to invest in agriculture $3.5 billion. We need $65 an acre, on 
average, on 70 million acres for Canadian producers, is what he 
said, is what the person from the floor asked from the Nipawin 
area. 
 
And Mr. Strahl answered the question by saying this. He said, 
we’ve made the commitment on the seven fifty, and I’m 
working really hard to get the additional $500 million. But I 
don’t have yet the approval of my cabinet for the $500 million. 
And he said, when you do the math on that — was his next 
comment — when you do the math on that, that’s about $6.50 
an acre and it’s not $65 an acre. And it was quiet and there was 
no applause. And he said, I guess those numbers don’t give me 
very much applause, is what he said. And he didn’t get very 
much applause. 
 
And then the individual sat down and the second speaker came 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2006 

to the microphone and said, you know, you’ve answered only a 
part of the question, but what about when we’re going to see a 
difference in the CAIS program? And Mr. Strahl then went on 
to say that we probably won’t see a change to the CAIS 
program till sometimes 2007, late 2006, maybe 2007. But there 
will not be any changes to the CAIS program yet today which 
affects the crop insurance program, is what he said. And 
farmers that were in that room couldn’t understand how it is 
that you had an administration that campaigned on CAIS not 
being any good, that they couldn’t change it for a couple of 
years. And then Mr. Strahl went on to say that what’s required 
here is an agreement from the provinces to sign this off. 
 
And I can tell you that the Minister of Agriculture in this 
administration would in fact, Madam Speaker, endorse the 
change to the entire formula today if he asked us to do that. It’s 
not impaired by the position of the province at all. And so we 
should not for a minute, we should not for a minute be 
concerned about the fact that the province wouldn’t endorse the 
change to the plan. 
 
And then of course when he was asked again, Madam Speaker, 
by the second speaker on the floor whether or not we’re going 
to see a change in the CAIS program and new money this year, 
Madam Speaker, the member said, I can’t find you $3.2 billion. 
I can’t find you $3.5 billion. I’m going to have a hard time 
finding $500 million. And you know boys, you know what 
we’re going to have to do? We’re going to have to buck up here 
in . . . We’re going to have to buck up, is what his comment 
was. And for those who were in the room, couldn’t believe the 
comment. 
 
And I’m not for a minute suggesting that in fact that the federal 
government is going to have some difficulty in finding $3.2 
billion. I can’t for a minute believe that that’s not going to be a 
tough exercise for them to find the money. And maybe it’s an 
unrealistic figure of which Canadian producers are asking for. 
But I can tell you the $65 an acre for farmers today is not an 
unrealistic number. It’s not an unrealistic number to get this 
crop in this spring. 
 
And to provide an additional $500 million . . . And I was 
listening as the member opposites were speaking and listening 
. . . And speaking just off the record, Madam Speaker, to the 
member from Maple Creek, and he said our previous 
commitments on $200 million, on previous occasions, worked 
out to about $5 an acre. And there was some mockery to the 
amount of money that we put in. Well that was all 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money, that $200 million at $5 an 
acre. Every penny of that was Saskatchewan people’s money. 
 
And you compare that today, Madam Speaker, to the additional 
$500 million that the national government’s rolling out, which 
works out to $6.50, which is going to come from 32 million 
people in the province versus 1 million people in Saskatchewan 
where we paid out $5 per acre from our little old population of 
Saskatchewan here, where men and women are working hard to 
provide that kind of subsidy to agriculture. And the national 
government, Madam Speaker, in Yorkton, said we might be 
able to find you an additional $6.50 per acre on a population of 
all of Canada. You tell me about the fairness of that particular 
statement, Madam Speaker. 
 

What are we going to do, Madam Speaker? We’re going to 
continue to work with the opposition. We’re going to continue 
to work with this opposition. We’re going to want this 
opposition to do the kinds of things they said that they wanted 
to do four months ago or five months ago in the November 
legislature where they said we should be on buses and trains 
and planes to Ottawa. We should be on buses and trains to 
Ottawa and we should be looking for additional money for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And you know what? We should be doing that, Madam 
Speaker, for Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers. They said 
that we should be on buses and planes and trains to be going to 
Ottawa and changing the CAIS program, refocusing the CAIS 
program and making it stronger to provide more benefits for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I bet you that they’ve got their planes and trains and buses 
already booked to do that, Madam Speaker, because it’s 
important that they do that. Because I can tell you that the 
Minister of Agriculture and this side of the House, Madam 
Speaker, are going to be working with the federal government 
to try and change both the CAIS program, enhance funding for 
the CAIS program, the changing of the formula that you’re 
talking about, and building a stronger Saskatchewan 
agricultural and Canadian economy. 
 
And so this is not a division about what we want to do for 
Saskatchewan farmers. This debate, Madam Speaker, it’s not a 
division. This is about working collectively and listening to the 
voices of our members opposite as they’re driving and working 
with Ottawa to fix the disparity that Saskatchewan producers 
have with men and women who understand their political 
flavour as well or better than we do. And so we’re going to 
expect that they’re going to be putting a ton of pressure, a ton of 
pressure on the federal government to change the kinds of 
disparities that exist for Saskatchewan and producers today. 
 
And so I’m going to continue to work closely with the Minister 
of Agriculture and this government to make sure that we have 
in this province the kinds of agricultural policy, the kind of 
financial support, and the kinds of opportunity for enhancement 
and building on the renewable fuels of this province in a far 
more significant way. 
 
So with that, Madam Speaker, I’m going to move to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has 
moved to adjourn the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Speaker, I move the 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



March 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. I wish everyone a safe and happy 
weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:40.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................908 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................908 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................908 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................908 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................908 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................908 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................909 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................910 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................910 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................910 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................910 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Junior Achievement Awards 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................910 
 Congratulations to Estevan Hockey Champions 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................911 
 2005 Summer Games Legacy 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................911 
 Spelling Principles 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................911 
 Documentary Inspired by Athletes 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................911 
 Fraud in Government 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................912 
 Growth in Swift Current 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................912 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Treatment of Seniors in the Health Care System 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................912 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................912 
 Population Statistics and Policies 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................914 
 Condition of Highway 15 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................915 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................915 
 Crop Insurance Premiums 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................916 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................916 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................916 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................918 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................918 
 



 

PRIVATE BILLS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach Centre Inc. Act 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................918 
 Bill No. 302 — The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment Act 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................919 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Crop Insurance Premiums 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................920 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................921 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................925 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................930 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


