
















































Hansard: October 30, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 41 
 October 30, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to present a petition on behalf of the residents of 
the community of Grenfell, and it’s in regards to a dialysis unit 
in Broadview. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
highways continue to be a pressing concern to the people of 
Cypress Hills constituency, as represented by this petition and 
the following prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is once again signed by 
residents of the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present on behalf of citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. This petition is regarding the drug Avastin and 
the fact that this government continues to not fund the cancer 
drug Avastin. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Carnduff, 

Gainsborough, Oxbow, and Edmonton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was asked to 
present these petitions by a couple at Carnduff who are using 
Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from Whitewood; Fort Macleod, Alberta; 
Regina, Quebec, Wolseley, and Carnduff. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
the Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki and surrounding 
areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki and 
Foam Lake and Margo. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition dealing with a section of Highway 22 between 
Junction 6 and Junction 20, and I present the petition on behalf 
of citizens who are very upset with this government’s move to 
turn a portion of that highway back to gravel. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Southey, Raymore, and Duval. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens who are 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

concerned about Highway No. 5 — in case anyone forgot while 
we had our summer recess. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Colonsay, Saskatoon, 
Meacham, Humboldt, Bruno, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from citizens of Biggar opposed to any reductions of 
health care services in their town. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at the current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar, Kenaston, Saskatoon, 
Perdue, and Asquith. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of residents across 
Saskatchewan that are concerned that Saskatchewan and PEI 
[Prince Edward Island] are the only provinces that do not have a 
dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this budget year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, and 
Silverspring areas of northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Whitewood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding Highway No. 36, 
which is in the Coronach area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will read from the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from the 
community of Coronach. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleague 
in presenting a petition urging the government to repair 
Highway 36. 
 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the RM 
[rural municipality] of Hart Butte No. 11, and I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning Bruno access off Highway 5, 
sessional paper 5; 
 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous, that’s 
sessional paper 6; 
 
Biggar Hospital and ambulance services, sessional paper 
7; 
 
Highway 18, sessional paper 8; 
 
And Estevan Daycare Co-operative, sessional paper no. 9. 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 7 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: did the department spend any 
money to provide offenders released from provincial 
correction facilities with a pass to a recreational facility in 
any municipality in the province in the year 2005-2006? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question to the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety on that same issue. And I’m 
happy to present them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you and 
through you to all members, I’d like to introduce, seated in your 
gallery, my wife, Amanda, who’s here to watch today’s 
proceedings. And I’d ask all members to welcome her today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Recognizing Achievements in the Aboriginal Community 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today it gives me great pleasure 
on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to congratulate the 
new chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 
Lawrence Joseph; first vice-chief, Morley Watson; second 
vice-chief, Guy Lonechild; third vice-chief, Glen Pratt; and 
fourth vice-chief, Lyle Whitefish. These gentlemen have 
committed themselves to work with their people and the federal 
and provincial governments to better the lives of Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that our provincial government must commit itself to 
working side by side with these leaders to co-operate on 
solutions to ensure that Aboriginal people enjoy a quality of life 
comparable to the rest of Canadian society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate Derrick Big Eagle, 
president of Eagle Drilling Services Ltd. of Carlyle, and his 
partner and company Chair, Rob MacCuish, on their oil well 
company being chosen at the ABEX [Achievement in Business 
Excellence] Awards as Saskatchewan’s Business of the Year in 
2006. 
 
These men’s dream of owning a business and employing as 
many First Nations people as possible, as well as being a 
positive role model for Aboriginal entrepreneurs, has been 
recognized in the very short time frame of their company’s life, 
22 months. They are an inspiration to all people of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan to fully reach its potential there 
must be a commitment between all elected leaders to pursue the 
rights and quality-of-life issues that are currently hindering our 
progress. There must be an equal partnership with our 
Aboriginal counterparts to ensure economic opportunities and 
responsibilities for all. We have the powers to make dreams 
come true just as Derrick Big Eagle and Rob MacCuish. Let’s 
use that power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

2006 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Saturday evening, the Minister of Industry and Resources and I 
attended the 2006 Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce ABEX 
Awards. And I just want to take this opportunity to congratulate 
all the finalists and winners. 
 
The ABEX awards recognize outstanding achievements in the 
Saskatchewan business community and reflect the diverse 
nature and spirit of innovation of Saskatchewan business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winner of the TIA [Technology-in-Action] 
New Saskatchewan Product Award is Ground Effects 
Environmental Services of Regina; the Canadian Bankers 
Association Award for Community Involvement to the Bank of 
Montreal; the Job Creation Award, Doepker Industries of 
Annaheim; marketing, Regina’s Partners in Motion; the Service 
Industry Award to Express Air of Saskatoon; the Investment 
Saskatchewan Award for Investment to Borderline Feeders of 
Ceylon. Ozonators Industry of Regina is winner of the Physical 
Environment Award; the STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership] Award for Exports went to Stewart Steel of 
Weyburn; the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Award for Business 
Leader of the Year to Shaun Semple of Brandt Tractor; the 
SaskWater Award winner for Young Entrepreneur of the Year 
is Shannon Sharpe of Curves Regina; and, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Industry and Resources Award for New Venture 
and the Saskatchewan Business of the Year Award went to 
Eagle Drilling Services of Carlyle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PCL Construction Management was inducted into 
the Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
recognizing the impressive accomplishments of the 2006 ABEX 
award nominees and winners. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatoon Business Leader Retires 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend 
Saskatoon business leader Stu Irvine celebrated his retirement 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

after 41 years at Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods, the company 
formerly known as Intercontinental Packers. 
 
Born and educated in Watrous, Stu started up as a plant 
labourer at Intercon in 1965. Working his way up, Stu was 
promoted to foreman, divisional superintendent of the 
processing area, plant superintendent, plant manager, and then 
vice-president of manufacturing operations. The board of 
directors wisely appointed this astute, visionary leader as 
president and chief operating officer in November of 1998. 
 
Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods was subsequently purchased by 
Schneider Foods, then Maple Leaf Foods purchased 
Schneider’s operations in 2003. And Stu became vice-president, 
manufacturing for the western region overseeing the Saskatoon, 
North Battleford, and Surrey, British Columbia plants. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Stu Irvine’s accomplishments are many. His commitment to the 
community is exemplary. He is one of the founding members of 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Corporate 
Circle. Through this program, Stu has created an atmosphere of 
employment opportunity for First Nations people at Mitchell’s. 
 
Stu is Vice-Chair of the board of the Saskatoon Regional 
Economic Development Authority. He’s also a member of the 
board of directors of Saskatchewan Blue Cross. Stu was 
recognized as one of Saskatchewan’s men of influence by 
Saskatchewan Business Magazine in 2004. 
 
Stu is married to Roxanne and will enjoy indulging in his 
hobbies of salmon fishing, downhill skiing, snowmobiling, and 
golfing in this new phase of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members of this Assembly to 
join me in congratulating Mr. Stu Irvine on his contribution to 
the Saskatchewan economy and his well-deserved retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Aboriginal Women: The Journey Forward 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, October is Women’s History 
Month. This year’s theme, Aboriginal Women: The Journey 
Forward, is a welcome acknowledgement of the important role 
that Canada’s First Nations, Métis, and Inuit women have 
played in our country’s history. The contributions of women in 
general and Aboriginal women specifically have frequently 
been overlooked in celebrating the strength and 
accomplishments of our past. 
 
Today in symbolic recognition of the contributions of all 
Aboriginal women, I want to profile six currently helping our 
province and Aboriginal people make the journey forward. 
 
Ava Bear, a former council member for the Muskoday First 
Nation, who just recently completed a Bachelor of Social Work 
at the University of Saskatchewan. Bev Cardinal, a Métis 
woman who works right here in the legislature building as 

assistant cabinet secretary. Cecile Asham, a Pasqua First 
Nations elder and pipe carrier and recipient of the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. 
 
Monica Goulet, a Métis woman who is currently on leave from 
her position as the cultural diversity coordinator for the city of 
Saskatoon to pursue a master’s degree at the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan]. Leah Dorian, a talented Métis teacher, 
painter, filmmaker, and writer in Prince Albert. And Falynn 
Baptiste, a young woman from Red Pheasant First Nations who 
is currently completing an Education degree while at the same 
time making a name for herself singing traditional hymns in 
Cree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these women provide a standard of excellence that 
future generations can strive to meet. I ask all members to join 
me in recognizing these special women and their contributions 
that they make to their families, their communities, and to our 
province as a whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Panther Industries Nominated for Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the annual 
ABEX Awards were held in Regina. Panther Industries of 
Davidson was in attendance and while they did not win in the 
category they were nominated in, they were very honoured to 
have been in the running for the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership Award for Exports. 
 
Panther Industries is a growing and an innovative company 
located in the town of Davidson. They’ve been operating for 
over 25 years and become a major distributor for the oil and gas 
industry. Under the expert leadership of President Jack 
Schneider, they handle over 90,000 tonnes of product yearly. A 
major portion of the products they handle is potash, which is 
packaged and shipped to other countries — one of which is 
Cuba where it is used for the company’s oil rigs and for 
agriculture. 
 
The company has also developed a market exporting water 
softener to the US [United States]. The plant also packages, 
among many other chemicals, also potassium chloride which is 
loaded on to approximately 28 trucks each day for transport to 
the US. Assistant manager Clayton Schneider attributes much 
of Panther’s success to its 48 employees who work various 
shifts to ensure that the plant operates 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week. The company has provided stable employment for 
the area, for Davidson and the area, with many new families 
moving into the community. 
 
Please join me in offering congratulations to Panther Industries 
at Davidson for ABEX nomination. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

Review of Headlines 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 
October 18, the Leader of the Opposition was on CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Radio and he said the 
following. I quote: 
 

I want to read the headlines about Saskatchewan’s 
population growing again. I want to hear and see the 
media reports about businesses being built in our province. 

 
Perhaps the Leader of the Opposition missed the headlines in 
The StarPhoenix in the month of October. I’ll read a few of 
them in an attempt to jog his memory. On October 6, headline, 
“Unemployment rate down.” On October 8, headline, “Business 
expects sales to increase.” On October 12, headline, “Economic 
outlook optimistic for small business sector.” On October 14, 
headline, “Sask to post 3.8 per cent economic growth.” 
 
I understand the Leader of the Opposition is a busy fellow and 
so he must have missed all the headlines from the Leader-Post 
in Regina, as well, in the month of October. So to help him 
catch up on his reading, here’s a few more good news stories. 
On October 4, headline, “Sask farm land values rise.” On 
October 7, headline, “Job growth resumed in September.” On 
October 13, headline, “We’re a lot better off than most of our 
neighbours.” 
 
If I didn’t know better, Mr. Speaker, I would swear the Leader 
of the Opposition missed these stories on purpose. But I’m sure 
that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the Leader of the 
Opposition just has trouble reading. It’s too bad his federal 
cousins have made all those cuts to the federal literacy 
programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Retaining Power 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Friday members of the opposition were subjected to a 
lengthy lecture from the principal. The Premier accused us of 
engaging in political diatribes. The member for Athabasca made 
the utterly false and preposterous suggestion that the primary 
focus of the opposition was to seek power. Mr. Speaker, the 
sheer hypocrisy did not go unnoticed. Here’s what a prominent 
columnist had to say on Saturday. I quote: 
 

[The government] could always spend the money on debt 
reduction and health care, [but] that really doesn’t buy 
anyone any . . . votes. (Calvert was brutally honest . . . 
when he said politics always comes into play in such 
decisions.) 
 

There you have it, Mr. Speaker. There in stark relief is the real 
motivation behind the Premier’s action. Does he care about sick 
people? No, he cares about votes. Does he care about children 
at risk? He cares about votes. 
 
The veneer of compassion this government and this Premier 

have been so anxious to maintain is crumbling. The government 
is in a free fall. It’s losing popularity. It’s desperately trying to 
stop the inevitable. Instead of focusing on the fundamental 
problems facing Saskatchewan people, the Premier is looking 
for distractions that will allow him to stay in office at least until 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] convention. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s fine. The Premier’s motivations are transparent to all. But 
please do one thing — save the lectures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Wait Times for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday I informed this Assembly of the death of 57-year-old 
Emily Morley. Six months ago Emily’s family came to their 
legislature after Emily was told that she would have to wait up 
to three months for her first visit with an oncologist. Three 
months, Mr. Speaker — that’s three times the national average. 
 
Emily did not want her death to be in vain. She launched a 
petition demanding this NDP government address the extremely 
long waits for cancer treatment. Her petition stated, “My life 
may not be saved, but you might be saving someone else’s.” 
Mr. Speaker, six months later, can the Minister of Health tell 
people of Saskatchewan how long they’ll have to wait for a first 
visit to an oncologist? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
remind the member opposite and all people in Saskatchewan of 
the very good and strong words conveyed to the people through 
the Lieutenant Governor on Thursday last week in the Throne 
Speech, in which the province has committed its thinking and 
resources this session to make life better for today’s 
Saskatchewan families and build an even better future here for 
young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was in his seat, as were 
almost all members of the Chamber, on Thursday when the 
Throne Speech was read, and it was clearly indicated that, as 
the birthplace of medicare, Saskatchewan retains its distinction. 
It is the only have province in Canada that does not charge its 
people a health care premium and, Mr. Speaker, committed 
itself — as the second cornerstone of our agenda — to work 
with health care providers to strengthen the leadership in this 
province, to reduce wait times, and improve access to services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, those are idle words to the 
Morley family who lost their mother because of a lack of 
oncologists in this province. In April of this year, we learned 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

that the Saskatoon cancer agency had a shortage of two 
oncologists. Since then we know that one of the oncologists that 
was working in Saskatoon has become ill, as well as another 
oncologist that was working in Regina has since left the 
province. Mr. Speaker, that leaves this province in a dire need 
for oncologists. We know that the longer the wait for a first visit 
to an oncologist and then treatment makes a huge difference to 
the prognosis of people that are suffering from cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us today how many 
oncologists are practicing in the Saskatoon area? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every person in Saskatchewan is touched when a citizen in our 
province is faced with a disease like cancer. Mr. Speaker, 
people all across this province put in a lot of time, effort, 
fundraising, generosity, etc., to help find cures, provide 
research. And, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to 
working with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and with the 
people of Saskatchewan to improve circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just this morning as a matter of fact I met with the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency executive director. Mr. Speaker, 
I am happy to report that all of the positions in the Saskatoon 
region have now been recruited. We have a full complement of 
oncologists now recruited and will be reporting for duty in the 
Saskatoon region before the end of this year, Mr. Speaker. And 
secondly, the Regina Health Region has recruited for interviews 
two representatives and will be concluding those interviews 
next week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know this NDP 
government continues to fail cancer patients in Saskatchewan. 
They are facing three times the average wait for first visit to 
oncologist. There’s a shortage of oncologists in this province. 
 
Now we know this minister has a real problem with setting 
targets and then meeting them. In the Regina Health District, 
they set a target. They say how many full-time equivalents we 
need to supply the service. But Saskatoon hasn’t. So he says 
they’ve filled some vacancies. 
 
But does that meet the demand for the Saskatoon area? What is 
the ideal complement which the Saskatoon Health District 
hasn’t set out? What’s the ideal complement for oncologists so 
we start seeing the three times the national average waiting list 
start to drop? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has responsibility to ensure that 
the needs of cancer patients referred to the agency are 

responded to and respected. Mr. Speaker, we have provided 
additional resources to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency this 
year, as we did last year, to ensure that they have the capacity to 
do the work that needs to be done. 
 
We cannot, Mr. Speaker, the opposition cannot question the 
goodwill, the desire, and the commitment and dedication of the 
members of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We respect the work that they are doing. 
 
They have concluded, Mr. Speaker, that the full complement of 
oncologists now to meet the needs out of the Saskatoon Health 
Region have now been met with their recruitment efforts. The 
member opposite is critical when there’s an oncologist leaving, 
but when we bring two back, he hasn’t got a compliment for 
anybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency does extremely good work being short-staffed as much 
as it is under this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, when people 
have to wait three times the national average, it’s absolutely 
unacceptable. And, Mr. Speaker, there have been no 
improvements. Cases keep coming into our office with people 
having to wait far too long to receive proper treatment. 
 
Doug Bonderud, who passed away earlier this month, had to 
wait up to four months to have a second opinion from a 
different oncologist, Mr. Speaker. That’s unacceptable. Another 
family who doesn’t want to go public was saying that their 
treatments were extremely delayed when the oncologist from 
Regina left the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can the minister tell me about the task force that was struck to 
deal with the long waits for cancer treatments, what they have 
found, and what recommendations were put forward? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m glad the member opposite has recognized that the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has done a tremendous amount 
of work in this area and in fact did establish a wait times task 
force with representatives from all disciplines as well as the 
department with the goal of improving access to all agency 
services. Mr. Speaker, that task force is doing some incredible 
work not only within the province but, Mr. Speaker, across 
Canada. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Just a month ago, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan hosted a 
conference of all cancer agencies from all provinces right here 
in the capital city of Regina. What were they talking about, Mr. 
Speaker? They were talking about the need to improve access to 
cancer care right across Canada. Who is now the leader of the 
cancer agencies from across Canada, Mr. Speaker? It’s the 
president of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker, 
who is now leading the national group on improving access and 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

reducing wait times. Mr. Speaker, we should be very proud of 
the people who are working for us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 
Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network website was launched 
about four years ago, under much fanfare from this government, 
this is what the government had to say: we are making sure that 
everybody has the most up-to-date and accurate information 
possible. Improving communications for the public, health care 
providers, and the regional health authorities are a critical part 
of ensuring appropriate access to surgical care. 
 
Four years later, Mr. Speaker, on the Surgical Care Network, 
there isn’t a word about the cancer wait times in this province. 
For four years this government has promised that they’re going 
to be putting the wait times and the issues around cancer care 
on their Surgical Care Network. But, Mr. Speaker, they have 
failed to do that. Once again cancer patients are waiting in this 
province. When is the minister and this government going to 
start addressing this issue on their much touted Surgical Care 
Network? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite listened carefully through the 
Throne Speech, but he didn’t quite hear the commitment that 
this government has made to make life better for today’s 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. And support for cancer 
care, Mr. Speaker, is a critical component of all of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the wait times initiatives that the cancer care 
agency . . . were very well reviewed recently by — and we 
welcomed the information from — the Health Quality Council, 
Mr. Speaker. In the recommendations, the Health Quality 
Council indicated that over the last year they’ve been working 
closely with a very receptive Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to 
deal with issues and challenges that we’re faced with in the 
system. Mr. Speaker, the recommendations that have been made 
by the Health Quality Council are being acted upon by the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. Oncologists are being recruited 
and put to work. The wait times task force is hard at work, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve got new hires in the front end, Mr. Speaker, 
to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For seven years, I 
have sat and listened to this government’s throne speeches and 
the number of promises that have not been kept. The amount of 
propaganda that is spread through that Throne Speech is 

absolutely astonishing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, patients aren’t buying the fact that wait times are 
reducing for cancer care in this province, and neither are we. 
Mr. Speaker, case after case come before us, talking about the 
absolute devastating impact it has on people when they’re 
waiting for their first visit to oncologists. He hasn’t once stood 
in his place and said that that three-month wait — three times 
the national average — is reducing, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
absolutely appalling. 
 
If you can’t give patients proper care in this province, if this 
minister cannot give patients proper care in this province 
because of a three-month wait for cancer treatment, will he start 
sending them out of province where they can get treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very proud to stand on the record of this government not only in 
health care but cancer care, Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad I’m not 
on the other side where they’re running from their record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On the subject of cancer care, Mr. Speaker, the cancer agency is 
very committed to the work that it’s doing. And with new 
oncologists in place, with the wait times task force activity 
taking place, with the responses to the Health Quality Council 
report and, Mr. Speaker, with additional staff at the front end of 
the new patient registry office and the cancer care office, Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to provide better care for Saskatchewan 
residents. And, Mr. Speaker, we are reducing wait times for 
cancer care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
discovered on Friday that the Minister of Community 
Resources was briefed about the problems at the Oyate Safe 
House on February 6 of this year. This was his first full day on 
the job, Mr. Speaker, so I’m sure it’s something he would 
remember. Yet one month later, he stood outside this Assembly 
and told reporters, and I quote, “We have no evidence that there 
were any problems.” 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I ask the question — and I hope today the 
minister will answer the question — why did the minister say 
there was no evidence of any problems when it was obvious to 
everyone that there were serious problems? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got an article here on Wednesday of March 
15, 2006, in which there was a specific assault allegation made 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

against one of the staff. And when this allegation was made, of 
course we investigated. And what I said on this article, Mr. 
Speaker, is I said we have no evidence there’s been any 
problems; we have no evidence that they’ve not responded to 
the issue. And by they, I’m talking about the Oyate board. 
 
And what did the Sask Party do and that member do just now, 
Mr. Speaker? They get up again, and they use the same quote 
that I have here, and they put it all over the advocate’s report 
saying, this is what Minister Belanger said about the overall 
Oyate House. It’s absolutely unbelievable that they would do 
this, and it’s unethical. And once again, Mr. Speaker, they 
misinterpreted my quote, and they put the quote in the wrong 
place. And it was very, very deliberate. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
is what we expect from that party that has a political agenda, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The political 
agenda would be that if this hadn’t have been exposed by CBC 
and questions asked by the Saskatchewan Party, that facility 
would still be open today and this minister would have done 
nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Is the minister aware, and has he reviewed 
the package of documents prepared by his department in a 
response to the requests from the Public Accounts Committee? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we have been very open 
to the public, to the media, and also with the Public Accounts 
Committee. They’ve got a binder, a fairly thick binder of all the 
information that we had on Oyate. And I go back again and I 
stand by my answers, Mr. Speaker, because the answers we 
gave at that time were correct. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that my staff, a 
number of my staff worked very, very hard for the past three 
weeks putting that binder together to make sure that they’re 
open and that they’re accountable. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
continue doing that. But I’d point out to the people of 
Saskatchewan, we take the issue very seriously. We’re going to 
work very hard. We’re going to solve this problem. And what 
we’re not going to do is continue following the political agenda 
of the opposition because we have work to do and we intend to 
get that work done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, this government, this minister 
has known since July 2003 regarding the issues around Oyate. 
And now he’s standing, saying that we’re making political hay 

of it. He should have done something long before these 
questions came to the House. 
 
Is the minister aware that as of March 7, 2004, briefing note 
included in its package his department delivered on Friday? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we got some really good 
advice from the advocate, from the auditor, and from many 
groups out there that are really concerned about children 
involved in the sex trade — very good advice. And they gave us 
a really good road map as well, Mr. Speaker. We intend to 
follow that road map. 
 
And again I point out to the people of Saskatchewan, we’re 
going to work very hard. We’re going to solve this problem 
because this government is committed to solving this problem. 
 
What we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is we’re not going to 
waste a lot of time following that political agenda because, as I 
mentioned time and time again to the people of Saskatchewan, 
we want to fix this problem. And unfortunately, what we have 
here is we’ve got to play a political game that those guys want 
to play over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, I’ll point out again that as far as I’m concerned, there’s a 
good road map that we have in front of us. We intend to follow 
the advice and the recommendation of both the auditor and the 
advocate. I’d much rather take that advice, Mr. Speaker, as 
opposed to that advice from over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if the 
political agenda of the Saskatchewan Party is to help children at 
risk, then I’m guilty and I’m sorry for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — And I will continue to ask the questions, 
and I will continue to get to the bottom until we have this issue 
resolved. The minister talks about the report from the advocate 
and from the auditor. Those reports would never have happened 
if it hadn’t have been for the CBC report. 
 
Can the minister explain to this Assembly why an event 
marking the official opening of the safe house was cancelled? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it was the 
members on the committee from this side of the House that also 
agreed it was really important to bring the advocate and the 
auditor into the picture. It was this government that led, Mr. 
Speaker, and those people followed. 
 
What’s really important here, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said time and 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

time again, we’ve asked the people of Saskatchewan to give us 
the opportunity to solve the problems when it comes to children 
involved in the sex trade. We’ve always asked that. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the problem we have here is that we’ve got to spend 
many, many hours researching stuff and giving that party 
opposite a lot of information. It takes a lot of work. 
 
And when I look across the way, Mr. Speaker, I do not see one 
person out there that has a social degree, not one social worker 
across the way. There are people that work with these children 
— high risk children — and these are qualified people that have 
worked many, many years in this field. Mr. Speaker, let them 
do their work. Park the politics. Park your crocodile tears, and 
let us go to work. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, when he asks why we didn’t 
know about it, I mean they’ve known since July 2003. Why 
wasn’t there an auditor’s report in the fall of that year? Why 
wasn’t there a Children’s Advocate report in the fall of that 
year? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister didn’t ask the question, I’ll refresh 
the minister’s memory. The document provided to the Public 
Accounts Committee states and I quote: 
 

The Regina safe house has experienced some internal 
growing pains and detracting events. The former minister 
Mr. Hagel has planned to participate with the vice-chief of 
the FSIN in a joint announcement official opening of the 
Regina safe house. 

 
This was to have occurred at the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] legislative assembly in 
Saskatoon in July 2003. Unfortunately at the time, a senior 
person who has been involved in the development of the safe 
house proposal was arrested for sexual involvement with a 
minor. The joint announcement was cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shouldn’t that have been a clue to the government 
that there was something very wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the member mentioned 
that particular case. I don’t have any information on that case, 
and certainly I’d be pleased to hear on that from that member. 
 
What’s really important overall, Mr. Speaker, is that we tried 
and will continue trying to find some solutions for these 
children. We’ll continue trying, Mr. Speaker. And what I 
pointed out earlier, what I pointed out earlier that’s really, really 
important to the people of Saskatchewan is that we want to fix 
this problem. We want to work very hard to find some solutions 
to really support these children and get these children into a 
better lifestyle. 
 
And what’s really important is that at the end of the day that 

message has to be told over and over and over again. And I’ll 
tell the people of Saskatchewan this: we take that role very 
seriously. We’re going to do something about it. But in the 
meantime, we have to go through some political games with the 
opposition, and we’ll go through them. But we also have to do, 
Mr. Speaker, is make sure we work very hard, and that’s 
exactly what my staff intend to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, it may be what his staff 
intends to do, but I want to know what he intends to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he never answered the question. He said he hasn’t 
seen the document. It was in a document provided to me by his 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when he says that we’re just bringing these things 
up and we don’t know about them, I’ve put two personal calls 
into his office with my home cell number on another issue that 
he doesn’t return. So why is it that all of a sudden when we 
bring it up, we’re making political hay? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is this matter that I just discussed resolved? 
And did an arrest occur or criminal charges from that event? 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out again on that 
particular incident, certainly if there’s information that my 
department has on that particular incident, I’ll certainly look 
into that, and I’ll make sure that we find out exactly how that 
issue was resolved. 
 
And I’ll point out, yes, the member did call my office, but the 
member was told that I was away on holidays and that my staff 
offered to help him. And he turned down that offer for help. He 
said no. He said that’s fine. And they offered him twice to help 
him, and twice he said, no. So, Mr. Speaker, what’s really, 
really important here is you want to work to solve the problem; 
that’s what you want to do. But in the meantime we say, okay 
let’s work, and all of a sudden he gets a political agenda going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out again, we’re going to follow the 
recommendations of the advocate and the auditor. We’re going 
to put a good blueprint and a good plan in for the children, and 
we’re going to work very hard. We want to fix this, and we 
intend to fix it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the questions I’m asking were 
in the briefing notes provided by his department that I took the 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

time on the weekend to review. I seem to have the questions; I 
would assume he would have some answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the incident points to serious problems 
with the people running the safe house, and this is now coming 
to light because the minister was forced to answer questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the department still continuing with that 
same agency? Why isn’t it out trying to contact or send out 
another RFP [request for proposal] to see if there are other 
people qualified in the region to provide those services? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what we pointed out is 
that — and we told this to the media and we told this to as many 
people that would listen to us — we said that Oyate would not 
get their funding unless and until the Children’s Advocate 
recommendation and the auditor’s plan was followed. We 
specifically said that, so I’ll say it again really loud and clear for 
that member to hear. We are not going to reopen Oyate nor fund 
Oyate until and unless all the recommendations of both the 
advocate and the auditor are fulfilled. If they are not fulfilled, 
they will not be funded, and that’s the bottom line. 
 
And the second thing, the second thing that is really important, 
Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to continue working with 
professional people to bring as many solutions to these children 
as possible. That work has begun, and it will not stop, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a plan. We have some good advice from the 
advocate and the auditor; that’s what we intend to listen to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, in the three years it was there, 
according to their own documentations, they never had one 
person on staff that was qualified and had a degree and the 
ability to do it. So what, all of a sudden, is going to change 
when there are maybe other organizations that could meet this 
specific need to the marketplace today . . . not until the auditor’s 
and the advocate’s report is done. 
 
On Friday the Minister of Community Resources said the 
opposition wants to know what the minister knew about the 
Oyate Safe House and when we knew it. Well that’s true. The 
minister also said he welcomes scrutiny, but I’m not sure about 
that. Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us then why he refuses to 
appear before the Public Accounts Committee and answer these 
important questions in the safety of children in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really important, 
as I’ll say again, is that we want to fix this problem. We want to 
work with the children. When we talk about trying to find some 

solutions, this government followed the all-party committee’s 
recommendation on how to resolve this whole issue of children 
involved in the sex trade. There’s an all-party committee put 
forward a lot of recommendations, and we followed those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. The most important thing is 
that we’re trying to find some solution for these children now. 
And we have been working at this now for three years, and 
we’re going to continue working to make sure that there are 
solutions and opportunities despite the political games from 
across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

La Ronge and Area to get Natural Gas Services 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am obviously very pleased again today to be able to stand in the 
House to advise all members of some very good news for the 
province of Saskatchewan. I am particularly. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would invite the 
Minister of Finance to start again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased to rise in the House today to advise members 
of more good news for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This morning I was joined by the 
Minister of Northern Affairs, the member for Cumberland, in 
La Ronge, and we announced that there would be a $14 million 
investment from the Government of Saskatchewan to help 
allow SaskEnergy to bring natural gas services to the businesses 
and residents of that community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, our government is 
fulfilling a commitment made by the Premier to bring the 
economic and environmental benefits of natural gas to La 
Ronge, to Air Ronge, the Lac la Ronge First Nation, and 
Weyakwin. The introduction of natural gas will reduce energy 
costs, allowing businesses to diversify and to expand in the 
area. This in turn will lead to increased employment 
opportunities for northerners. 
 
The total capital cost to extend SaskEnergy’s network to La 
Ronge is $20.1 million. The Government of Saskatchewan is 
contributing $7 million in grant. Members of the Assembly will 
be asked to support this in supplementary estimates later this 
session. Additionally there will be a $7 million investment from 
SaskEnergy. The remaining $6.1 million will come as a result 
of residential and customer contributions. This investment 
overall allows SaskEnergy to make natural gas services that are 
of course affordable, also make them available to these 
communities. 
 
Pending the results of customer interest — and I can say from 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

having met with the gas committee this morning that there is a 
strong support in these communities for this expansion — I can 
assure the members that construction of this natural gas pipeline 
from Montreal Lake to La Ronge should be complete by spring 
of 2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again by working together with 
Saskatchewan people, with northerners, our NDP government is 
making life better for Saskatchewan families and is ensuring 
that they experience the real benefits of a strong and growing 
economy. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
thank the minister for sending me a ministerial statement to me 
in advance to take a look at. And I want to congratulate him on 
good news. It is good news. It’s a great announcement, and I 
think it’s extremely important to La Ronge and area. 
 
La Ronge is the gateway to the North and so that this is a great 
announcement for that area. We recognize the incredible 
potential for northern Saskatchewan, and we know that 
infrastructure is a very, very important component to the 
potential. And so it’s important for the province. It’s important 
for the people in the North. And so it’s a great announcement. 
 
Infrastructure, we believe, is a government responsibility. 
Infrastructure for economic development, the Saskatchewan 
Party has always said, is a government responsibility. And as 
such we welcome this announcement. 
 
I also would like to end with applauding the people in La Ronge 
for pushing for this. I know what it’s like to be in a community 
where you push for a project and the government continuously 
announce it and announce it and announce it and announce it, 
and you wait and wait and wait. And you wonder if it’s ever 
going to happen. So I know the people in La Ronge, the leaders 
in La Ronge have been asking for this for a number of years. 
The governments have promised it a number of times. So good 
work to the people of La Ronge, good work to the leaders in 
that area — I applaud the work that they’ve done and thank the 
government for this announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Before orders of the day, 
on a point of order. There’s been a long-standing practice of 
this Assembly that we not invoke the Lieutenant Governor into 
a debate. And I would ask the Minister of Health to take a look 
at his first response and make note of that. 

 
Ruling on Point of Privilege 

 
The Speaker: — Now I want to speak to the point of privilege 
that was raised last week. On Friday, October 27, the 

Opposition House Leader raised a question of privilege 
concerning the disclosure by the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation during a media interview of an impending 
reduction in the provincial sales tax. I thank the member for his 
comments and for the written correspondence he provided to 
me later that afternoon, and I also thank the Government House 
Leader for his intervention. 
 
The circumstance that gave rise to the question of privilege was 
an interview given by the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation to a radio station on the morning of October 27. 
During the interview the minister revealed that the provincial 
sales tax would be reduced. This interview was broadcast on the 
27th prior to the Minister of Finance’s announcement of the tax 
reduction in this Assembly later that same morning. 
 
It is the position of the Opposition House Leader that the 
disclosure of a tax measure outside this Assembly violates a 
parliamentary principle that they be first introduced in the 
Assembly and further, that the violation of this principle 
constituted a contempt against the privileges of this Assembly. 
 
In his rebuttal the Government House Leader asserted that the 
interview had been subject to an embargo agreement that would 
in the normal course of such arrangements have prevented the 
premature disclosure of the tax cut. 
 
In determining whether a contempt against the privilege of the 
Assembly occurred, one must assess whether the actions of the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation disregarded, 
disrespected, or clearly challenged the authority and dignity of 
this House or whether they improperly interfered or impeded 
the parliamentary work of members. 
 
The Opposition House Leader rested his case upon the March 
19, 2001 ruling of the House of Commons. In that ruling 
Speaker Milliken found that the denial of members or their staff 
to an embargoed technical briefing for media on a Bill 
constituted a prima facie contempt of parliament. The House 
Leader’s assertion that the principle outlined in this ruling is not 
limited to cases involving legislation but would be equally 
applicable to technical briefings on budgetary or taxation 
measures is well taken. 
 
The impact of the Milliken ruling on the practices of this 
Assembly was considered in a ruling I delivered on April 11 of 
the year 2005. In that case, a prima facie breach of privilege 
was found when opposition members and their staff were 
denied access to a technical briefing on a Crown corporation 
annual report given for the media. Subsequently when the 
Standing Committee on Privileges was unable to come to a 
decision on how to resolve the matter, this Assembly adopted a 
motion directing that all technical briefings and news 
conferences that dealt with matters to be considered by the 
Assembly were to be made available to all members and their 
staff in advance of or concurrently with any media briefings. It 
is the terms of this motion that must now guide the 
consideration of privilege matters in this Assembly. 
 
The challenges that this order creates in the present 
circumstances is the stipulation that its terms be directed to 
government officials and Crown corporations and that it 
encompassed technical briefings and news conferences. In the 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

absence of clear direction otherwise, I hesitate to interpret the 
order to include members themselves. 
 
In the second instance, I would not characterize the 
communication of the Minister of Highways and Transportation 
as being a technical briefing or news conference, given that the 
scope of the interview was not known, that it involved only one 
media outlet, and that it addressed a matter, namely tax 
measures, outside his portfolio. 
 
A further consideration in my decision is whether members 
were impeded from carrying out their duties. On many 
occasions I and my predecessors have underscored the 
importance of ensuring that nothing is done that disadvantages 
members from carrying out their parliamentary functions. 
That’s the ruling of April 11, 2005. 
 
The timely provision of information is but one facet of this 
principle. Indeed the Minister of Finance adhered to this 
principle by announcing the tax reduction in this Assembly as 
soon as the rules permitted — during ministerial statements — 
and by providing a copy of the statement to the opposition at 
the time. 
 
On the basis of the current situation, I do not find that the 
premature disclosure was significant enough to impede 
members in their work. I also note that no one could have 
benefited in this specific instance from the early disclosure. 
 
Accordingly I find that the actions of the Minister of Highways 
and Transportations do not technically meet the threshold 
required to establish a prima facie breach of privilege. 
 
[14:30] 
 
However I feel strongly that the granting of an embargoed 
interview could violate the spirit of the Assembly’s 2005 
motion. The motion was intended to protect parliament’s 
pre-eminent role in the conduct of legislative matters by 
ensuring that it was informed first of significant initiatives. It is 
now apparent those provisions do not sufficiently clarify the 
practice governing the advance release of information. 
 
For this reason, I strongly recommend this Assembly address 
this issue either by motion or by referral to the Standing 
Committee on Privileges to review and make recommendations 
on the advance release of information, the means by which it 
may take place, and the sources from which it may come. There 
ends my statement. 
 
Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to 
seek leave to introduce a motion to create a sessional order. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
a leave to advance a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Implementation of Procedural Rules 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a brief 
comment and then introduce a motion, seconded by the House 
Leader from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that follows up the 
adoption on Friday of rules guiding the procedures of the 
House. 
 
We wanted to be realistic, Mr. Speaker, about the ability of the 
business of the legislature to be conducted in the spirit of the 
rules, also in the context of the ability of the administration in 
support of government to be able to ready the preparation of 
legislation such that it can be properly considered in the House. 
 
And it has been recognized in discussions that we’ve had, Mr. 
Speaker, that what we’re doing is shifting the emphasis on the 
introduction of important Bills to the fall session. I want to 
emphasis as well this does not mean that legislation cannot be 
introduced in the spring, but — in the spring sitting — but that 
in order to become a specified Bill that Bill must be introduced 
in the fall in order to acquire that kind of a characteristic and 
therefore have the privileges and obligations that are attached to 
it by the end of the session. 
 
We’re recognizing, Mr. Speaker, that the administration did not 
have the opportunity, sufficiently in advance of the adoption of 
the rules, in order to prepare all of what the government would 
consider to be its more significant legislation in time for 
introduction in the fall session. 
 
And so accordingly, Mr. Speaker, in discussion we’ve come to 
a conclusion that it does make sense for the orderly conduct of 
business that for this session alone — and therefore the creation 
of a sessional order — it does make sense to permit the 
government to introduce up to three additional Bills which can 
be designated as specified Bills by March 22 or earlier. 
 
And further, that in order to accommodate the requirements of 
specified Bills, if necessary, that either the Government or the 
Opposition House Leader would have the ability to extend the 
sitting beyond the standard completion date by up to seven 
additional sitting days in order to accommodate that. 
 
So that’s what this is intended to achieve and with that in mind 
then, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Opposition House 
Leader: 
 

That the modifications and amendments to the rules and 
practices of the Legislative Assembly, as specified by the 
seventh report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services, be adopted and brought into force effective 
immediately, notwithstanding that the rules and 
procedures for the parliamentary calendar shall be varied 
on an interim basis for the duration of the third session of 
the twenty-fifth legislature as follows: 
 
1. The Government House Leader may designate, on or 
before the sitting of the Assembly on March 22, 2007, the 
spring period of the parliamentary calendar, as many as 
three additional government Bills to be considered as 
specified Bills. 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

2. The additional specified Bills shall be designated orally 
in the Assembly by the Government House Leader or the 
minister of the Crown responsible for the Bill immediately 
upon the introduction and first reading of the said Bill. 
 
3. If additional specified Bills are introduced on or before 
March 22, 2007, the completion date of the spring period 
of the parliamentary calendar may be postponed up to 
seven additional sitting days by order of either the 
Government House Leader or the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
4. An order to postpone the completion date shall be made 
orally on orders of the day on or before the sitting of the 
Assembly on May 3, 2007. 
 
5. If there are two orders to postpone the completion day, 
the order with the greatest number of sitting days shall be 
observed. 
 
6. The deadline for the passage of business under the rules 
for the parliamentary calendar shall be applied in 
accordance with the revised completion day. 
 
7. The procedures outlined in this sessional order shall 
expire upon the adjournment of the Assembly on the 
completion day of the third session of the twenty-fifth 
legislature. 
 

And further, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That upon adoption of this motion, the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
are revised, printed, and republished in English and French 
as expeditiously as possible. 
 

I so move, seconded by the House Leader of the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Government House Leader, seconded by the 
member from Melfort, the Opposition House Leader, that the 
rules and procedures for the parliamentary calendar should be 
varied on the interim basis with the seven points. Will the 
members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Are there any further speakers to the motion, 
or is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question has been called. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
your ongoing service to this House. I particularly wish to 
acknowledge your patience and good judgment in fulfilling 
your duties as Speaker. I know first-hand that, while it’s 
rewarding, it’s not always easy to be a Speaker in this very 
lively and often very contentious Assembly. 
 
And through you to our Clerk at the Table, Gwenn Ronyk, 
congratulations on your retirement at the end of this year. You 
have served this Assembly nobly for many years. 
 
I also want to congratulate my esteemed colleague, the member 
for Regina Coronation Park, on his very eloquent remarks in 
moving the Speech from the Throne. I’m very pleased to have 
the privilege of seconding the motion he has presented. And I 
couldn’t agree more with the sentiments he expressed regarding 
the pride that we on this side of the Assembly feel to be a part 
of Saskatchewan’s social democratic tradition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank my caucus colleagues for their friendship 
and support, and I thank the Premier for his leadership and for 
providing me opportunity to play this special role in the Throne 
Speech debate. 
 
I also want to thank my constituency executive who keep me 
energized and focused. Thank you to Tammy Watt who runs 
my constituency office and who serves the people of Regina 
Wascana Plains right along with me. 
 
I’m ever grateful for the loving support of my family who stand 
behind me and support me in my energetic lifestyle. They have 
given much to allow me to serve in the Assembly. They know, 
though, the values and principles I fought for and have 
defended over the last 21 years of elected office. 
 
For those rewarding years, I particularly thank today’s families 
in Wascana Plains. They span a wide range of economic 
circumstance, urban and rural geography, and demographics — 
ever challenging me to make choices to benefit all people in our 
great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as New Democrats we are inheritors of a 
progressive philosophy and political tradition that is 
characterized by clear vision, practical thinking, and innovative 
ideas. Ours is a uniquely Saskatchewan tradition, firmly rooted 
in Saskatchewan values and developed in direct response to 
Saskatchewan’s needs. And above all, as New Democrats we 
are the inheritors of a forward-looking political tradition which 
believes unequivocally that good society and a good 
government works for the benefit of all of its citizens, not just a 
privileged few. 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

The search for Saskatchewan solutions to Saskatchewan 
problems gave rise to the CCF [Canadian Commonwealth 
Federation] and later the NDP and a philosophy and ideology 
that is Saskatchewan’s own, which is half of the explanation for 
why social democrats have been in government in this province 
for 46 of the last 62 years. 
 
The other half of the explanation is this. Unlike the members 
opposite, our ideology and our solutions are practical, and our 
solutions work. In search for practical solutions, the Premier 
approached me three and a half years ago to engage with the 
voluntary sector and work collaboratively to establish a 
Saskatchewan context for the Canadian volunteerism initiative. 
During the International Year of the Volunteer, Ed Broadbent 
was commissioned to do a report on volunteerism in Canada, 
and in that report he identified that a healthy voluntary sector is 
extremely important to a civil society and is also an economic 
engine to the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan that is particularly true. Almost 
8,000 organizations in Saskatchewan see volunteers donate 80.6 
million hours, the equivalent of almost 42,000 jobs. They 
employ 13 per cent of the labour force and have revenues of 
nearly $3.7 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in April 2002 in recognition of this valuable work 
undertaken by the voluntary sector across the province, the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative, or PVSI, was introduced. 
This recognition that solutions and challenges are best 
considered and tackled collaboratively through broad, shared 
ownership have been the defining feature of the PVSI. 
 
Early on, a steering committee was established comprised of 
representatives from a range of voluntary sector organizations 
and a number of provincial government departments to direct 
the work and activities of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative. And in the winter of 2002, the steering committee 
presented the Premier with a document that outlined a 
framework including principles and values for the continuing 
partnership between government and Saskatchewan’s voluntary 
sector, as well as recommendations to guide succeeding phases 
of the initiative. 
 
Since that time, the steering committee has been working 
toward building a formal relationship between the public sector 
and the voluntary sector, building capacity within 
Saskatchewan’s voluntary sector — and this has been done in 
co-operation with the Canadian Volunteerism Initiative — and 
building awareness of the value of the voluntary sector and 
volunteers to our society, and of the ways in which voluntary 
sector organizations structure themselves and of the structure of 
the relationship between the public sector and the voluntary 
sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community-based and voluntary organizations are 
the backbone of the high quality of life Saskatchewan families 
enjoy. Saskatchewan people volunteer more than any other 
jurisdiction in Canada, and that’s by no accident. Through the 
voluntary sector initiative, we have worked hard to achieve and 
maintain that distinction, and we’re going to continue working 
hard to strengthen our position as a national leader in voluntary 
participation. And, Mr. Speaker, not only are we going to 
continue to support the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative; 

we anticipate moving forward to forge a new structure that will 
strengthen the relationship and address issues important to both 
sectors. 
 
On that note, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but notice a deafening 
silence from the members opposite on the subject of the federal 
Conservative cuts, cuts that they must know adversely affect 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, whether we’re talking about cuts to 
volunteerism, literacy, early learning and child care, 
equalization, or the Canadian Wheat Board, the party opposite 
is lining up with the Harper Tories. The Saskatchewan Party 
position on these federal cuts is another clear indicator that 
they’re far more interested in serving their right-wing ideology 
than they are in serving Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in a global society where instant real-time 
communication is essential to our daily lives. Citizens are 
demanding that their governments keep pace with this rapidly 
expanding technology, and we need to stay in touch with the 
pulse of what our constituents are saying. Therefore the Premier 
has also appointed me the Legislative Secretary of integrated 
citizen service delivery or crossing boundaries to help the 
province and its citizens move effortlessly into the information 
age and find new and innovative ways for citizens to interact 
with government in a more timely and efficient manner. This is 
about promoting greater awareness of improved government 
services to the general public and will involve ongoing 
collaboration and dialogue between elected officials and public 
servants across Canada as well as the voluntary sector. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, most people shouldn’t have to care which level of 
government provides which service. Rather than second-guess 
whether a service is provided municipally, provincially, or 
federally, citizens simply want this service to be provided from 
the government in a quick and efficient manner. 
 
BizPal, a joint federal-provincial service providing online 
access to business permits and licences, is currently available to 
citizens living in the Saskatoon area and is one example of this 
approach. Another is ExpressAddress that allows residents to 
change their address once and is automatically updated with a 
number of cities, Crowns, and departments. 
 
We believe the time is right for the province to formally 
recognize the important role of expanding and increasing 
awareness of citizen-centred services. We also believe it’s 
extremely important and tremendous benefit to Saskatchewan 
people, and so I’m very pleased to take on this additional 
responsibility. Mr. Speaker, I want to go on record with the 
member from Coronation Park when he says that we are proud 
to be a part of Saskatchewan’s social democratic tradition and 
to have the achievements of Premier Douglas, Lloyd, Blakeney, 
Romanow, and of course the current Premier, for inspiration 
and to build upon. 
 
In a similar fashion to the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative 
and the citizen-centred services, the things we and the people of 
this province have accomplished together makes for a list of 
Saskatchewan firsts, a list that is long as it is impressive — 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

medicare, a Bill of rights, public auto insurance, minimum 
wage, rural electrification, The Trade Union Act, paid vacation, 
a 40-hour work week, the idea of statutory holiday, the 
provincial arts board, and Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations 
just to name a few. 
 
So now when I brag about these accomplishments, I know the 
members opposite won’t consider this to be bragging because 
by their rhetoric in this Assembly, it’s clear they don’t consider 
any of these things I’ve just mentioned to be of value. But I do 
and Saskatchewan people do, and I’ll continue to talk about 
Saskatchewan and what it has achieved to anyone and everyone 
who is willing to listen. And this year I’m going to join my 
colleague from Rosemont and be proud out loud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — So while it’s not in all of our natures to brag 
about what’s been achieved for the benefit of Saskatchewan 
people and Saskatchewan families, we all do need to instill 
pride in what sets us apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech we’re building on the 
foundations that have been laid over the last 16 years and on all 
the work that has been done since the early ’90s to restore the 
province’s finances and credit rating, and the last five years to 
establish a strong economic base. 
 
Saskatchewan people will remember the last time the Leader of 
the Opposition was in government, when his party nearly 
bankrupted this province, which I assume why is . . . he could 
easily adopt the tune called “Don’t Look Back” as his theme 
song. He’s saying to Saskatchewan people, don’t look back at 
my long history and sketchy activities as a Devine 
Conservative. Don’t look back at my party’s ideology to create 
extreme right wing positions. Don’t look back at the 
Saskatchewan Party posturing and flip-flopping. Don’t look 
back at who we really are. Look at who we are pretending to be 
now. 
 
So do they actually believe that pulling the old switcheroo with 
a name change has fooled anyone? And even if we were willing 
to give them the benefit of the doubt, you know we could just 
suspend our disbelief and give them credit for being anything 
other than sad, old Tories. Well their record and their friends 
speak for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re looking for a party that champions old 
ideas and an outdated Tory philosophy, we just need to look at 
the members opposite. And we remember. But we must also 
remember this province has come a long way in the last 15 
years. Now we see 13 consecutive balanced budgets, 14 credit 
upgrades, and significant reduction in the old Tory debt. 
 
In the last six years, we put in place measures to see record job 
numbers and economic growth. Moving back to old, failed Tory 
ideas the Saskatchewan Party’s adopted would be a mistake for 
Saskatchewan. That’s why they’re saying don’t look back, in 
the hope that people won’t remember where they come from. 
 
For our part, we’re going to continue to move ahead. Last year 
we put before the people an inspired and bold vision for the 
future. A vision of a province where no one is left behind on the 

road to opportunity; a province of healthy, diverse, and growing 
communities; and a province whose economy is both green and 
prosperous. I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, there’s already 
been much progress toward this vision. And with this Throne 
Speech we’re accelerating our efforts, focusing on making life 
even better for today’s Saskatchewan families, and building an 
even better future for young people right here at home. We’ve 
laid a solid foundation on which to build, Mr. Speaker, and on 
that foundation we’re going to place these four cornerstones. 
 
Foundation laid, cornerstone one. We’re making Saskatchewan 
the best place for young people to live, work, and build strong 
futures. 
 
As a mother of two young adults who’ve chosen to stay in 
Saskatchewan and that see many of their friends moving back, 
it’s important for me that we are committed to addressing the 
changing needs of the labour market in helping young people 
create their futures right here at home. 
 
We’re expanding training opportunities to meet market 
demands. We’re unveiling a new partnership between 
government, business, labour, and our training institutions to 
help meet Saskatchewan’s evolving labour market needs. And 
we’re going to bring education closer to students, better linking 
training with learners, job seekers, and employers, and we’re 
going to link better apprenticeship and trades. I’m pleased 
we’re continuing the freeze on university tuition. 
 
The youth summit will give strong voice to youth and to 
building a bright future for young people here in this great 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly interested in the review of access 
to post-secondary education, for this review will help address 
issues essential to students as well as promote the exceptional 
range of career opportunities at home. But, Mr. Speaker, you 
need only check out saskjobs.ca or career opportunities in the 
local papers or even just look around you to know 
Saskatchewan has abundant career opportunities. We are a 
province that is down to earth, but a province where the sky is 
the limit for jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Last year we launched a bold new initiative 
to attract 5,000 immigrants each year and we’re on track to 
achieve that goal. We’re providing services to foster strong 
beginnings for newcomers including a program at the College 
of Medicine to aid in the certification of international medical 
graduates living in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re also reinvigorating our relationship with the Fransaskois 
community with particular emphasis on immigration and 
employment needs of Saskatchewan francophones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy is diverse, robust, and 
fundamentally strong, and our doors are open with opportunities 
for workers here at home and from abroad. We’re going to 
continue to spread the word that Saskatchewan is a great place 
to live, to work, and raise a family. All this in support of our 
efforts to make life better for today’s families and build an even 
better future here for our youth. 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

As a member of the baby boom generation and someone who’s 
been sandwiched between health care needs of a young and 
growing family and the caregiving responsibilities for aging 
parents, health care issues and wellness are extremely 
important. Our second cornerstone, Mr. Speaker, is to work 
with health care providers to strengthen Saskatchewan’s 
leadership in public health care while reducing waiting times 
and improving access to services. 
 
Not only are we leaders, Mr. Speaker, but as the birthplace of 
medicare we also have the distinction to be the only have 
province that does not charge our people a health care premium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — And we’re strengthening the health care 
system — enhancing efforts to recruit health care providers, 
increasing opportunities for internationally educated 
professionals to work here now, and expanding the number of 
Aboriginal people working in health care. Our commitment to 
Saskatchewan families continues with progress toward a 
children’s hospital within a hospital and providing support for 
children with mental, physical, or behavioural disabilities and 
disorders. 
 
On the topic of health care, Mr. Speaker, I particularly want to 
note that we’re introducing new measures to benefit our seniors 
and elders. Saskatchewan’s achievements reflect their 
achievements and their dedication will be recognized. 
 
As a global citizen and a wannabe grandma, I want to ensure 
that Saskatchewan continues as a leader in environmental 
protection and the green economy. The health and prosperity of 
both Saskatchewan families and the Saskatchewan economy 
depend on it. 
 
Our third cornerstone is to advance Saskatchewan as a leader in 
environmental protection and the green economy. 
Saskatchewan will be a leader in the protection of the 
environment and the promotion of clean, renewable energy and 
will demonstrate national leadership in conserving, protecting, 
and restoring the health of our environment and our diverse 
ecosystems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re already taking steps to achieve our 
long-term goal of meeting one-third of our energy requirements 
through renewable resources, and we’ll be working in 
partnership to research the feasibility of the world’s first 
Saskatchewan-designed, utility scale, clean coal generating 
facility. All of our efforts toward environmental protection will 
contribute to our goal of making life better for today’s families 
and help build a better future here for our young people. With 
our connection to the land and our commitment to 
environmental stewardship, Saskatchewan demonstrates again 
it’s down to earth but the sky is the limit. 
 
As a social democrat, Mr. Speaker, I believe that economic 
progress should result in social progress and that prosperity 
should benefit the many and not just the privileged few. 
 
The fourth and final cornerstone is to ensure today 
Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong and prosperous 
economy. This will take shape in many ways within our 

communities, both rural and urban alike. Saskatchewan’s 
business climate is one of the most competitive in the country, 
leading to more job creation and employment opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. And I am extremely pleased to say that 
Aboriginal economic development has contributed significantly 
to the growing employment numbers among Saskatchewan’s 
First Nation and Métis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — And I’m confident that the national summit 
on Aboriginal economic development being held in partnership 
with First Nation, Métis, and Inuit will even further this 
progress much more in the coming months and years ahead. 
 
So our fourth cornerstone, that all Saskatchewan people will 
benefit from economic growth, is why we’re concerning 
ourselves with benefits that families and young people realize 
today from our strong economy. It’s why we’re standing up for 
Saskatchewan people on fair equalization and will be relentless 
in pursuing a fair deal for Saskatchewan’s non-renewable 
resources from the federal government. 
 
And we’re going to continue our promise to provide the 
lowest-cost utility bundle in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the increased minimum wage is benefiting 
Saskatchewan people as we speak. And there will be an 
increase of $7.95 on March 1. 
 
We’ve taken the two points off the PST [provincial sales tax]. 
We have a multi-year road and rail strategy. There’s the 
building communities fund, the improvements to access to First 
Nation communities in our Throne Speech, the urban agenda. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to Saskatchewan where families 
feel safe and secure in their communities, and we’re creating 
more targeted crime reduction efforts in all our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know from my travels through my constituency 
and speaking with farm families that there is tough times for 
many. We’re committed to ensuring the benefits of the 
economy touch the lives of farm families as they did from the 
changes to the education tax on farm land, fighting and 
negotiating for a more effective national agriculture deal, fully 
funding CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization]. 
We’re telling people loudly and clearly that the federal 
government should keep their mitts off the Canadian Wheat 
Board, and let farmers decide for themselves on that issue. You 
know, I would have thought the members opposite would have 
stood up for farmers on this issue but apparently not. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Family Day here in Saskatchewan will help build a healthy 
balance between work and family. This Throne Speech is about 
articulating how families will feel a real benefit from our strong 
economy. People know that they can trust an NDP government 
to be there for them. 
 
What do people know about the Saskatchewan Party? They 
know the Saskatchewan Party now sides with their federal 
buddies against Saskatchewan people. They know the last time 
the Leader of the Opposition was in government his party 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

nearly bankrupted this province. They know that their record, 
the Saskatchewan Party can’t be trusted with Crowns, health 
care, or labour standards. They know that the risk of 
privatization, the selling off of assets and cuts to labour 
standards is real, and would hurt working people. And they 
know that Saskatchewan Party would be bad for average 
families. They would end up paying more and getting less. 
They know our social fabric would be in jeopardy with stress on 
cuts to CBOs [community-based organizations] and the 
voluntary sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a sharp contrast with our vision. We’re 
building a province where children, regardless of race or 
culture, will be able to read the books they carry in their school 
bags. We are building a province where young people will 
establish their careers and raise their families in a healthy 
environment with a quality of life second to none. We’re 
building a province where the contributions of our seniors and 
elders are celebrated with the utmost pride and respect. We’re 
building a province where after work there is ample opportunity 
to enjoy our land, our lakes, our skies, our neighbours, and most 
importantly, our families. This is a province, Mr. Speaker, a 
province we are proud to call home, down to earth, with the sky 
as our limit. I am, Mr. Speaker, I am proud out loud. 
 
It’s with respect and pride I second the Speech from the Throne 
as moved by the member from Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I wish to thank 
my colleagues on both sides of the House for their warm 
welcome. I, like my colleagues I am sure, consider it an honour 
to represent my fellow citizens in this historic Chamber. While 
only elected a couple of months ago, Mr. Speaker, this position 
has opened the door to some incredible experiences and I’d like 
to tell you about one of them. 
 
I was able to sit in this Chamber with many of the members for 
the installation of our new Lieutenant Governor. And many 
who witnessed that event, either here in the Chamber or perhaps 
at home on television, may recall a young lady who sang a song 
during that ceremony. I believe her song was entitled “In My 
Wildest Dreams” and, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly appropriate 
for how I feel today. 
 
And while I’m on the topic of music and song — and I heard 
that the member from Wascana Plains wanted to talk about 
songs — I have to say that at last week’s Throne Speech, after 
the Throne Speech, I really enjoyed the performance given by 
the LeBoldus jazz choir. And you know when I heard them sing 
“Penny Lane”, for a moment there I thought the Premier was 
maybe testing some new song titles to follow up on the Imagine 
campaign. And while I think of it, Mr. Speaker, they did sing 
another song. And I think it’s appropriate for the message that 
the people of this province will deliver to that government after 
the next election when they sang “Ticket to Ride,” Mr. Speaker, 
because the people of this province are going to give that 

government a ticket to ride right out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, before I get too far along with 
my comments I need to recognize some people for whom it 
would not be possible for me to be here — to my family for 
their unwavering support. Mr. Speaker, I can still remember the 
first time I ever visited this building. I was on a class trip in 
grade 3 with my classmates from Halbrite school. And I can’t 
imagine what a mother thinks when her nine-year-old comes 
home from Regina and tells her that he wants to be a politician. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from my mother I received nothing but support 
and encouragement. From my father I received a better life. He 
is to me the definition of work ethic. Each day as — and I think 
probably today, unless he drove into Weyburn to watch this 
speech at my office — but each day he can be found driving up 
and down the oil patch roads back home. He’s done that for 30 
years. And with little more than a grade 9 education he has 
given to his three children opportunities that were never 
available to him. 
 
I would not be here today among you without the support of my 
parents, my brother and my sister, my grandparents, my entire 
family and friends, and many of my teachers, Mr. Speaker, who 
encouraged me along the way to be interested in the world 
around me. 
 
As I am sure the hon. members can attest to, running for public 
office is not easy —perhaps more so on our spouses than us. 
This year has been a whirlwind for my wife Amanda and I, 
although if you ask her she’ll probably you that about the seven 
years that we’ve been married. But she’s been incredible 
throughout this whole process. 
 
And to get an idea of how great she is, about a week or two 
after we won the by-election, we decided we should maybe take 
a bit of a holiday. So we took a road trip for about a week 
through North and South Dakota. And after a month of 
campaigning for a nomination and three months preparing and 
then campaigning in a by-election, the first place that her 
husband takes her to is the North Dakota state capital. The 
second was the South Dakota state capital, and the third was 
Mount Rushmore. And, Mr. Speaker, she didn’t complain once. 
More than anyone else, I couldn’t have done this without her 
support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — There are so many others that I need to thank, 
most notably the good people of Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I 
pledge to do all that I can to represent them with honour and 
respect. 
 
Finally I’d like to thank my entire campaign staff, the 
volunteers that put in tireless hours, my assistants back in 
Weyburn — Marcie and Marilyn — the entire Legislative 
Assembly services staff, the Clerk’s office, and the library staff 
for their help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was preparing for this, my first speech, I 
thought it would be a good idea to look back and read what 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

some of my colleagues have said in their first speeches just to 
get a sense of what was expected. So I went online — the 
library keeps a record of all the maiden speeches — so I went 
online, and I read a few that my colleagues had made, actually 
not all of them but most of them. I read what the Leader of the 
Opposition, member for Swift Current, had to say and the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone and Canora-Pelly and 
Melfort and Kelvington-Wadena, just to name a few. And I 
even, I went into the library, Mr. Speaker, and tracked down the 
printed version, high up on a shelf, and dusted it off and read 
what the member from Cannington had to say so many years 
ago. 
 
Seriously, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues and the 
caucus staff for their support. It’s a bit of a unique situation that 
I found myself in, going from staff to an elected member, and 
they’ve made that transition as smooth as possible and have 
made me feel very welcome. So I thank them. 
 
I want to talk a bit about my constituency before I talk about the 
Throne Speech. I feel very honoured to represent Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. The people of Weyburn-Big Muddy have given so 
much to me, not only with electing me to this Chamber but also 
in educating me and helping me to become the person that I am 
today. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that can really be summarized 
in what people from the RM of Surprise Valley in my 
constituency what they had to say about themselves. They, like 
many RMs many years ago, wrote histories of the RMs, and 
they just recently updated it. And I think what they had to say is 
really appropriate for the constituency. 
 
Surprise Valley, not surprisingly, it’s a lot of rolling, hilly 
country and they said that . . . But it’s not named Surprise 
Valley because of not only the surprises of what you get when 
you go past that next hill, but they said and I quote: 
 

[The real] Surprises are the people, the sturdy pioneers 
who by the sweat of their brow helped open up the West, 
enduring countless hardships to take the rough edges off 
the prairies and make the land productive . 
 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s really indicative of the people 
that I represent and the part of this province, a beautiful place 
that I represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a bit about . . . I know I 
mentioned my family and I thank them. And I want to talk 
about my family and our background in the constituency and 
near by the constituency. And I’d start with my wife’s family. 
Over 100 years ago, the Alexander family came to the Weyburn 
area where they homesteaded. In fact three years ago we 
celebrated, her family celebrated the 100th anniversary of the 
original homestead which Alexanders still farm to this day. 
 
And as for my family, Mr. Speaker, while we haven’t been in 
the Weyburn area for that long, the Duncans did begin farming 
in the Weyburn area near north of Midale in a place which was 
once known as Huntoon. It’s no longer there. They came in the 
late 1920s and, Mr. Speaker, we’re still trying to farm that pile 
of rocks today. My great-grandfather on my mother’s side came 
to Canada from the United States, first came to Hume, which is 
east of Weyburn, and then later he travelled to Willow Bunch 
and homesteaded at Willow Bunch, both places of which I have 

the honour of representing today. And, Mr. Speaker, if the 
Premier ever decides to take a bus trip through the Halbrite and 
Midale areas of the southeast, he’d have trouble finding a 
municipal road to drive on that my grandfather didn’t build. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for the support that I received 
— nearly, I guess, 50 per cent, 49 per cent of the popular vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — But, Mr. Speaker, to think what would have 
happened in that by-election had I been the local candidate, I 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — I can’t imagine how well we would have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet today, I would be remiss if I 
didn’t mention a word or two about my hometown of Halbrite, 
and I hope the member from Estevan doesn’t mind me 
mentioning it because it does lie a mile or two outside of the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. Like many communities in 
the Southeast, we actually celebrated our centennial 
celebrations a year before the rest of the province. 
 
For many years Halbrite, which today is a small hamlet, but for 
many years it was a major trading area that had a number of 
shops — the Litschke General Merchandise, Comstock Hotel, 
Murphy’s General Store, just to name a few — which, you 
know, haven’t existed since I’ve been around. I don’t remember 
these places. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think unofficially Toronto probably should 
be the sister city of Halbrite. And I know you’re probably 
thinking: what does a prairie hamlet of 100 people have in 
common with the Ontario capital? And the answer’s, nothing, 
except that when you’re raised in Halbrite, you’re raised to 
believe that you’re living in the centre of the universe. And 
that’s what it was like to grow up in Halbrite. It was a great, 
great place to grow up. 
 
Today it’s a quiet hamlet kept alive by the oil industry which 
we’re very blessed to have. And we’ve gone through many 
changes, and like many small towns we’ve lost our elevator, 
and we’ve lost our school. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Halbrite will never lose their spirit. And Halbrite . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Halbrite, Mr. Speaker, has been my home, and 
no matter where life’s journey takes me I hope it will always 
remain my home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the Throne 
Speech. I will be moving an amendment at the close of my 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s often said these days of this NDP government 
that they’re old and tired. Certainly we on this side believe it, 
and many people across the province do. And I noted during 
last Friday’s proceedings, when a member from this side of the 
House said those words, I had to laugh a bit because I noticed 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

that the member from Moose Jaw North, he would reply, bold 
and inspired, which I don’t normally associate with that party, 
but I guess if that’s what he believes. But I do have to confess 
that this NDP government has done just that for me. They’ve 
inspired me, inspired me to do all I can to ensure that they don’t 
return to government after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — And while I’m discussing this year’s Throne 
Speech, it was actually last year’s Throne Speech that 
ultimately led me to run for my party’s nomination and to fight 
in the by-election. And it was one line in particular that I’d like 
to share with you, Mr. Speaker, that inspired me. And speaking 
of the children and youth of this province, that speech contained 
this phrase, and I’ll quote: “Today we dream of the province in 
which they will live, grow and reach adulthood.” 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, that really struck me. That phrase really struck me 
because I think on this side of the House, we not only believe 
that, but we want to see a province where the young people can 
stay here, not only reach adulthood, reach 18 or 19 and maybe 
if they stay, that’s great, and maybe if they go, you know, that 
might happen. That I think is a sentiment on the other side of 
the House. But we see a province where the young people can 
stay and raise a family and grow, build a career, build a 
business for themselves. 
 
But the message from that party — from statistically impossible 
to grow at the national average or more for the rest of us or even 
that last line about reaching adulthood — it shows that they 
don’t have a plan. They don’t have a vision to make this a place 
where our young people want to stay and where they can stay 
and have an opportunity to stay. 
 
That was then, Mr. Speaker. And then we had the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy by-election where the people of that constituency gave 
youth a chance. They obviously like what they hear from this 
party as evident in the increase in the popular vote and the 
increase in the margin of victory and an outright win in the city 
of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — And just like that after the by-election, just 
like that, Mr. Speaker, overnight, all of a sudden that party and 
that Premier became concerned about population loss, where 
they weren’t before in the past. And all of a sudden now they’re 
concerned about population loss and our youth and 
out-migration, and this after watching some 18,000 people 
leave our province since he became Premier. But once again 
they’ve fallen short with this Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very grateful for the support that I received in 
the by-election, and I’m particularly happy with the support that 
I received from the young people of my constituency, the young 
people. And you know, it reminds me of the day before the 
by-election, the day of voting, my wife and I, we decided to go 
for supper and went to a local restaurant and our waitress — 
she’s a few years younger than us —and she came up to us. She 
obviously recognized who I was, and she came up to me and 

she was, you know, real excited, saying that she was going to be 
voting and all her and her friends were going to be voting for 
the first time. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the young people really came out 
and volunteered and gave their time and, you know, really put 
in a strong effort for me, which I’m grateful for. Now I believe 
that the reason that these young people supported me and why 
they’re coming over to this party in record numbers can be 
explained by . . . You don’t have to go any further than listening 
to the speech given last Friday by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park and even some of the comments of the 
member from Wascana Plains today. That member and that 
party as a whole seem fixated, Mr. Speaker, seem more 
interested in what happened 15 years ago and 25 years ago and 
in 60 years ago, Mr. Speaker. The young people of this 
province, those who are students, who are starting careers, 
starting families are more concerned with five years from now. 
They’re more concerned about 10 years from now of what their 
province and what their future will hold for them. 
 
That party, Mr. Speaker, is stuck looking in the rear-view 
mirror as the people of this province are passing them by. And, 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to go any further than last year’s 
Throne Speech. The little that they did offer young people was 
a Saskatchewan Youth Award which I don’t think we’ve seen a 
year later, just shows you that there’s a lack of commitment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are interesting times for our province. 
We are I believe at a crossroads. We have some amazing 
potential in our people and in our resources, and Weyburn-Big 
Muddy is certainly indicative of that. But to use a phrase that 
the Environment minister likes to use, we have some 
challenges, and some of these challenges threaten our prosperity 
and our way of life. 
 
Under this government, we continue to face out-migration. In 
the last year we’ve witnessed, in the middle of a resource boom, 
4,500 people leave our province. In the last five, six years, 
we’ve seen 18,000 people leave. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re on 
the verge, if not already knee-deep, in a serious labour shortage, 
one that will hamper our economy and put at risk everything 
which that supports — health care, education, highways, just to 
name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our second century, now is not the time to be 
timid or meek or talk about the wee province as the Premier 
likes to do. Now is the time to be bold and to be inspiring. But 
what did we get? What did get from this government in the 
Throne Speech? What did we get? We got a new holiday, Mr. 
Speaker, at a time when we need to be addressing these serious 
issues. And in order to save their political careers, they have to 
offer a new holiday, one which they named Family Day. And in 
honour of this government, I will be travelling to Alberta on 
Family Day to visit my brother who has had to leave because 
of, in large part, this government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they probably should have called it the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy holiday, Weyburn-Big Muddy day, or 
maybe the by-election tax cuts. Maybe that would have been 
more appropriate because, Mr. Speaker, we know what these 
moves are about. The people of the province and the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy know that this government is on its last 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

legs and change is going to come as soon as they have the 
courage to call the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — It might get called for them. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m towards the end of my 
time here, speaking. And I think I will, I will be moving an 
amendment and I’ll read it now. I move: 
 

That after the word “session” the following be added: 
 
That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
this Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative in 
finding solutions to the growing labour shortage, the 
out-migration of our youth and families, forcing 
Saskatchewan people to go out of province for health care, 
failing to deal with the agricultural crisis and it’s impact 
on rural Saskatchewan, failing to protect children who are 
at risk, and for being too focused on its internal partisan 
political problems. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That after the word “session” the following be added: 
 
That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
this Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative in 
finding solutions to the growing labour shortage, the 
out-migration of our youth and families, forcing 
Saskatchewan people to go out of province for health care, 
failing to deal with the agricultural crisis and it’s impact 
on rural Saskatchewan, failing to protect children who are 
at risk, and for being too focused on its internal partisan 
political problems. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question on the amendment? 
Debate continues on the amendment and the original motion 
concurrently. The Chair recognizes the member for Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to compliment the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy 
on a very excellent maiden speech. And just from the tenor and 
tone of his speech, I can tell that he is going to be at home in the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to pass on best wishes to Garrett Robinson and his 
family — the young hockey player for the Moose Jaw Warriors 
that was involved in a vehicle accident a week or so ago and has 
just come out of a coma. My family and I understand the 
circumstances that he and his family are facing, and we’d 
extend them our best wishes. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit 
about the Cannington constituency which extends from the US 
border in the Southeast across to almost Estevan, north to 
Corning and further west from the Manitoba border to just west 
of Fillmore, Mr. Speaker. And that whole area also includes 
three First Nations — White Bear, Pheasant Rump, and Ocean 
Man. 
 
And Pheasant Rump is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that — no it’s 
Ocean Man — Derrick Big Eagle who just won the ABEX 
award is from that First Nation, Mr. Speaker, and has built a 
very, very successful oil patch business, drilling rigs. He has 
three rigs up on the go now, and I know that he hadn’t expected 
to be in that position quite as quickly as it turned out to be. But 
the job opportunities were there; he was ready to move ahead. 
And I know that him, his partners, and his employees are very 
much looking forward to the opportunities that are in the oil 
patch in southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that one of the difficulties that Derrick is facing is 
employees. It’s hard to find employees, Mr. Speaker, in 
southeast Saskatchewan because the employees have all left and 
gone to Alberta . . . the young people I should say, not the 
employees. The young people have gone to Alberta for the jobs 
there in the oil patch. So while Derrick and the other oil patch 
businesses in the Cannington constituency fill in their job 
requirements, that puts pressure on the other businesses in that 
area to maintain their employees because they see the bigger 
dollars being offered in the oil patch. And you see quite a 
movement of employees, and that’s a real problem, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a good problem to have in the sense that the 
economy is working well in that area. But it is still a serious 
problem for this province when we have out-migration like we 
have had over the last number of years because of this NDP 
government’s policies, its philosophies, and its economic 
regime that have driven people out. It’s a real problem, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s something that needs to be addressed. And we 
believe that the only way that is going to be addressed is with 
an election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, one of the issues in 
Cannington over this past summer has been the lack of water. 
We haven’t had rain since about June 10. Even this fall when 
there was rain in general across the province, we received very 
little water. And I’ve had a number of phone calls, Mr. Speaker, 
that if there wasn’t going to be any water there was going to be 
a serious problem with the cattle operations this winter, that 
people were going to be forced to haul from great distances, 
from community wells, which in turn would have put pressure 
on the highway system or what is left of the highway system in 
our area. Because with agriculture and the oil patch our 
highway system has taken a real beating in that area, and the 
government fails to recognize the economic growth that is 
happening in Cannington, fails to recognize the pressure that 
puts on the infrastructure, and refuses to maintain that 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is a shame that this government’s attitude towards that 
region of the province, the economics that are happening there 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

that are driving, in part, the provincial economy with the oil 
industry, and doesn’t return any of those revenues back into 
maintaining that infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While agriculture, Mr. Speaker, in the Cannington area went 
without water this year, they still produced a very good crop, a 
decent quantity of grain, and a very good quality. Now the 
problem is to sell it, Mr. Speaker, which is always a problem 
because the prices for cereals, pulses, oil seeds remains 
historically low, Mr. Speaker. And this is a difficulty that this 
government, while it can’t impact those prices directly, it can 
and does impact the net return to farmers through its support of 
crop insurance which it has been reducing its support for, and 
the CAIS program. 
 
While the CAIS program is certainly a very flawed program, 
the Deputy Premier as the minister of Agriculture at the time, 
demanded of the federal government of the day that there be an 
expanded CAIS program. The Liberal government said, yes 
we’ll do it. And then the NDP refused to fund their share of it. 
They said, we said $99 million and that’s it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I hate it when they call my bluff like 
that. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, the Liberals called their bluff and 
then the NDP refused to put in their dollars that needed to be 
put in. They do that, Mr. Speaker, they have put their dollars in 
six to eighteen months later so that the farmers never had any 
idea what the financial impact was going to be. So when you 
went to the bank then in the spring, as far as the banker was 
concerned it was $99 million that was going into CAIS even 
though most of the past few years there has been a need for 130 
to $150 million and the NDP government refused to fund that 
until later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when this government says we are fully funded in the CAIS 
program they mean they are fully funding their initial $99 
million commitment, not what the expanded CAIS program that 
they called for is supposed to deliver, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you go to the coffee shop in Cannington, to 
the rink which is just starting up now, or the ball games over the 
summer there are three issues of discussion. First one is always 
the weather, Mr. Speaker. In any rural community first item of 
discussion is always the weather. The second item of 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, is farming. Prices are too low and 
there’s no rain or there’s too much rain or there’s too much 
wind. It always eventually goes back to the weather, Mr. 
Speaker. And this past summer, this fall, and I’m sure extending 
into the winter there is a third item of discussion that you go . . . 
that you hear in all these communities. It’s when can we have 
an election. They’re desperate, Mr. Speaker, to have an election. 
They want to throw this government out. They only want the 
opportunity to do it and they want it as soon as possible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So when you see something like happened this week with the 2 
per cent reduction in the PST you know there’s a vote coming, 
Mr. Speaker. You know there’s a vote coming. The problem 
with there’s a vote though, Mr. Speaker, is it’s not about a vote 

in a provincial election directly — it is down the road ultimately 
— but it’s a vote at the NDP convention about the leadership of 
this Premier, the member from Riversdale. That’s the vote that 
the 2 per cent cut in the PST was about. Because when you take 
a look at what happened this summer, what happened this fall, 
the member from Regina Dewdney, the former Corrections 
minister, was turfed from his office by the Premier because he 
questioned the Premier’s leadership. 
 
So if you’re looking at this 2 per cent reduction in the PST and 
wondering, why did it occur? It happened for two reasons. Most 
of the credit goes to the new member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy for his overwhelming victory in Weyburn. The 
community that Tommy Douglas — the saint of the NDP — 
that’s where he always ran and won, Mr. Speaker. And they 
lost. They came in third. That was the primary reason for the 2 
per cent reduction. 
 
The second part of it was the member from Regina Dewdney’s 
challenge of the Premier’s leadership. And now that Premier 
has to go to the NDP convention to prove that he is a bold and 
dynamic leader. His move was to cut the PST. 
 
Only six months ago there was no money available to cut the 
PST even though oil prices in March and April were 
significantly higher than they are now. There was no money to 
cut the PST. But when the Premier’s leadership is challenged, 
when they lost the riding, the vote in the riding of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, all of a sudden there’s money available for a PST 
reduction, Mr. Speaker. It has nothing to do with what is good 
for the people of Saskatchewan. Nothing to do with what is 
good for the economy of Saskatchewan. What’s good about it is 
protecting the Premier’s political hide. That’s why this is 
happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the province is going to forego $320 million to protect the 
Premier’s hide. You know, when you take a look at this cut, a 
cut in the PST is good, Mr. Speaker. There is no doubt about it. 
It is a good move. But, but to make it sustainable you have to 
know where that replacement income is coming from and the 
Minister of Finance gave no explanation as to where that money 
was going to be made up. None whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. None 
whatsoever. 
 
But they talk a lot though in their Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker, about the financial position of Saskatchewan, you 
know, and they . . . and, fact is, the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains today was talking about 13 consecutive years of 
surpluses — 13 consecutive years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I’m glad that they respond. When you 
look at the Provincial Auditor’s report, volume number 2 for 
2006, on page number 7, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
has a graph there so it makes it easier for the NDP to read, Mr. 
Speaker. And it has a line down it that says, this is the zero line. 
Above is surpluses for every year; below is deficits, Mr. 
Speaker, you know. And this line starts out below and gets 
lower and stays there for a total of four years from 1991 to 
1994. So the first surplus year under this NDP government is 
1995. 
 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, it stays there and gets almost down to zero in 1999 
— because it obviously was an election year, government was 
going to blow all the money they possibly could, Mr. Speaker 
— rises up a little bit, and then the current Premier becomes the 
Premier. In 2001 he became the Premier. In 2002, 2003, 2004 
— not my numbers, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor’s 
numbers — is, there is a deficit, Mr. Speaker. All three of those 
years including the 2003 of $654 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, so seven of those 15 years, Mr. Speaker, are deficit. So I 
don’t know where the member from Wascana Plains can say 
that there is 13 consecutive years of surpluses because the 
Provincial Auditor directly counters that, Mr. Speaker. And 
anybody who wants to take a look at the numbers, they’re right 
there in plain sight, in black and white, Mr. Speaker, black and 
white . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Some parts of the graph 
are blue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a look at some other numbers. Both the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains and the member from 
Regina Coronation were busy fighting the 1991 election all over 
again. And I certainly understand why they want to do that; 
they won. So why wouldn’t you want to fight that one over 
again? But when you look at the debt numbers, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And these are net debt right now — $7.9 billion in 1991, $7.8 
billion in 2006, when the price of oil has been over $70, Mr. 
Speaker, which is an unheard of record. And this government 
hasn’t touched the debt, Mr. Speaker. The net debt remains the 
same. So I don’t know what they’re bragging about, Mr. 
Speaker, but they’re bragging about the wrong things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When you take a look at some other numbers, Mr. Speaker, in 
1991 there was zero income from gaming; 2006 — $234 
million. I remember the Premier when he represented Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, I believe it was, marched down the street, 
marched down the street in about 1986, opposing gaming, 
opposing gaming in Moose Jaw. And yet his government is 
relying on 234, $234 million of income to prop up his 
government, Mr. Speaker. And there has been a lot, a lot of 
social impact — negative social impact because of that 
implementation of gaming. And I think I may have been 
referring to the Speaker as Deputy Speaker for a couple of 
times. I apologize for that if I did so . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes, I didn’t want to demote him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some more numbers that I think need to be taken a 
look at. Saskatchewan relies on agriculture. Cannington relies 
on agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and yet in 1991, the year the NDP 
took power, there was over $800 million going into agricultural 
support programs from farmers themselves, from the federal 
government and the provincial government. In 2006 that 
number has dropped down to about $450 million, Mr. Speaker. 
The provincial government’s share has gone from 412 million 
to 277 million. And yet this government wants to brag about 
how well they are supporting agriculture. 
 
Prices are worse today than they were in 1991. Farmers only 
continue to exist on the land, Mr. Speaker, because of how 
efficient they have become. Certainly not because the prices 
have improved and certainly not because this government has 
provided them with any further assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And I think when I listen to this government talk about 1991, 
when I hear this government talking about the provincial debt 
and how well they’re doing it paying it down, Mr. Speaker, 
when you take a look at those numbers, 1991 total debt was 
17.6. Today’s total debt, according to the Provincial Auditor, 21 
billion — three and a half billion dollars more in a time of 
record oil prices, at a time of record potash prices, at a time 
when the government is pulling in 234 extra million dollars out 
of gaming. Out of gaming, Mr. Speaker. So when the 
government says how well they’re doing, the debt continues to 
increase under this Premier. 
 
And fact is, you know, there’s a lot of . . . this government 
relies on a lot of support from union membership across the 
province. One of the numbers that I’m sure most union 
members would find very interesting, especially those union 
members in the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, in the 
SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union], and other government employees, Mr. Speaker, is the 
unfunded pension liabilities — 1991, Mr. Speaker, $2.7 billion 
of unfunded pension liability. And what is it today after 15 
years of NDP government? Four point three billion, Mr. 
Speaker. Four point three billion. Any teacher out there under 
the old pension plan should be seriously questioning this 
government’s commitment to those pension plans, Mr. Speaker, 
because they’ve gone up by over 50 per cent. The unfunded 
portion has increased by over 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s during the good economic times. Good economic times, 
Mr. Speaker. Not in difficult times. 
 
So when you look at this, Mr. Speaker, this government is 
failing to meet its commitments. It’s failing to provide for those 
people that it should be providing for. It should be covering the 
pension plans, Mr. Speaker. It should be providing agricultural 
supports that they have promised and have failed to deliver, Mr. 
Speaker. This government is failing the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But there is a group of people, Mr. Speaker, across this 
province that are not failing their constituents. And that’s the 
new group of people that were elected last week to represent 
FSIN and the municipalities, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
congratulate all those leaders that were elected or re-elected in 
last week’s elections. Chief Joseph with the FSIN and the FSIN 
vice-chiefs that were elected or re-elected, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to congratulate Mayor Pat Fiacco of Regina, Mayor Don 
Atchison of Saskatoon — both of those were re-elected — and 
new Mayor McBain from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, and a good 
many other mayors and councillors in towns and villages and 
cities across this province that are dedicated to their 
communities and trying to build this province and make it better 
for everyone, and trying to do their best to ensure that there are 
jobs and opportunities available for the youth of this province 
despite the efforts of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say that the members of the Sask Party in 
forming a government are looking forward to working with all 
of these groups to retain youth and provide opportunities across 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
When you take a look at this Speech from the Throne, Mr. 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

Speaker, it’s a recycled document for the last four or five years, 
rewording the same old promises that have not been delivered. 
You know the only new thing in this Speech from the Throne 
was a new stat holiday, Mr. Speaker. The only thing was a new 
stat holiday, Mr. Speaker. That was all that there was. 
 
So there are many things that need to be changed in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. This government is failing in education. 
It’s failing in health. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, in one of my 
communities of Carlyle they got 10 beds closed at the long-term 
care facility because they can’t get enough staff, Mr. Speaker. 
Ten beds closed. That’s the kind of history, that’s the kind of 
service that this government is providing to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Highways, they’re turning No. 8 Highway back to gravel, going 
to re-tender it because it came in too high of a price and so 
they’re proposing to build it to a lower quality. It didn’t stand 
up before. It certainly won’t stand up again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne, this 2 per cent 
reduction in the PST is all about saving the Premier’s political 
hide. It’s not about helping the people of Saskatchewan. I am 
pleased to be able to second that motion that was presented by 
my colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my great honour and privilege to enter into the Throne Speech 
debate. And of course at the end I will be indicating that I’ll be 
supporting the main motion and be voting against the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
Sutherland for allowing me to serve them here in the Assembly. 
It’s a great honour and a great privilege to be able to do that. 
And I take that honour and privilege very seriously. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatoon Sutherland is a very unique constituency. 
I’m quite fortunate to be able to represent the University of 
Saskatchewan, Muskeg Lake First Nation; the synchrotron is 
within Saskatoon Sutherland; Royal University Hospital falls 
within those boundaries and as well Innovation Place is within 
Saskatoon Sutherland. So I’m very grateful and fortunate to be 
able to have relationships with each of those entities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also very grateful to my constituency 
assistant. She’s worked in that constituency since 1987 — three 
terms with the prior MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and now into the second term with the current MLA. 
I also want to thank the ministerial staff that work very hard in 
this building in the last year since I’ve had the honour and the 
privilege to serve in the Premier’s cabinet in this past 12 
months. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure all members agree that 
we all wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t for our families. And I just 
want to thank my family, as other members I’m sure will want 
to thank their families, for the opportunity to be here and the 

work that the families do at home enabling us to be here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate our Premier for the 
excellent work that he is doing and for the vision and the 
leadership that he has provided in this Throne Speech. We’re 
quite fortunate to have the type of individual leading this 
province and I’ll be able to get into details as to why that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech contains four cornerstones 
with a number of information details beneath each of those 
cornerstones. And I’d just like to go over briefly some of those 
cornerstones. 
 
The first cornerstone that we’re building on is to make 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures. Mr. Speaker, that’s the main reason why 
most of us got into politics is to ensure that we’re building a 
brighter future for Saskatchewan people. We plan on expanding 
Saskatchewan’s literacy program. We’re going to continue the 
freeze on university tuition — which is very important to 
constituents in Saskatoon Sutherland — and we’re going to 
expand the training and strengthen regional training to bring 
education closer to students. And finally, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to host a youth summit and engage young people and 
ensure that we hear their views and that we’re working with 
them to help build a future for young people here in this 
province. 
 
The second cornerstone, Mr. Speaker, of the Throne Speech, is 
to strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving public 
health care while reducing wait times and improving access to 
services. Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of planks that I want to 
touch on in that area. The first is to work with health care 
providers to further improve access to service and to reduce 
wait times and improve access to service. That’s a very 
important element to this plan. We’re going to consult with the 
health care workers, the health care professionals, and engage 
them to ensure that we listen to their good counsel in 
developing plans into the future. 
 
The second point, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to expand the 
Aboriginal workforce within health care. That’s an extremely 
important point to this whole plan. First Nations people are 
experiencing an echo boom not unlike Saskatchewan did and 
Canada did in the 1950s with the baby boomer generation. And 
we’re very grateful and very fortunate to have Aboriginal young 
people in our society to be a part, and full members, of our 
society. 
 
The third point, Mr. Speaker, is to enhance efforts to recruit 
health care providers using new relocation incentives in return 
for service commitments, among other initiatives. Mr. Speaker, 
I was born and raised in rural Saskatchewan and I know 
first-hand how challenging it is to attract people to live in small 
towns and have their careers there. We will work with people to 
ensure that that is done and provide a number of incentives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that I’m responsible for is the 
Premier’s Project Hope, and we’re going to continue 
implementing the Premier’s Project Hope. And over the past 
year there has been solid progress on a number of initiatives in 
Project Hope. It’s a three-year program and we’re well ahead on 
many of the initiatives — and this is a key, important part — 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

because the ultimate vision is to provide the children of 
Saskatchewan with the best possible chance to grow up free 
from addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’ve done is restrict the 
ingredients that are used to make crystal meth and ensure that 
they are restricted within drugstores and behind counters as 
well. And this Premier led that charge all across Canada and 
that’s the standard in all of Canada right now. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve opened a new youth detox centre, stabilization and 
treatment beds, and we’ve hired counsellors and community 
workers to help communities deal with addiction issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have also, as the minister, was able to participate 
in a new anti-tobacco initiative called the View and Vote, and 
that’s directed largely at grades 6 to 12. And this was an 
interesting initiative where they’ve collected anti-tobacco ads 
and health ads from around the world, and between now and 
December they’re showing these ads in groups within schools 
and they get to vote as to which ad is the most effective. And 
next spring we’ll be releasing that ad and that will be the ad that 
we’ll be supporting and that will be chosen by young people. 
Many of these ads are humorous, many of them are very 
serious. But we’ll be choosing, the young people will be 
choosing the ad that they find most effective. 
 
And finally, I’d also like to commend the city of Lloydminster 
for taking the positive step of banning smoking in bars, 
restaurants, and ensuring the health of their citizens is universal 
regardless of which side of the border people reside on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other component of the health plank that I 
wanted to talk about is children and youth in mental health. 
This government takes very seriously the mental health of our 
Saskatchewan young people, and we will be consulting and 
have consulted various organizations throughout Saskatchewan, 
including the Children’s Advocate, the Canadian Mental Health 
Association Saskatchewan division, as well as SASKFEAT, 
Saskatchewan Families for Effective Autism Treatment. 
 
There are new initiatives — the cognitive disability strategy — 
new initiatives in children’s mental health which will expand 
early identification and intervention, treatment, outreach, 
residential and respite services. And these initiatives will 
address the needs and barriers in mental health services for 
children, youth, and families in Saskatchewan. 
 
The plan for children’s mental health aims to build the capacity 
of children, youth, families, and communities as well as 
organizations and service providers to respond to the mental 
health needs of children and youth. Every child in our province 
deserves the opportunity to grow, develop, and unlock their 
potential, explore their dreams, and have hope for the future. 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech lays out the direction so that 
we are able to achieve that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll be providing support for children with 
mental, physical, behaviour disabilities and disorders. And we 
will continue to develop a children’s hospital within a hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third plank, the third cornerstone is to advance 
Saskatchewan as a leader in environment protection and the 
green economy. We’ll be taking further steps to achieve our 

long-term goal of one-third of our energy needs from renewable 
resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be partnering to research the 
world’s first Saskatchewan-designed, utility scale, clean coal 
generating facility. That’s an extremely important aspect to 
meeting our commitment to climate change, because we have a 
300-year supply of coal here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, not only is it important to use that resource in a way 
that doesn’t damage the environment, but we’ll be creating the 
technology here in Saskatchewan that can be exported to places 
like India and China which are using coal currently and can 
benefit from the clean coal technology. So not just the benefit 
here in Saskatchewan but also the technology as we expand and 
export it throughout the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll be implementing measures to assist in 
energy conservation and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll carry out a 
comprehensive plan to develop biofuels and as well implement 
a plan related to the mandated use of ethanol that will not only 
benefit the environment but it will also benefit farmers and 
those that want to use their crop in this way and save on a lot of 
shipping charges as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fourth plank in this Throne Speech is 
ensuring families benefit from our strong, prosperous economy. 
Probably the most important one to balancing work and family 
life is to introduce a new annual statutory holiday known as 
Family Day beginning in February of this upcoming year. 
 
We’ll continue to work to ensure that we have a fair deal for our 
non-renewable resources. We have the Prime Minister on 
record saying that that’s worth, as a minimum, $750 million 
each year, to a Member of Parliament in Saskatchewan on the 
Conservative side that it could be upwards of over $2 billion 
each and every year, Mr. Speaker. So that’s a very key and 
important part of the upcoming plan. 
 
We’ll be introducing legislation to dedicate every dollar of fuel 
tax collected by the province from motorists toward 
maintaining and building Saskatchewan’s roads. And that’s a 
very important part. 
 
The other point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to establish a 
multi-year infrastructure fund to enhance families and 
communities, including funding for cultural and recreational 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a strong economy but we’re going to 
make it even stronger. We’re going to work with municipalities 
on an urban agenda and we’re going to partner with First 
Nations, Métis, and Inuit to host a national summit on 
Aboriginal economic development. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
also going to continue to develop a provincial anti-racism 
strategy which I know many members in this House find very 
important and would support fully, Mr. Speaker, I being one of 
those. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in the area of agriculture we’re going 
to fully fund the CAIS program while we negotiate with the 
federal government to have an improved, more fair program. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to press the federal government 
to ensure that it honours its own legislation to enable farmers to 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

decide the future of the Canadian Wheat Board through an open 
and fair plebiscite. Mr. Speaker, it’s only fair and that is what 
the federal government should be doing. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to join with colleagues that have 
mentioned earlier to congratulate the new mayors and 
councillors that were elected last year. And I also want to 
extend my personal congratulations to Chief Lawrence Joseph 
of the FSIN and also the vice-chiefs that were elected recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we listen to the new member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I welcome the new member to 
the House. And I know that he will do his best to represent his 
constituents in the short time that he will serve here for the next 
12 to 18 months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I thought it was interesting that the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy moved the amendment and the member 
for Cannington seconded that motion. And it reminded me that, 
you know, we have something old; we have something new. 
When those members were supporting the government in the 
’80s, we had something borrowed, and we were all something 
blue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to the member for 
Cannington as he did not want to talk about what had gone on 
in the past. And I can understand why members on that side of 
the House don’t want to talk about the 1980s and about what 
had happened and the debt and the deficit and bringing us to the 
area of bankruptcy. And, Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, that in 1991 that Saskatchewan people were pretty 
much united in throwing out the government that those 
members supported. 
 
But it is interesting. The member from Swift Current, currently 
in the Assembly, what he decided to do in 1991 was seek a 
nomination for that party and for that government because 
obviously he thought that they were doing a fine job, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I found it interesting that the member for Cannington — and I’ll 
paraphrase that — said, the Minister of Finance reduced the 
PST by 2 per cent. But he said, and paraphrasing, doesn’t know 
where the replacement money is going to come from. Well you 
know, that is interesting, Mr. Speaker, because just recently the 
opposition released a pamphlet in Saskatoon. And a couple of 
the planks there, Mr. Speaker, say that their guiding principles 
are, no. 2, smaller, less intrusive, more efficient government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — And they support that obviously. And no. 
3, steady gradual reduction in government spending and 
taxation while maintaining a firm commitment to balanced 
budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — And they support that as well. But I ask 
the members, please lay out, in accordance with what the 
member for Cannington say, where’s the replacement money 

going to come from? What are they going to cut? 
 
We hear every day in this House, and I’m sure we’ll hear in this 
session, that we should be spending more money in health care, 
more money in education, more money with SaskTel to put up 
towers in certain parts of their constituency. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
if their guiding principle is to gradually reduce government 
spending, well not only do they have to show where they’re 
going to cut just to put the additional money in the priorities 
that they’ll be laying out in the rest of this session, but they’ll 
also have to point out where, if they’re going to reduce the size 
of government, they’ll have to lay that out. 
 
So I’m waiting in bated breath and I’m sure the member for 
Cannington is as well — where are they going to cut, where are 
they going to reduce, Mr. Speaker? So I’m looking forward to 
those responses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my grandfather was born in the 1880s here in 
Saskatchewan. My grandmother was born in the 1890s, and 
they met after serving in World War I. My grandfather lied 
about his age — he was 36 — served in World War I, met his 
bride, and brought her back from Scotland. 
 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, there were no CCFers or New 
Democrats. And a story that they told was hitching up their 
wagon during a winter election to go in, and one of them voted 
Tory and one of them voted Liberal. And it took all day to 
move in from the farm to vote. Mr. Speaker, and I remember 
the story of him complaining that they’re going to keep the 
roads open in the wintertime, Mr. Speaker, that he didn’t think 
that the government should be investing in that area. 
 
Think about in two generations from my grandparents’ 
generation to what we have today. We have an improvement in 
the highway system. We have all the money dedicated to that 
area, the whole innovations in the health care area, innovations 
in education, and the innovations in the tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude with two points. The 
StarPhoenix says in an editorial, “Throne speech brings 
welcome wind of optimism.” Mr. Speaker, they conclude with 
this quote. Quote: 
 

It’s time for optimism in this traditional “next year 
country,” and the throne speech certainly reflects that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to be voting in support of the Throne 
Speech, along with my colleagues from Regina Coronation Park 
and Wascana Plains. And I will be voting against the 
amendment put forward by the new member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and the member for Cannington. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m very 
pleased to rise today to speak on the Throne Speech. To me it’s 
another speech that offers absolutely nothing but the same old 
rhetoric from a tired, worn-out government. How can people on 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

that side of the House get up and start talking about how good 
things are when we’ve lost 4,500 people in the last year and 
18,000 people since this Premier became the Premier — 
18,000? 
 
I would like to just start out, just to comment about . . . The 
member from Sutherland was talking about his grandparents. 
Well it brings back memories for me also to talk about my 
grandparents, and I’ve done this in the House before. But I talk 
about . . . My grandparents came here in circa the 1912-1915 
era, and they settled not too far from where I now live. And 
when they settled there, they had to go out by cart from Moose 
Jaw. When they arrived there, there was no roads. There was no 
school. There was no railroad, and there was no hospital. 
 
Now we had an evolution of growth. We had an evolution of 
expansion in this province. I retired to the same area 80 years 
after my grandparents did and guess what? The hospital is 
closed. The school is closed. The railroad is pulled, and our 
highways are probably the same as they were when my 
grandparents moved there. Is that what the NDP call progress? 
Is that what they think is progress? That’s NDP progress. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I do want to start going through the Throne 
Speech a bit by bit before I start talking about constituency 
problems and issues. First off . . . and I have to compliment my 
colleague from Cannington who brought this up, but it bears 
being repeated again because in the Throne Speech on page 1, it 
talks about 13 consecutive balanced budgets. And I know my 
colleague used the report of the Provincial Auditor and looking 
at . . . And he went through it very eloquently, but it bears 
repeating. There’s seven, seven budgets in the last 15 years that 
have been deficit. Seven out of 15 have been deficit, and I can 
give you the years: ’91, ’92, ’93, ’94, 2002, 2003, 2004. 
 
Now this, Mr. Deputy Chair, begs the question. On this 
particular document, it says 13 consecutive balanced budgets. 
The auditor says there are seven that aren’t; they’re deficit 
budgets. Who do you believe? Who do you believe? Who is 
telling the truth? 
 
Do the people of this province, do the people of this province 
believe the auditor or do they believe the rhetoric from over 
there? I would let the people of this province decide because all 
they have to do is read the auditor’s report where there’s seven 
deficit budgets, and here unequivocally it states that there’s 13 
consecutive balanced budgets. How do people of this province 
believe and trust that government when they can’t even say 
something honestly in their own Throne Speech document? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, I hear some heckling over there, but I’ll 
tell you it’s very difficult to heckle the truth. 
 
Now we want to go, we want to go ahead. Again my colleague 
from Cannington talked about the debt because in the Throne 
Speech again it talks about reduction, significant reduction in 
debt. I repeat that: significant reduction in debt, in the Throne 
Speech. And on page 8 of the auditor’s report, it clearly states 
that it’s the same — 1961, 7.9; and 2006, 7.8. So arguably from 
somebody on that side of the House, it’s point one difference. Is 
that a significant amount? 
 
But, but even more so than that, when you really get down to 

looking at the details of the budget . . . And we start talking 
about liabilities. Now one can sit and debate the word liability 
vis-à-vis deficit or debt. But when you look at the liabilities of 
this government — again the auditor’s report, page 34 — in 
1991 the liabilities of this province were $17.6 billion. And 
what are they today? 2006 auditor’s report, $21 billion. 
 
Now, now, Mr. Deputy Chair, who do the people of this 
province want to believe? The auditor? Or do they actually want 
to believe the rhetoric of this NDP government? And this, and 
this is actually from the auditor’s report. Again we have the 
Minister of Finance heckling. How do you heckle the truth? 
 
Now, now we talk in the Throne Speech about more jobs, more 
jobs. Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, we’ve lost 18,000 people, and yet 
we have somebody over there that is talking about jobs. We 
know we got a labour shortage in this province. There’s a 
labour shortage in other jurisdictions. But we are losing people. 
And here we are in an economic boom and losing people. How 
can anybody on that side of the House stand up and look 
themselves in the mirror and say that we’re doing good, when 
we’re losing people and we’re in an economic boom? 
 
Now in the Throne Speech, we’re only one of three have 
provinces, and I applaud that. We’re a have province. But we 
have a Premier that says our wee province is always going to be 
in and out of federal welfare. Well what kind of a message does 
that send to people in this province that, oh we’re always going 
to be in and out of welfare? Well I would submit that we would 
be in and out of welfare if we would maintain that current 
government which the people of this province can see through, 
and we know that they’re not going to be around for much 
longer. 
 
Now we look at the cornerstones and I kind of, you know, 
there’s some same old repeats in the cornerstones of this Throne 
Speech . . . but place for young people to live and work. What I 
would like to have seen then, how do we retain young people 
here? What do we do to have our young people stay in this 
province and make their careers and their lives here? And, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I will assure you, a 25-cent phone call is not 
enough to keep the young people in this province. 
 
Now we look at other issues that are in this document, and we 
talk about investment and training. Well this is quite interesting. 
We have the government out there now with this piece of 
whatever and talking about investment and training. How do we 
keep people in this province when we’re not meeting the 
educational needs of our workforce? We’ve brought to light in 
the past number of months many, many situations where young 
people are on up to 15-year waiting lists for post-secondary 
education, up to 15 years. And yet say, well we’re doing pretty 
good on that side of the House they figure. But 15 years waiting 
for post-secondary education, how can anybody sit around and 
wait that long? And yet people on that side of the House say 
we’re doing good. We’re doing something to address the labour 
market challenging needs. 
 
Now attracting immigrants, last year, last year we launched a 
bold initiative to attract 5,000 immigrants. Well how are we 
doing? We’re on track. What’s the track? I talk to people that 
are trying to get into this province. I have people that have been 
sent out of this province that have migrated here because of 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

some form or somebody in the department that says no, the only 
way you can stay here . . . although you’ve got a job, although 
your family’s here, although everything is good, sorry you have 
to leave. But then when you leave, you can reapply. Is that ever 
a nice way to have immigrants come into this province. 
 
Now we keep saying . . . We talk about health care, the second 
cornerstone is health care. Well let’s just look at health care. 
How are we making out in health care? How many times have 
we had to bring up in this House people that have no 
satisfaction with the health care system, and we bring it up in 
this House to get some results. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Hon. members, I’m 
having difficulty hearing the member for Wood River. And 
members, I ask members on both sides of the House to please 
keep their voices down. The member for Wood River has the 
floor, and I recognize the hon. member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well 
again I have to use that phrase; it’s very difficult for them to 
heckle because it’s hard to heckle the truth. So I don’t know 
what they’re heckling. 
 
Now, now we talk about the health care and the waiting lists. 
How has it improved? How has the waiting list improved? The 
Minister of Health got up today in question period. He couldn’t 
answer. He wouldn’t, couldn’t, didn’t know, doesn’t care. Who 
knows? But he didn’t answer. So when we talk about the 
rhetoric of health care and how we’ve got the best health care, it 
was Tommy’s great big thing, but how are we doing? 
 
I talk to people on basically a daily basis that have problems 
with the health care system, people that are going outside of the 
province because they cannot get it here. I recently talked to 
somebody that can hardly move because of pain, and can he get 
in to see a specialist? No. Now what does a person like that do? 
Your quality of life is somewhere between zero and nothing, so 
in order to get some health care you’re basically forced to go 
outside of the province. And what do that group of men and 
women say? We have the best health care system in the 
country. If they say that often enough, they tend to believe it. 
But again to the people of the province, you look at what our 
health care system is doing for you and now you decide. 
 
It’s the same old rhetoric, the same as the debt numbers. If they 
think it they say it, and they’ll try and convince some of their 
own supporters, but they’re not fooling the people of this 
province any, any longer. 
 
Now we talk about environment. Now we’re all 
environmentalists at heart. We want to see clean air. But what, 
what are they doing? They talk about it every year. They’ve 
talked about a green and prosperous economy. There’s not one 
on that side of the House that can identify to anybody what a 
green and prosperous economy is. They can’t do it because all it 
is is words. 
 
Now we talk about Kyoto in the past and how the people over 
there supported Kyoto, and they did not really believe the fact 
that the Kyoto accord was basically a transfer of money from 

richer nations to poorer nations. They couldn’t see through that. 
And yet we already had one of our Crown corporations that was 
planning to buy something in the neighbourhood of $35 million 
of credits from another country. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you’re buying credits from another 
country to support your emissions in the province, how is that 
helping the clean air of this province? Can anybody over there 
get up and explain that? You’re buying credits from an African 
country or from Russia or from some other place so we can 
conform to Kyoto, but how is that helping our air in this 
province? It is not. It’s not doing anything. So their talk about 
the green and prosperous economy is basically hollow words. 
 
Now we talk also . . . they have talked about developing the 
biodiesel industry in this province and the biofuels. Well it was 
very interesting to hear the other day that 24 million tax dollars 
was going into the Belle Plaine ethanol plant — 24 million tax 
dollars. Was this anything more than to try and save face for the 
Premier? Was it anything other than that? Because of the 
blotched ethanol plant at Belle Plaine that was so highly touted 
before that really was . . . a lot of us felt it was another 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]. So now to try and save a little face is to put 24 
million tax dollars into an ethanol plant in Belle Plaine. 
 
Now it bears talking about the investments that this government 
has done. Now they will argue, and I’ve heard one from 
Investment Saskatchewan say, well it’s a good investment. Well 
don’t they always say that? Don’t they always say, when they 
go tinkering with tax dollars on wild investments that, oh, it’s a 
good investment. 
 
Well let me just talk about a couple of good investments of this 
NDP government — tappedinto.com, Mr. Speaker, a good 
investment, lost $6.7 million. Persona, another good 
investment, lost 9.4. What’s Navigata at now? It was 43, but it 
jumps on a regular basis. It’s up to 60-some or 70-some million 
dollar loss — another good NDP investment. Retx.com — that 
was a really good investment. It only lost 26 million. How 
about Craig Wireless? That’s a $10 million loss. NST [NST 
Network Services of Chicago], $16 million loss; Clickabid, $1.9 
million loss; Soft Tracks, $2.2 million loss. Ag Dealer, 
competing with a local production in the province, and they’re 
competing with that to the tune of an $8.9 million loss. That’s 
$124.5 million loss from SaskTel alone. 
 
Well SPUDCO. We know all about SPUDCO. I think there’s 
some members over there that are still pretty proud about 
SPUDCO, but it was only a $35 million loss. So the former 
minister of SPUDCO, he probably wants to reinvest in potatoes 
now because he’s behind some of these others in losses. 
 
We could go back a few years; members want to go back. How 
about Channel Lake for $15 million loss and Guyana for a $2 
million loss? Now we look at SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] — $16.1 million loss in Coachman Insurance. But 
let’s not forget one of the favourites here — mega bingo. 
Wasn’t that a bright idea by this government? This NDP 
government had to get into the bingo business — $8 million 
loss. Pangaea, 3.5 and counting. 
 
Now if you add in some of the other ones, we’re sitting over $1 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

billion in losses. So a $24 million investment into the — of tax 
dollars — into the Belle Plaine plant might seem pretty, pretty 
small compared to all of these other ones. 
 
We’ve had members opposite who’ve got up and talked about 
equalization. I just want to make a couple of comments about 
equalization. When you’re trying to deal with an individual or 
in this case government to government, how would you feel if 
somebody come along and kicked you in the shins and then say, 
oh by the way I want some money? And this is what this 
government is doing with the feds all the time. They’re poking 
their finger in their eye with their right hand and their left hand 
is out for money. Now I’ll tell you, if I was sitting there, I sure 
wouldn’t be willing to deal with them on that basis. Look at the 
Minister of Agriculture. He’s continually saying that he needs 
money from them, but he’s continually running them down. I 
would just love to be at the other end and tell him where to go 
in a couple words or less. 
 
Now you’re going to do a multi-year strategy of roads. That’s in 
the budget. Every fuel dollar collected, tax dollar from fuel is 
going to roads. That’s good. That’s a good initiative. We’ve 
been saying that for years. They keep saying, oh we’ve been 
doing that. Well they haven’t. But now they want to deliver a 
multi-year strategy for the roads through the economy, a 
multi-year strategy. Well I’ll tell you if they had any strategy at 
all it would be new because there’s sure no strategy for the 
roads at all now in this province. 
 
So I guess my time is running out . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes it’s a shame. Mr. Speaker, we talked about the Family 
Day that was announced, another political ploy to try to buy 
voters off, I guess. But I just wanted to throw something out for 
consideration. When they announced, or pre-announced the 
Family Day, how much consultation was done? Did they 
consult with any of the . . . for an example the teachers? Now 
teachers have already talked to us and said, you know what? We 
have a set number of days in the calendar year that we must 
teach — 197. Now we have a holiday in February. Where are 
we going to make up that other teaching day? Will it be in 
June? July? August? So I’m wondering how much consultation 
was done by that government or if any consultation was done at 
all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would sure like to talk about the 750,000 head of 
cattle that we ship out of the province. I talk about it in every 
one of our Throne Speeches and budget speeches. We ship 
750,000 head of cattle out of the province to Alberta to be fed, 
along with our grains and our young people. What did this 
Throne Speech do to bring any of that back to this province? 
Absolutely nothing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think my time is running out so I would just 
like to close by saying that I will be supporting the amendment 
to the motion. And I think it deserves being read again: 
 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
this Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative in 
finding solutions to the growing labour shortage, the 
out-migration of our youth and families, forcing 
Saskatchewan people to go out of province for health care, 
failing to deal with the agricultural crisis and its impact on 
rural Saskatchewan, failing to protect children who are at 

risk, and for being too focused on its internal partisan 
political problems. 

 
With that, Mr. Speaker, the only thing I could possibly close 
with, I just can’t imagine how much money that the government 
is now going to spend on selling the Throne Speech to the 
Saskatchewan people. How much money is it going to cost? 
Just imagine. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure today to rise and speak to the government’s 
Throne Speech and vision for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of confidence in this 
government’s ability to understand and work with the 
Saskatchewan people. And I take a great deal of pride, Mr. 
Speaker, in being among this fine group of people on this side 
of the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we are all aware, all aware today that there 
are two groups of people in this Chamber. Mr. Speaker, there 
are those on this side of the House working for the 
Saskatchewan people, and there’s those on that side of the 
House working for the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a huge amount of difference. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very proud to represent people who continue to believe in and 
work for the people of Saskatchewan, and more importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, as this particular Throne Speech indicates, the 
families of Saskatchewan, today’s Saskatchewan family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think a lot can be said not only about this Throne 
Speech but about how well this government has responded to 
Saskatchewan people’s needs over the last year, leading to the 
development of our plans for the coming year. Mr. Speaker, the 
interesting thing about Thursday of last week is that there were 
two speeches in this Chamber. The first was the prorogation 
speech which had a look at the year past, and the next one was 
the Throne Speech taking a look at the year coming forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just have a look back a year ago in which this 
government committed to working with the children of our 
centennial, the youth of this province, and building a 
Saskatchewan that was built on an unbreakable social fabric and 
providing opportunities for young people and other 
Saskatchewan residents. Last year’s Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, laid out a significant vision for the province, not only 
for a year but for the 20 years into the future. 
 
What did we accomplish, Mr. Speaker, during the course of the 
last year? It’s all in the prorogation speech. The public has 
access to it. Go to the website and take a look at that speech 
from Thursday of last week, October 26. Mr. Speaker, it 
indicated that in addition to the 4,000 events celebrating our 
centennial in communities right across this province, Mr. 
Speaker, individuals who were proud to be Saskatchewan 
people and proud of the history of the province and proud of the 
future of this province, Mr. Speaker, anyone who attended a 
centennial event last year knows that the doom and gloomers on 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

the other side do not represent the average Saskatchewan person 
and certainly don’t represent today’s Saskatchewan family, Mr. 
Speaker. They are proud of their heritage and their history. 
They are proud to be Saskatchewan residents. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last year when we look back at what took 
place, we have seen again — just to quote a few things out of 
the prorogation speech — this government said it would and did 
freeze tuition for university students. We said we would create 
additional training spaces for young people at our community 
and regional colleges as well as our provincial training 
institutions. We did create, Mr. Speaker, 2,700 new spaces for 
training opportunities in the province. 
 
In the Battlefords, we are particularly pleased that we expanded 
our pre-kindergarten program. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got new 
children in pre-kindergarten in North Battleford that two years 
ago wouldn’t have been in this program. They are delighted, 
Mr. Speaker, at this single initiative outlined in the Throne 
Speech and delivered by this government over the course of the 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said in the Throne Speech a year ago we 
would expand our wind power generation and we did that, Mr. 
Speaker. We said we would address the corporate capital tax 
and business tax in the province, Mr. Speaker, and we did, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We said that we would have further commitments to health care 
and, over the course of the last year, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
largest single contribution to health care ever by a government 
in the history of this province. We delivered. And the result of 
that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got lower waiting times, better access 
to care. And, Mr. Speaker, more diagnostic images and more 
surgeries were done in this province than ever before — Mr. 
Speaker, a record to be very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced additional, after saying we would 
do so, additional traffic safety measures. And, Mr. Speaker, 
anti-gang legislation and of course the safer communities work 
— all set out in the Throne Speech last year, all delivered by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Indeed today, Saskatchewan . . . Even though a year ago this 
was an excellent, wonderful province, today, Mr. Speaker, the 
province of Saskatchewan is an even better province. And as a 
result, Mr. Speaker, we are living in a province that indeed is 
looking after today’s Saskatchewan family and building a 
province that’s even better for the future of our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So having achieved a significant amount 
of work in a single year’s time, Mr. Speaker, what are we doing 
going forward for yet another year with a strong economy, Mr. 
Speaker? And I think the member who spoke before me, the 
Minister of Healthy Living Services, outlined very clearly some 
of our historical challenges and some of the incredible work of 
this government to overcome those challenges, to put us in a 
position today that we can do some of things that we’re able to 
do. 

Mr. Speaker, the focus of this year’s Throne Speech indeed is to 
make life better for today’s Saskatchewan families and build an 
even better future here for young people. Every activity that we 
engage in in the course of the coming year, Mr. Speaker, is 
aimed at addressing today’s family and youth. Mr. Speaker, can 
there be a greater commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, a 
greater illustration of how we have listened carefully to what 
the people of Saskatchewan are interested in and delivering 
programs that are going to meet those needs as expressed by the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how are we going to do this? The Throne Speech 
outlines four areas in which we will focus. I’m going to talk in 
my brief time available here today about one of those pieces. 
Four cornerstones that are set out for the government’s agenda 
— no. 1, to make this the best place for young people to live, 
work, and build a strong future, Mr. Speaker. No. 2, strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving public health care 
while reducing wait times and improving access to services. No. 
3, advance Saskatchewan as a leader in environmental 
protection and a green economy. And no. 4, ensure that today’s 
Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong economy. 
 
The two big announcements made on Friday, the big 
announcement coming out of the Throne Speech and the big 
announcement that came on Friday — the day after the Throne 
Speech — specifically addressed the benefits to be received 
from building a strong economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, creating a new statutory holiday, Family Day, in 
the province of Saskatchewan, recognizing the good, hard work 
ethic of the people of Saskatchewan and rewarding them for the 
sacrifices that they had to make as we rebuilt this economy 
through the ’90s and strengthening the economy today. Mr. 
Speaker, Family Day has the respect of Saskatchewan families, 
and we’re able to do that, Mr. Speaker, because there’s a 
stronger economy in place today built by policies that this 
government has put in place over the last five years. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have been able to, from this 
strong economy, provide a direct tax benefit to Saskatchewan 
families, Saskatchewan businesses, Saskatchewan 
municipalities, institutions, and facilities. Mr. Speaker, 2 per 
cent reduction in provincial sales tax is a direct benefit from our 
growing economy. Mr. Speaker, is this a sustainable tax cut? 
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, because it’s coming from a growing 
economy, a growing tax base in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have confidence that the Saskatchewan people have 
earned this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of the direct benefit there are the indirect 
benefits that come from that tax cut because the cost to 
business, Mr. Speaker, has been reduced as a result of this. And 
business people in this province are going to be able to create 
more jobs, deliver product at a lower cost, and provide 
Saskatchewan people with an indirect benefit. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, 15 per cent of this reduction is going to 
areas whereby there are additional taxes collected at the 
municipal level and at the school board levels. Mr. Speaker, our 
schools that pay provincial sales tax, our municipal 
governments that pay provincial sales tax, our hospital 
authorities that pay provincial sales tax, are all going to see a 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

benefit from this, Mr. Speaker, and that will indirectly further 
benefit today’s Saskatchewan families. 
 
I’m very proud to be able to stand on this side of the House and 
say to the people of Saskatchewan we’ve addressed issues that 
they’ve raised with us and we’re pleased to be able to have done 
the work that’s able to provide the benefits coming back. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a particular interest in health care in 
this province and the members opposite continue to talk about 
all of the problems that exist in health care. And there’s no 
doubt, Mr. Speaker, that there are challenges that we and people 
in other provinces right across this country, Mr. Speaker, face 
all the time. Recruitment and retention is a challenge in all of 
the provinces. Keeping up with increased drug costs, Mr. 
Speaker, dealing with operating room capacity and meeting 
waiting times, Mr. Speaker, these are all challenges. But when I 
take a look at what we’ve been able to achieve over the last 
year, Mr. Speaker, I’m just so impressed with what the people 
in our regional health authorities, with the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency, have been able to do with the resources and the 
policies that this government’s been able to provide to the 
Saskatchewan health care system. 
 
Let’s just have a look at what it represents, Mr. Speaker. First 
and foremost, the health care system employs 37,000 people in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. That includes 26 self-regulated 
health professions and, Mr. Speaker, the system operates 269 
facilities across the province. Mr. Speaker, this is indeed by 
itself a tremendous benefit to Saskatchewan people. The scope 
and volume of service I don’t think the members opposite fully 
understand. When they bring a case forward it is one of how 
many cases that are successfully dealt with within the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province we have 2,100 people in hospital 
beds every single day. Mr. Speaker, this is 128,700 annual 
patient admissions for 2,100 patients a day in hospital care in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do 257 surgeries every single day in this 
province — 257 surgeries, Mr. Speaker. And for those who 
understand some of the numbers they will know that in the 
Saskatoon and Regina Health Region alone, on hips and knees 
this is 1,000 more this year than done the previous year. We 
have made tremendous, tremendous progress in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we contribute to and fund, through the physician 
payment plan, 4.6 million family physician visits every year or 
12,600 family visits every day. Everyday in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, physicians are seeing 12,600 people. 
 
So on occasion, Mr. Speaker, there are challenging cases in 
which individual’s expectations or satisfactions or needs are not 
met. But, Mr. Speaker, 95 to 99 per cent of the cases dealt with 
in Saskatchewan provide the satisfaction of the people. The last 
exit poll from hospitals asked people, do you believe your care 
was good or excellent. Ninety five per cent of people said, my 
care I received in hospital was good or excellent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we still have challenges to meet. But by golly, 
Mr. Speaker, a system this large, dealing with this many people, 
with this many processes and procedures, by golly, Mr. 
Speaker, we can be proud of the people who are delivering that 

care throughout the province. 
 
And every time there is a challenge to the system on an 
individual or collective basis, we are going to address it, Mr. 
Speaker, through the regional health authorities, the quality care 
coordinators, the provincial quality care coordinators and of 
course Saskatchewan Health, Mr. Speaker. We will address 
those issues. We will learn from the challenges that are 
presented to us and, Mr. Speaker, we will put in place policies 
that are going to improve the quality of care, increase access, 
and indeed reduce our waiting lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it should be 
known that significant progress has been made on several fronts 
over the course of the last year. I had mentioned some of them 
already. But there are some more that I should talk about. 
 
We’ve increased capacity. We’ve provided system 
improvements, workforce planning, quality efficiency, 
workplace improvement, and program developments. This has 
resulted, Mr. Speaker, in reduction of our surgical wait-lists in 
this province. In fact the number of patients waiting last year 
has been reduced by over 1,600. Mr. Speaker, we’ve did, in the 
last year 3,500 more MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] than 
we’d done the year prior to that. We have actually reduced . . . 
or we increased the MRIs in this province by 22 per cent and 16 
per cent for CT [computerized tomography] scans. 
 
We realize that we still haven’t moved everybody on a waiting 
list through the system. But, Mr. Speaker, as this Throne 
Speech correctly identifies, we are going to put additional 
resources into the health care system. We are going to continue 
to improve access, and we’re going to continue to reduce 
waiting lists. Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech and the 
commitment through health care will do absolutely everything 
to provide a better environment for Saskatchewan families and 
of course build an even better future in this province for youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that speaks to our educational and recruitment and 
retention initiatives in health. Mr. Speaker, over the last year we 
contacted all of those nurses about to graduate from the nursing 
education program. We showed them the benefits of working in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We identified some bursary 
programs. And, Mr. Speaker, what was the response from 
nursing education program graduates in the province? When 
they talked to the . . . when the regional health authorities and 
they dealt with the bursaries, Mr. Speaker, today — last year’s 
graduating class — 90 per cent is working in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, tremendous progress that 
has been made. And what does the Throne Speech indicate, Mr. 
Speaker — more commitment from the Saskatchewan 
government towards the health care field. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve identified additional training opportunities and 
additional recruitment and retention initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s just so much that the people of 
Saskatchewan will benefit from as a result of the commitments 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

that have been made in this Throne Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
am so looking forward to additional announcements that are 
going to come out of this government over the course of the 
next few months leading up to and including the development 
and the announcement of the budget in the spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long ways from the days when the 
Leader of the Opposition was playing in the backrooms of the 
Grant Devine government. We’ve come a long way, Mr. 
Speaker, from when the deficit and the debt was the driving 
force behind the policies from the members opposite. Mr. 
Speaker, we spent a decade trying to rebuild this province and 
we spent the last five years building an environment in which 
this economy can grow. Mr. Speaker, today we’ve got an 
environment that is able to provide benefits back to today’s 
Saskatchewan family and provide a better future for 
Saskatchewan youth. 
 
I’m very excited to be a part of this process, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank all of my colleagues for all of the hard work and 
dedication that they’ve made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and not 
supporting the motions raised by the doom-and-gloomers on the 
other side of the chamber. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
enter into the debate today. And following the Minister of 
Health’s comments regarding the Speech from the Throne, I 
don’t think many of us will have witnessed so little thought in 
so many words before or into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne really has altered very 
little from the ones in the past. We had a campaign which went 
forth on a green and prosperous economy and since that last 
election I have yet to vote on a meaningful piece of 
environmental legislation, which leads me to believe that it is an 
open discussion. It is something that for political reasons may 
sound good but really has no intent beyond moving voters to 
hopefully stay with the agenda of the current government and 
absolutely not what is needed for the province of Saskatchewan 
today or going forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in question period we had a very concerning 
situation revolving around youth that are in harm’s way. This 
House — this Legislative Assembly — has been trying to deal 
with children working in the sex trade, being forced into this. 
And all members of both sides of the House have tried to put 
forth legislation to deal with this. And it is with regret that we 
got this report back that stated that these very vulnerable 
individuals were in fact being possibly put into harm’s way by 
the very people meant to care for them. 
 
The minister didn’t have answers for us today, which was very 
disconcerting. And I know that, I know that, Mr. Speaker, this 
is just demonstrative of our current government’s lack of 

actually getting results for the statements that they make. And 
it’s very disconcerting to myself. I have said it before in this 
Assembly. I know the members on the opposite side. I know 
many of them to be very good and caring people. And yet, and 
yet we have a system which they are responsible for running, 
which allows for these tragedies to be perpetuated, and results 
play second place to political outcomes as far as the New 
Democratic Party is concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can see from the mover of the Speech from the 
Throne, the member from Regina Coronation Park . . . I took 
great interest to listening to his speech and his discussion at 
length on the upcoming plebiscite, which may or may not 
occur, with regards to the Canadian Wheat Board. Myself, as a 
farmer and exiting public life after this term of government is 
up, as a farmer, this is an issue that greatly concerns myself and 
many of my constituents. What is amazing is the historical 
revision that the member puts forth. 
 
He does raise that the Canadian Wheat Board was initially 
proposed after the First World War. What he forgot to mention 
was that at that time it was a voluntary institution. It was not a 
single-desk selling operation. And somehow it managed to, 
somehow it managed to survive into the Second World War. 
 
During that time, the war effort demanded that all the grain 
from Western Canada be put under the single desk of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. And I don’t think that there were any 
farmers at that time felt that this was a particular difficult 
situation, when we had young men and women from this nation 
giving their lives and blood on the battlefields in France and 
overseas for our freedoms. 
 
However, following the Second World War that monopoly was 
never reversed. Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, in the first 
few years and the heightening of the Cold War, the CWB 
[Canadian Wheat Board] actually performed fairly well with 
regards to the prices it garnished and the market share that it 
retained. At that point it had roughly 50 per cent of the world’s 
market share for export wheat and barley. To date it has about 
21 per cent of the world’s export share of wheat and barley and 
hence cannot demand the type of premiums that it used to. At 
20 per cent of the world export, it is largely ignored and at the 
cost of myself and my neighbours. And this is a fact that the 
member from Coronation Park absolutely failed to raise. 
 
And so it leads us into the question regarding this. And this 
does define the philosophies of the party opposite and our party 
is, why does it make sense to the member opposite that property 
— because I honestly believe that the hard work that I put into 
my crops and that my neighbours put into their crops should be 
their property — that because a majority of 50 plus 1 would 
then limit your ability to dispose of your property as you see 
fit? 
 
It’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. What’s even more wrong, Mr. 
Speaker, is the historical exploitation of the Canadian Wheat 
Board by members in eastern Canada. If you go through . . . 
The member from North Battleford is shaking his head. What 
the member from North Battleford should look at is who got the 
contracts to move that CWB grain. I’ll tell you who it was. 
 
It was Canadian steamship lines largely and Paul Martin 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

Liberals. It was the union members on the tugboats which were 
designated only for grain up and down the St. Lawrence River, 
and at minus 20 you needed a boat in front and behind. Where, 
Mr. Speaker, if you had that same freighter loaded with coal, 
none of that was responsible. And that came right out of my 
family’s pockets and the pockets of my neighbours. And yet 
this is what these people would support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More than that, Mr. Speaker, the reality is at the end of the day 
the Canadian Wheat Board only represented the Prairie 
provinces under this monopoly. It should be a basic charter 
standard that I should have the same rights as a individual in 
British Columbia or Quebec, but this is not the case. The larger 
philosophical point which exists here is the members opposite 
believe that it is all right if people with property, if 51 per cent 
of them are to vote, that they have the right, in a tyranny of the 
majority, to suppress the rights of the other 49 per cent. 
 
If you took, Mr. Speaker, the gas stations in Regina, if you took 
the gas stations in Regina and said, we are going to have a vote 
on what that price setting for the price of fuel is and if 51 per 
cent vote that this is the way it is, everybody is going to be 
forced to live with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this aspect, this aspect of what the member for 
Regina Coronation Park spoke of in his response to the Speech 
from the Throne absolutely demonstrates the mindset which is 
preventing our province from moving forward and taking our 
rightful place in the Dominion of Canada. Mr. Speaker, if we 
look, if we look at the reality of the population of this province 
prior to the 1930s, prior to the socialist disease which infected 
this area, Mr. Speaker, we had the third highest population of 
any province in the Dominion of Canada. Where are we today, 
Mr. Speaker? At around 4 per cent of the overall population. 
 
And how does that hurt my neighbours? Well, Mr. Speaker, one 
of the valuable aspects in agriculture over the past 20 years, 
profitable, has been the supply managed sector. We have more 
arable land in this province than any other province. And yet 
when it comes to being able to produce chickens, turkeys, or 
dairy in that supply managed section, we are allocated 3.9 per 
cent of the Canadian quota and that’s because we don’t have the 
population. And it costs my neighbours and it costs me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne doesn’t address for 
me one of the largest issues which should face all persons in 
Saskatchewan and that has to do with how the members of our 
First Nation and Aboriginal community are going to be bridged 
out of having to be participants in the economy where only 24 
out of 100 have full-time jobs. If we don’t address these issues, 
which I haven’t found addressed by this New Democratic Party 
government, we end up having manifestations of violence, 
manifestations of children being exploited in the sex trade, we 
have horrible social circumstances which affect all of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t know how this particular Speech from the Throne or any 
that I have had to address have tackled this problem. I find that 
it has been something that is danced around, that none of us 
have entered into this debate openly. And we find Mr. Speaker, 
at the end it is all of us who end up paying for this. 
 

And I think that across the province, one of the cynicisms 
around politicians is that we seem to have a situation wherein 
serious problems, such as the one I just outlined here, remain 
moot. 
 
And yet at the other side of the coin, we have a shortening of 
the work week for the actual elected members. I know that, Mr. 
Speaker, these situations make it difficult for the electorate 
sometimes to really believe that we’re going to have answers 
coming from this Legislative Assembly. And I find that that is 
particularly problematic and I would firmly place the blame 
largely on what has been the governing party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are only a few minutes left before the clock 
winds down. I wanted to take this opportunity to, I wanted to 
take this opportunity to congratulate the new member of our 
Assembly — the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy — also to 
pass on my condolences to the Heppner family in the loss of 
Mr. Heppner, and his years of service to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the constituents of Kindersley look 
forward to the next election. I know that they have faced a 
number of challenges but, in many ways in traditional west 
central style, have met these challenges head-on. And I would 
like to thank them for the opportunity to continue to serve on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those remarks, I’d like to close my response 
to the Speech from the Throne. I won’t be supporting it, as I 
cannot see that what is inherent within it is going to actually 
solve our problems. I will be supporting the amendment as 
raised by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy and seconded 
by the member for, now I’m going to say Assiniboia but it was 
Cannington, Mr. Speaker. And with that, I will take my leave 
and I thank you for your attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is for me a distinct privilege to enter into this Throne Speech 
debate — a debate about a speech, Mr. Speaker, which looks 
forward with a sense of optimism and confidence about the 
future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit, I don’t know if you say amused or 
confused by the speech from the twilight zone that we just 
heard here a few moments ago. But, Mr. Speaker, I see the hon. 
member for . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Upper rubber boot. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Upper rubber boot, he said. Wood River. 
Upper . . . I think he’s got it right. That’s what he would call his 
constituency. But I’ll tell you what his constituency will not be 
calling him after the next election. They will not be calling him 
MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being the hour of 5 o’clock, this 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

House stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................41 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Allchurch .....................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
  Duncan .........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................42 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................43 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan .........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recognizing Achievements in the Aboriginal Community 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
 2006 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Forbes ..........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
 Saskatoon Business Leader Retires 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................43 
 Aboriginal Women: The Journey Forward 
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 Panther Industries Nominated for Award 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
 Review of Headlines 
  Morin ...........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
 Retaining Power 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................45 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Wait Times for Cancer Care 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ....................................................................................................................................................................................47 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................47 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 La Ronge and Area to get Natural Gas Services 
  Thomson ......................................................................................................................................................................................50 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................51 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Point of Privilege 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................51 
MOTIONS 
 Implementation of Procedural Rules 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................52 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................53 
  Duncan .........................................................................................................................................................................................57 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................60 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................63 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................65 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................67 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................72 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




