
















































Hansard: March 14, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 19A  TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 549 
 March 14, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — Well good afternoon, everyone. And welcome 
back, members and sessional staff. 
 
Before we go into routine proceedings, it’s my pleasure at this 
time to introduce your Pages for this session. I would ask the 
Pages to rise as I call their names and stay standing. Our Pages 
are: Patrick Button, Mosopefoluwa Ogunrinde — Sope for short 
— Michael Radmacher, Nicolas Stulberg, Kyla Will. A sixth 
Page, Mandy Selzer, will be joining us later this month. She’s 
currently representing Canada at the junior curling 
championship in Korea. 
 
Members, your Pages for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last three 
sessions I’ve presented petitions on behalf of communities 
along Highway 32 from the town of Cabri to the town of 
Leader. I continue that tradition today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are from individuals 
in the communities of Liebenthal, Prelate, Sceptre, Mendham, 
and Herbert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people who have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Invermay, Foam Lake, Regina, and Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition, a number of pages actually, of citizens concerned 
about Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Annaheim, Macklin, 
Tisdale, Quill Lake, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Battleford, 
Kelvington, Kamsack, Viscount, Lake Lenore, Preeceville, 
Bruno, Meacham, Archerwill, Dahlton, and Englefeld. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read a 
petition from constituents who are opposed to possible health 
care reductions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise to present a petition from parents in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much needed elementary 
school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Horlick Crescent, Peters Cove, 
and Rossmo Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens from the town of Davidson that are opposed to the 
closure of the SaskPower office in Davidson. 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the SaskPower office in 
Davidson remain open at its current level of customer 
service and available to all SaskPower customers in the 
Davidson and surrounding service area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from the town of Davidson. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

Petition concerning a new hospital in Humboldt — that’s 
sessional paper no. 47 — and addendums to previously 
tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 4, 7, 8, 13, 19, 
22, 33, 38, and 42. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management: how much revenue did the department 
receive on the sale of the Echo Valley Conference Centre 
to the town of Fort Qu’Appelle? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
number of questions to the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. I give notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: as of 
March 14, 2006, how many overdue boiler inspections are 
there in the Swift Current area? Also as of March 14, 
2006, how many overdue boiler inspections are there in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And another question: as of March 14, 2006, how many 
boiler inspector positions are there in Saskatchewan and 
how many of these positions are vacant? As of March 14, 
’05, how many boiler inspector positions were there in 
Saskatchewan and how many of these positions were 
vacant? And, Mr. Speaker, as of March 14, ’05 how many 
overdue boiler inspections are there in Saskatchewan? 
 
And finally to the minister of public safety and 
corrections: as of March 14, 2005, how many overdue 
boiler inspections were there in the Swift Current area? 
 

Thank you. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have several 
questions to the Minister of Community Resources. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following questions: 

 
To the Minister of Community Resources: has the 
department received any letters or written verbal reports 
from individuals or organizations concerned about the 
welfare of children at the Oyate Safe House, and if so 
when were these letters or reports received by the 
department? 
 
To the same minister: as per recommendations of the 
legislative committee on the prevention of exploitation of 
children through the sex trade, did the department ensure 
that the Oyate Safe House could adequately protect 
children in its care to providing the organization with 
funding, and if so what steps were taken? 
 
To the same minister: how many children have utilized the 
services of the Oyate Safe House since it opened two and a 
half years ago, and how many have ended their 
participation in the sex trade? 
 
To the same minister: how has the department monitored 
the success of these programs being delivered through the 
Oyate Safe House? 
 
To the same minister: is the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment aware of any instances where 
children who resided at the Oyate Safe House have 
returned to work in the sex trade, and if so how many 
children does the department know of who have returned 
to work in the sex trade? 
 
To the same minister: what accountability measures were 
put in place when the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment first provided money to the 
File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council for the Oyate Safe 
House? 
 
To the same minister: did the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment monitor how the money 
provided to the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council was 
being spent, and if so indicate what steps were taken to 
ensure financial oversight of the Oyate Safe House. 
 
To the same minister, final question: how many 
agreements similar to that of the Oyate Safe House does 
the Department of Community Resources have with other 
community organizations that provide services to child 
victims of the sex trade? And what reporting and 
monitoring procedures are currently in place to monitor 
those other organizations? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
the privilege today to introduce two friends of one of our new 
Pages, Kyla Will. In the galleries, Mr. Speaker, are Mercedes 
Will and Hilda May Hobbs. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you and through you to all of the members 
of the Assembly two very special Arlenes that are sitting in 
your gallery. I’ll introduce them separately if I may. 
 
I’d first like to introduce to this Assembly . . . Well both of 
these women are certainly no strangers to members here. The 
first Arlene I’ll introduce is Arlene Heppner. Maybe Arlene will 
stand. 
 
And certainly we’re happy that Arlene’s here because that 
means she’s brought Ben with her. And may I just say at this 
point in introduction of guests that we want to make sure that 
Ben understands, and certainly Arlene understands, that our 
prayers are with him — with Ben — and with the family as they 
fight this newest battle. And we are so very grateful that he is 
here right where he belongs in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
We also want to . . . Yes. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We also want to thank Arlene very publicly for 
her support for Ben and her leadership in their family. As you 
all know, Mr. Speaker, Arlene is an entrepreneur, although I 
understand some changes have recently occurred there and she 
is obviously a mother and a wife, and she is special to the entire 
constituency of Martensville, certainly to the Saskatchewan 
Party. And frankly I would point out that when she 
accompanies Ben down here, Ben seems a little nicer actually 
when Arlene’s with him. 
 
I’d also like to introduce another woman in the gallery, in your 
gallery, who’s no stranger to this Assembly. She was a very, 
very effective member, MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Humboldt and, who knows, might one day 
pursue that career again — I don’t know. Arlene Julé. I wonder 
if Arlene would stand and accept the welcome of members of 
the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to 
introduce one of the legislative interns because I think everyone 
would like to introduce their own. With me during this three 
months part of the session is Haley Gagnon, and she’s sitting up 
there behind the clock. Haley, if you can stand up and wave. 
 
So I want to give you a couple of things about Haley. She’s a 
proud member of the Red River Métis community in both 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba. In 2002 she was selected to 
represent Saskatchewan as a member of the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] commissioner’s national youth 
advisory committee. 
 
Following in the footsteps of her grandfather, father, and 
uncles, Haley has been actively associated with the Canadian 
military. She is currently a member of the 16th Service 
Battalion of the Canadian Armed Forces based in Saskatoon. 
 
She’s in her third year of studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan and she’s pursuing a Bachelor of Arts degree in 
Aboriginal public administration. I’m very happy to have her 
assisting me for these three months. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I have one more. Also up in the 
gallery is Justin Messner. He is the researcher that the Human 
Services Committee, the standing committee of the legislature, 
has hired to assist us during our public hearings. So he’s the 
first person that’s been doing that, and we’d like to welcome 
him here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce an intern as well today. Justin Leifso is the intern for 
myself this time and he gave me a bio for himself which I 
promptly left on my desk. So I’m going to make this up for him. 
 
Justin is attending the U of R [University of Regina] where he’s 
doing his master’s degree in political science and is busy trying 
to work on a thesis. He’s from Moose Jaw and originally from 
Crane Valley which he was surprised that I even remembered. 
Mr. Speaker, Justin is working on a research program for me 
dealing with gaming across Canada and where it’s going. It’s a 
very important issue for all of us across Canada, and I’m sure 
that I will receive an excellent report from Justin in time for his 
duties here. Thank you very much. I’d like to welcome him 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to this Assembly a constituent and also mother of one of our 
Pages, Nicolas Stulberg — Nicolas’s mother, Carol, who is up 
in the gallery. And Carol works for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation, and we’re really glad to have her 
here with us today and also to be able to welcome Nicolas as a 
Page. Thank you and join me in welcoming them please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a Page 
as well, Michel Carpentier, who is . . . intern rather, I’m sorry 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Move my desk to the hall. Mr. 
Speaker, I share this intern with the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Michel was born in Arborfield and raised on a farm near Zenon 
Park. He was active in high school politics and served as a high 
school SRC [student representative council] representative. In 
2004 he obtained a Bachelor of Arts Honours degree in political 
studies with a minor in history from the University of 
Saskatchewan and is currently completing a Master of Arts 
degree in political studies at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he has held several positions with the Arts and 
Science Students’ Union and served as president during the 
2003-2004 academic year. 
 
He has been very active in sports as well and includes baseball, 
volleyball, soccer, football, curling, inter-tube water polo, and 
inner-tube basketball; and is currently a member of the Gopher 
men’s rugby team. 
 
Earlier this fall, Mr. Speaker, he had a large divot on his head as 
a result of a rugby experience, and I note that it has not 
adversely affected his ability to work hard and to provide 
competent work. I know that in a short while he is going to be 
going over and working on the dark side. And I want to tell the 
members opposite that they will be very well received. 
 
We recently did a trip out of town and without prompting he 
was able to bring doughnuts for everyone who was travelling 
with us. So he is fulfilling all of his obligations extremely well, 
and I want to ask all members to welcome Michel to the House 
and appreciate his humour and good work as he works on both 
sides. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very 
honoured to have a member of the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program working with me. The program is valuable 
in that it provides them with the experience to work with an 
MLA and understand how all of the processes work and such. It 
also provides a valuable tool for MLAs in terms of providing 
research for us and also helpful advice on occasion as well. 
 
So I have Stewart Low working with me at this time, and 
perhaps Stewart could rise. He’s received his early education in 
Rouleau, Saskatchewan, and his family subsequently moved to 
Regina where he graduated from Martin Collegiate. Stewart 
was a member of Saskatchewan’s provincial field hockey team 
and also served a stint on the junior national team. Stewart and I 
have a passion for sports in common which is also quite nice. 
He currently holds levels 1 and 2 tactical and technical coaching 
certificates and has held several positions as an executive board 

member of the Saskatchewan Field Hockey Association. 
 
He was enrolled at the University of Saskatchewan and 
graduated in 2005 with a Bachelor of Arts Honours degree. He 
has some very special accomplishments that he can be very 
proud of. His major was in international studies, and his minor 
was in political studies. He has been a member of the Golden 
Key International Honour Society which recognizes students 
whose academic accomplishments place them in the top 15 per 
cent of their college. And during his final year, Stewart’s 
research paper titled “Banking on Development: The Role of 
the International Political Economy as a Tool for Development” 
was nominated for the Barron-Garcea Essay Prize. So he has, 
like I said, a lot of things that he can already be proud of at this 
stage in his life. 
 
Stewart has served as a member-at-large for the International 
Studies Student Association at the University of Saskatchewan. 
And clearly, I would have to say, the proudest accomplishment 
that Stewart would brag about is his marriage to his wife, 
Miranda, who is a teacher with the Saskatoon Public School 
Division. 
 
So I’d like the Chamber to currently welcome Stewart Low to 
the Legislative Assembly and also welcome him to the 
legislature for this session. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce a constituent of mine, Mr. 
David Brown, from the community of Kyle. David Brown is 
vice-president with APAS, the Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan, an organization formed in the 
year 2000 to serve agriculture. 
 
It’s quite a challenge that you and your organization have taken 
on, and we have enjoyed working with them. And we know that 
the producers of Saskatchewan appreciate the fine work that 
David and his organization does on behalf of their industry. It 
could never have happened at a more critical time. And I’d like 
the Assembly to welcome David Brown. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature 
two guests, one from Regina and one from Kelowna — Stella 
Bosley who’s here from Regina and Molly Wunderlich who’s 
visiting us from Kelowna, BC [British Columbia]. 
 
Stella lives in Regina and is recently retired from Sears where 
she spent many years working on behalf of all of us that attend 
to Sears once in awhile. And Molly is a former Saskatchewan 
resident who many years ago moved to Kelowna, but she has a 
habit of coming back to Saskatchewan in the middle of winter. 
She likes visiting the province in winter, and we are extremely 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

pleased to see her here. I know that even though Molly lives in 
British Columbia, she is still a proud Saskatchewan daughter. 
So welcome to the legislature this afternoon, and I hope you 
enjoy question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House a 
very good friend of our family and someone who lives in the 
community of Kenaston which would be in the constituency of 
Arm River. Her name is Margaret George, and we’re happy to 
have her here in her Legislative Assembly. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome her. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I have two other guests that I 
would wish to introduce at this time. They are the parents of 
Michael Radmacher. They are Gordon and Marion Radmacher 
who are both here today to see their son in action. And they are 
both retired school teachers. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

Selection of Lloydminster Constituency Candidate 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, today with the new start of the 
legislature there is also other changes sweeping the province 
and one of which of course is a change in the candidate selected 
for the Lloydminster constituency. A bright, new, young 
candidate was selected last night to a sellout crowd of over 400. 
And I say young because lots of people look young to me at my 
age. 
 
The candidate selected last night was Tim McMillan. Tim 
McMillan, a great selection from a field of six excellent people 
all more than capable of serving our constituency and certainly 
capable of winning the next election over this tired old NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government. What we saw last night 
was youth, excitement, optimism, and hard work by candidates 
and most importantly, over 700 voters in all turned out for 
nomination meetings. 
 
Now Tim McMillan is a young professional with a commitment 
to building his life and his family’s life right here in 
Saskatchewan. He graduated from the University of Victoria 
and he uses his economic degree working in places like 
London, England and other places around the world. He has 
chosen to return to Saskatchewan establishing a business as 
well as becoming a very successful rancher just east of 
Lloydminster. Returning to Saskatchewan, Tim is a role model 
for the young people of our region and indeed for all the 
province. As was said last night at the nomination meeting — 
bring it on. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Celebrating the Life of Saskatchewan’s Oldest Citizen 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to honour the memory and celebrate the remarkable 
life of Mary MacIsaac who passed away Friday in Saskatoon at 
the age of 112. 
 
Mary was Saskatchewan’s oldest resident and at the time of her 
passing, by all accounts, was Canada’s second oldest citizen. I 
think it should be noted that among her many lifelong interests 
and activities Mary was still an enthusiastic cross-country skier 
well into her 11th decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, her incredible longevity is only but one part of an 
extraordinary life. Mary MacIsaac came to this province as an 
immigrant in 1916 from New Brunswick, gave a remarkable 
lifetime to education in this province. She taught in one 
capacity or another from 1919 to 1999 and even to her passing 
remained a teacher. 
 
I was with Mary last year when the two of us were treated to the 
performance by an elementary school choir. And Mary 
MacIsaac said to me during their performance, Premier, you 
know they’re a little bit out of tune but they will learn, they’re 
only young. Throughout her life in this province Mary always 
cited her greatest accomplishment in her family — her husband 
Jack and their five children. 
 
She was a colleague of Tommy Douglas. She was a devoted 
advocate of medicare and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, a lifelong, 
committed social democrat. Mary had a very simple yet 
eloquent motto. She used to say, the only thing that counts in 
life when it’s over is what you’ve done for others. Today we 
recognize the passing of Saskatchewan’s oldest citizen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

A Woman’s Service in Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Wednesday, March 8, was 
International Women’s Day. International Women’s Day is an 
important day around the world because the collective power of 
women is celebrated by millions, and the brave achievements of 
women past, present, and future are respectfully honoured. I 
would like to do so for one such woman in the North 
Saskatchewan Regiment who is currently serving in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Currently there are five members of the North Saskatchewan 
Regiment serving in Afghanistan. One is Lieutenant Guinevere 
Bourque, also an employee at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology], who is serving in 
Afghanistan as part of a civil and military affairs team. 
Lieutenant Bourque’s mission is to work with local Afghan 
officials to determine the most effective way of rebuilding the 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

infrastructure of the country. She works to find out the needs of 
the Afghan people and recommends solutions through the chain 
of command as to how to meet those needs. She was recently 
involved in the provision of services to rebuild a school 
destroyed by the insurgents. 
 
Lieutenant Bourque is typical of all men and women of the 
army reserve who are citizens of our province and who also 
have civilian careers. Many of these people have put their lives 
at risk and have put themselves into significant danger to serve 
our country. In recognition of Lieutenant Bourque’s excellent 
service to our country and to the world, I would like to thank 
her for her valiant service and wish her and her fellow soldiers 
in Afghanistan all the best in their new mission. 
 
I would like to ask all members to join in recognizing 
International Women’s Day, and specifically the 
accomplishments of Lieutenant Bourque and her hard work and 
putting her life at risk. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Welcome to Brier Participants 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to extend a 
warm Saskatchewan welcome to everyone — players, officials, 
and spectators — who are in Regina this week to be part of the 
2006 Tim Hortons Brier and Parti Gras, which of course 
includes a cruise down Beerbon Street and into the Brier Patch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan curling is so much a part of 
our history and our culture that it has been named our provincial 
sport. That’s one reason why I think it’s fitting that this is the 
third time since the year 2000 that the national men’s curling 
championship is being hosted by a Saskatchewan city. Just two 
years ago Saskatoon hosted the 75th Brier and made it an 
incredible success. 
 
That’s the other thing, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people really 
know how to host a party like this — not just organize it, but 
host it with all the skill and enthusiasm and spirit of community 
and volunteerism that goes into putting on a successful, 
high-profile national event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Bernie McIntyre and all the organizers, thanking 
the volunteers, the tremendous work they do, and in welcoming 
the participants of the Brier to Regina and wishing all the 
competitors every success. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the competitors from 
other provinces and territories will understand if we show a lot 
of pride for our Saskatchewan rink — Pat Simmons, Jeff Sharp, 
Chris Haichert, and Ben Hebert — just a little more than the 
rest. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Historic Anniversary of Women’s Suffrage in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, it is a pleasure to rise today to 
commemorate an important day in Saskatchewan history. 
Ninety years ago today women who were British citizens won 
the right to vote in Saskatchewan provincial elections and 
moved forward in our journey towards full equality in the eyes 
of the law. 
 
The question of women’s suffrage was first raised in the 
legislature in 1912 by Conservative member J.E. Bradshaw 
from Prince Albert. In the debate that followed, both 
government and opposition supported the idea in principle. 
However the official position of the provincial government was 
that women would only secure the franchise once they had 
demonstrated it. Saskatchewan women responded by sending 
hundreds of letters and petitions to the government demanding 
the right to vote. 
 
Finally in 1916 Saskatchewan became the second province in 
Canada to extend the franchise to women of British citizenship. 
It was an important step forward for women and paved the way 
for the election of this legislature’s first woman — Sarah 
Ramsland — in 1919 from what was then the riding of Pelly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Yorkton. 
 

Recognition of Saskatchewan’s Olympians 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan loves the Olympics, and we love our 
Olympians. I’d like to congratulate all of our athletes who made 
it to Turin, and congratulations to all those who brought medals 
home. 
 
Shaunavon’s Hayley Wickenheiser and Kennedy’s Colleen 
Sostorics were both part of the gold-medal-winning women’s 
hockey team. Regina’s Justin Warsylewicz won the silver 
medal in speed skating, and Regina’s Amy Nixon won the 
bronze medal in curling. And last but not least, I’d like to 
congratulate Jason Parker, Yorkton’s first ever winter Olympic 
medallist. 
 
Let me tell you briefly about Jason. He started skating before he 
was five. He was soon active in the Melville Speed Skating 
Club, and this winter he realized and surpassed his dream of 
skating in the Olympics by winning a silver medal in speed 
skating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jason’s interests are varied, and he has even spent 
time as a motivational speaker. I understand he once said that, 
quote, “You can do anything if you do it with your whole 
heart.” And we all know that Saskatchewan is a province with 
lots of heart. 
 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

Well, Jason, the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Yorkton can’t help but be motivated by your words, your deeds, 
and most of all by your heart. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Appreciation and Encouragement  
for a Legislative Colleague 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, those of us who have chosen a 
life in politics do so for very deep personal and philosophical 
reasons. We come to the majestic doors of the legislature from 
all over this diverse and wonderful province to make a 
difference in the lives of our fellow citizens. It’s hard to explain 
the life of an MLA, but there’s a side benefit that we all reap, 
and that’s never part of any plan when we are elected. It’s the 
friendships that evolve with people whose paths may never 
have crossed ours were it not for politics. These friendships 
shape the rest of our lives. These friendships impact the way we 
think, discuss, and consider matters. They affect our families, 
and they in some way large or small make a difference in our 
personal world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to thank my friend, the member from 
Rosthern, for coming to the Legislative Assembly to encourage 
and support us on this first day of the new session. It seems 
hard to believe that nearly 11 years ago I saw this member as 
someone I was supposed to disagree with on lots of issues. 
Nothing is further from the truth today. All of us on this side of 
the House — and I daresay maybe some on the other side — 
not only consider him a friend but a genuine man, deeply 
religious and a dedicated politician. Behind that tough exterior 
hides a man whose heart is soft, beliefs are strong, and his 
commitment deep to his family and his constituents. His vision 
for a future different from today never wavers. 
 
I remember a member’s statement that he made a few years ago 
on an issue that’s unimportant today. What is important is my 
memory of the way he lovingly described his new wife when 
they visited the legislature shortly after their marriage. I know 
he sees her today in his heart as the same beautiful woman who 
stood by his side over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that God has decided to again test the 
will and strength of our friend in the next few weeks as he 
undergoes chemotherapy. To our friend and our colleague, you 
won’t be alone in your treatment. We will all be with you in our 
thoughts and our prayers. We need your knowledge, your 
experience, your wit, and your supposed toughness to help us 
deal with issues that affect families in Saskatchewan. You’re a 
big part of our lives. Continue to fight the good fight, my friend, 
and Godspeed coming back to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Jobs and the Economy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier is fond of saying recently that in his Saskatchewan no 
one will be left behind, but it’s not quite true as it turns out, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan under the NDP, under their economic 
policies is . . . we’re losing jobs, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan, 
under the NDP, has lost population — 2,356 over the last year. 
 
And so people are being left behind. Parents are being left 
behind by their kids as they go pursue opportunities elsewhere. 
Grandparents are being left behind as families choose to pursue 
opportunities elsewhere even though this province, with its 
amazing potential, should be providing those opportunities right 
here for those families. And when any of those decide to leave, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan loses part of its future. 
 
We know now from Friday’s Statistics Canada report that 
Saskatchewan amazingly lost 4,400 jobs in the middle of the 
boom. The question to the Premier is very simply this: how in 
the world, how in the world can this province, under failed NDP 
economic policies, be losing jobs and people in the middle of a 
boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to bring a 
report to this legislature today about the state of the 
Saskatchewan economy. Mr. Speaker, this economy in 2005 
had a GDP [gross domestic product] growth of 3.8 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our oil and gas well drilling was up 3.4 
per cent. New capital investment up 4.6 per cent. Our potash 
production was up 5.1. Our retail sales were up 7.6 per cent. 
Our manufacturing shipments up 8.2 per cent and our 
international export of goods up a total of 13.4 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s an economy, Mr. Speaker, that is 
booming. Mr. Speaker, that economy is producing jobs. There 
are jobs in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The challenge for this economy, the challenge for this 
government, and the challenge for our province is matching the 
people of our province with these job opportunities which are in 
this economy, and hence our vision that no one should be left 
behind on this path of opportunity we are creating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s the amazing answer of 
the government. The Statistics Canada report is clear that in the 
middle of a boom that Premier and that NDP government is 
actually costing the province of Saskatchewan 4,400 jobs. And 
the government says well those, we haven’t lost jobs. We just 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

have, we just have a labour shortage, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
answer that the Premier has given. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that 
the province of Alberta, it’s also experiencing a labour shortage 
more acutely than even here. The same is true in the province of 
British Columbia. The same is true in the province of Manitoba 
with far fewer resources than we have. 
 
What’s happening in those provinces, Mr. Speaker? Manitoba 
created 4,000 new jobs; Alberta, 64,000 new jobs; British 
Columbia, 72,000 new jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The labour shortage most acute in the province of 
Saskatchewan is the shortage of any NDP MLA that has a clue 
about growing an economy, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 
question for the Premier. Answer it — I hope he will do in this 
opportunity — why, under his policies, are we shedding jobs 
and losing population in the middle of a boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to talk about growth in the economy. Let me 
share with the Leader of the Opposition the independent 
observers of this economy and their predictions for growth in 
Saskatchewan. It is predicted that GDP growth in Saskatchewan 
this year, 2006, will be 3 per cent. It is predicted that capital 
investment in this province in this year will be at a level of 6.7 
per cent. And it is predicted, Mr. Speaker, that the level of 
private-sector investment in Saskatchewan this year will be 9.2 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are jobs in this economy. If the Leader of the 
Opposition would care just to look around, he would see 
everywhere help-wanted signs in our businesses. If he spoke to 
the private sector, he would know the reality of needing to find 
workers for the opportunities in this province. The question, 
Mr. Speaker, the question is, does that leader, does that party 
have any plan, any vision at all on how we are going to meet 
this challenge? They are just not credible with the kinds of 
plans that they have delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We have a vision to meet this new 
opportunity in this new economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, won’t the 2,356 people who 
had to leave the province find comfort in the Premier’s words. 
They had to leave here last year. Won’t their families find 
comfort in the Premier talking about percentage increases and 
this stat and this stat that are only predicted, that are only 
forecast. 
 
We have seen those forecasts in the past, and we on this side of 
the House understand the amazing potential of this province 
that would cause those economists to make the forecasts. But 

what they can’t calculate, Mr. Speaker, is the stunning 
economic incompetence of this social democratic government, 
Mr. Speaker, because notwithstanding the predictions, we’ve 
lost jobs — 4,400 of them. Notwithstanding the predictions, we 
have lost 2,356 people. 
 
I think it’s a brand problem in part, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got to 
get the fundamentals right, but it’s a brand problem. This 
Premier represents a government that, on its website, proclaims 
the Regina Manifesto that calls for the eradication of capitalism. 
It might be the only promise he’s actually keeping. He has an 
Economic Development minister who said, Mr. Speaker, that 
when people leave, there’s more left for the rest of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To the Premier: what does he have in store for the economy? 
What is he going to do to turn things around so that we’re no 
longer losing people and jobs in the middle of a boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is one Premier and one 
leader and one government caucus that is very proud of its 
history in this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Very proud of its history, unlike the 
members opposite. I tell you what they don’t put on their 
website is their history, and that’s for sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not talking about predicted growth. I just 
reported to this House real GDP growth in this year 2005 — 3.8 
per cent. That’s in a leadership capacity across Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. We are creating jobs, and we have the broad vision 
and the broad plan to equip Saskatchewan people to access 
those opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about making this a more competitive 
environment for investment to create those jobs. We talk about 
the investments in education and skills training for our young 
people. We are working with Aboriginal people, First Nations 
and Métis peoples, to equip those young people for this 
opportunity. 
 
We’re talking about immigration, expanding immigration. 
We’re talking about infrastructure, research commitments. And 
we’re talking about building a social fabric where people will 
want to make their long-term homes. 
 
What do they talk about? Tax cuts and declaring war on 
working people. That’s what they talk about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about that the fact 
that he’s proud of the history — 60 years of history, Mr. 
Speaker, over the span of which this province, notwithstanding 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

its amazing potential, hasn’t grown. We have not grown at all 
when almost every other province in the Dominion has. It’s 
true, Mr. Speaker, there is 60 years of socialist history 
unimpeded by progress or an idea on how to grow economy, I 
might add, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the brand problems caused by this government for 
this province that we all love, the brand problem is evidenced 
further by another MLA who recently said . . . an NDP MLA 
who said she believes it’s impossible for us to grow even at the 
national average of 1 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s part of the 
bland . . . the brand problem — well frankly, maybe a bit of a 
bland problem as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have seen the industry minister currently when faced 
with these statistics say, well the situation isn’t totally bleak. 
We hear the Premier refer to this province as the wee province. 
Mr. Speaker, why would he ask the people of Saskatchewan to 
believe in him when he clearly doesn’t believe in the dynamic 
potential of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in partnership with 
Saskatchewan people we brought this province back from the 
brink of bankruptcy left behind by that party. We have spent, 
we have spent — and history repeats itself, Mr. Speaker; other 
social democratic governments have come along and have had 
to clear up and clean up after right-wing governments — we’ve 
spent a decade in building this economy. We’ve taken this 
province, Mr. Speaker, from one of the basket cases in Canada 
to a have province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s what we’ve done. We’ve taken 
our energy resources. We’ve taken our mining resources. We’ve 
taken our manufacturing sector. We’ve taken our research and 
development sector, and we’ve seen them prosper, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve stood by our farm families through some of the toughest 
years that they’ve had to battle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’re working, we’re working today 
with our northern communities and our northerners in Prince 
Albert in the challenge we have in forestry. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a government that has partnered with the people of 
Saskatchewan, with the potential of this province. And we are 
bringing it to flower, and we are bringing it to a great future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know what, Mr. Speaker? We’re talking 
about a vision for the economy and a plan to get it going again. 
It’s amazing that the Premier would bring up the fact that we’ve 

obtained have-province status because when that occurred not 
that long ago in the province of Saskatchewan, what did the 
Premier do? What did he say when asked about our 
have-province status? It was reported in the Leader-Post. 
 
He tried to lower expectations for this province. What he said, 
and it was recorded in the Leader-Post was, you know, Mr. 
Speaker, we ought not to be too, too convinced that this could 
continue. He said, we will always be in and out of equalization. 
That’s what the Premier of Saskatchewan said. He calls us a 
wee province. He says we’re always going to need fiscal 
welfare from the federal government from time to time. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? The people of the province of 
Saskatchewan reject that kind of plan for mediocrity, that kind 
of a weak vision. And they reject the results of that vision, Mr. 
Speaker, which are — what? — a loss in jobs and a loss in 
people in the midst of a boom. What is the Premier going to do 
about that? We’re losing jobs and people in a boom. What is his 
plan for our economy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition is very, very good at issuing criticism but very short 
on plan and vision for the future. Now since that party was 
formed and particularly since he took over his leadership, all we 
get is dumping on Saskatchewan, criticizing Saskatchewan. 
 
At least when the former member over there was leading that 
party, they at least laid before the people a plan. I may have 
disagreed with the plan but at least it was a plan. 
 
All we hear from this new Leader of the Opposition are two 
things. He goes on province-wide radio, and he says he’s going 
to declare war on working people. And that’s supposed to make 
an unbreakable social fabric, I guess. And then, Mr. Speaker, he 
says there’s one solution, there’s one solution — and I think he 
goes to Calgary all the time to get these ideas — he says there’s 
one solution. We just need to cut taxes and that will be the 
nirvana for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand about building a competitive 
investment climate to create jobs for our young people. But we 
know it’s much more. It’s education. It’s infrastructure. It’s 
research. It’s a broad-based vision and a plan from a party and a 
government who believe in the future of this province and will 
always put the future of people ahead of politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Readiness of Addiction Treatment Beds 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier claims to be 
concerned about young people with drug addictions, and he 
claims that no one’s going to be left behind. Yet young people 
with addictions are being left behind because this government is 
dragging its feet when it comes to addiction treatments. We 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

need beds and not promises. Addiction workers in this province 
are calling his plan project hype or project hopeless. 
 
Can the Premier tell us why there will be no permanent 
addiction facilities or long-term treatment beds in Saskatchewan 
until after the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve said and the Premier has said that the opposition 
on this issue has some credibility. So it really makes wonder 
why in the last number of months that they’ve continually 
worked very hard to undermine that very credibility. 
 
In fact just recently, a member from Saskatoon on the 
opposition side said there’ll be no new beds until 2008. That 
was two weeks after I was touring the new six-beds unit at the 
Calder Centre, Mr. Speaker. I don’t understand why they’re 
taking the little bit of credibility they do have on this issue and 
undermining that. 
 
We’ve got a very impressive program that has been 
award-winning from the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse 
and that we will be implementing some very good programs. 
We’ve already implemented very many in the past. We’re well 
on the road of implementing all of the initiatives within Project 
Hope. Thank you much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what this government has to 
realize is we know there’s detox beds. What we need is 
treatment beds — long-term treatment beds. That’s what the 
government has opened is detox beds, and maybe they should 
recognize there is a difference. 
 
People at Teen Challenge understand there is a difference. Teen 
Challenge would be expanding their current addiction treatment 
facility from 12 beds to 35 beds. And they’ll open their doors 
this fall. Then they’re going to start on a treatment facility for 
women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government putting politics 
before people? Why is it that Teen Challenge can put more beds 
on line in a short period of time and this government is forcing 
people with addictions to wait until after the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member, I 
can assure the House that the new beds that will be coming on 
will be here long before the provincial election unless the 
Premier gets excited and calls one within the next month, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s Project Hope 
has a four-point plan: prevention and education, supply 
reduction, treatment, and coordination. Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition can focus on the narrow beds part of it. And that’s a 
very important part of the treatment continuum. 
 
But the member knows, as do other members there, that that is 
just one small part of that. However, Mr. Speaker, very soon 
we’ll have new beds here in Saskatchewan. We’ve partnered 
with P.A. [Prince Albert] Grand Council. I don’t want to scoop 
any announcements that they have in the short order, but we’re 
moving very quickly, Mr. Speaker. And I would be more than 
happy to involve the member as we get closer to the 
announcement so that she knows what’s going on. Thank you 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not me that needs to know 
what’s going on. It’s the people of the province that need to 
know what’s going on. We don’t have to listen to another 
promise about it’s going to be opening before the next election. 
When are the beds going to be open or when’s the next election 
going to be? And when are the kids going to get an addiction 
centre with the treatment where they can look after their 
addictions and actually be safe? That’s what we’re asking this 
government. When are the beds going to be open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, premier Project Hope has a 
large number of initiatives. It was announced last August, six 
months ahead of schedule. Mr. Speaker, our concern are for 
those that are battling the addiction. We’ve wanted to make sure 
that we have a number of initiatives on the prevention side. 
 
I was very happy to see well over 350 people at the conference 
that we held in Saskatoon. We expected 200, Mr. Speaker. We 
actually had to turn people away; it was that popular . . . 
training the addiction workers, Mr. Speaker, and providing the 
information. Mr. Speaker, we’ve provided information to the 
schools. We’ve got the HealthLine that’s available. We’ve got 
the support for parents right across the continuum, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not only about beds, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve already got the 
six youth detox beds in Saskatoon. We’ll have some treatment 
beds in Prince Albert in very short order, well ahead of 
schedule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve established a plan. We’re implementing 
that plan. It will be implemented well ahead of 2008, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Safety Concerns for Residents of Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of a freedom of information application, we’ve received 
further information on the Oyate Safe House in Regina, 
information that raises some serious concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to the Minister of Community 
Resources: can the minister assure this Assembly that children 
currently living at the Oyate Safe House in Regina are safe? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The Oyate Safe House is a very important part of our joint 
effort as MLAs and members of the opposition and government 
in terms of a joint effort to try and reduce the amount of 
children and youth involved in the sex trade on city streets and 
other streets. 
 
The Oyate Safe House has been working now for the last three 
years. And some of the issues raised in the media, these issues 
were raised back in 2004. 
 
I am pleased to report that that work has continued and will 
continue in terms of building capacity, so we are able to 
respond as a government and as a people to this growing 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that many changes have been 
made at Oyate Safe House. That includes a new executive 
director. That certainly includes a new facility of which our 
federal government graciously helped. It also included work to 
begin strengthening hiring and training of staff, Mr. Speaker. 
Good progress has been made and we need to continue that kind 
of work. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister 
assure this Assembly that all children currently living in the 
Oyate Safe House in Regina are not participating in the sex 
trade? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as we develop capacity to 
respond to this growing problem, it is important to note that this 
is a voluntary program. And it’s also very important to note, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is not a secure facility. We are trying to 
make it very attractive for kids to come off the street, go to the 
safe house, and get counselling and support as best we can — 
and make it as easy as possible, Mr. Speaker. 

This is not a boot camp. This is not a secure facility, so to 
speak. We are trying to reach out to the kids and give them 
what really is a safe house and an opportunity for them to get 
off the street. So in terms of us saying, look we’re going to 
force you to do certain things, we cannot be in that position of 
making sure that kids aren’t involved in any kind of activities 
that are illegal after they leave the safe house. We’re trying to 
reach out to them and to point out to them that this kind of 
activity is not healthy and that you have different options 
available to you. 
 
So to respond to the question, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue 
working with this problem, and it is a good opportunity for 
people to realize the problem exists and that good work is being 
done. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister 
tell this Assembly why his department suspended referrals of 
children under the age of 16 to the safe house? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think the important part 
here is, as we develop what I think is a response to our effort as 
a government and as a people, as a people to have a 40-bed 
facility, we knew that the Oyate Safe House would be a big part 
of that. And it is a big part of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we develop capacity, we learn many lessons as we go 
through this process of responding to this crime and this 
problem. So I point out that it is very important that as we train 
and retrain staff to respond to this growing crisis that there is 
some capacity challenges, as we’ve indicated to many, many 
people and on many occasions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to respond to the question, the bottom line is 
we are going to work very closely with as many clients as we 
can with as many groups as we can, and that certainly dictates a 
myriad of approaches in terms of different groups and age 
groups. Oyate Safe House will work with the young kids and 
the children who are at risk and will continue doing so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll rephrase the 
question. Can the minister tell us when he suspended referrals 
of children under the age of 16 to the safe house or have those 
referrals resumed or when will they be resumed? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of this 
specific question, and I’ll certainly get back to the member in 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

terms of a more detailed response. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Can the minister inform the Assembly of 
the results of a police and internal investigation into allegations 
of assault on a resident by an employee of the safe house? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as these allegations come 
forward we take the allegations very seriously. I think it’s also 
very important . . . As a new minister for this portfolio, I’ve 
asked my staff for a detailed update on the progress and some 
of the challenges associated with Oyate Safe House. 
 
The important note to point out here, Mr. Speaker, is that this is 
a high-risk group of kids that we’re dealing with. It is an 
incredible challenge to try and respond to children and youth 
involved in the sex trade. It is very, very challenging. So as we 
go down this path, there are going to be different approaches. 
There’s going to be lessons learned. And as we build this 
capacity to respond to it, there are going to be, as I mentioned 
before, certain challenges that we have to meet. There’s no 
question that as we build this capacity we’re going to learn 
more and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we owe it to our children and our youth to make 
every effort to learn from our current experiences and build a 
bigger and better model to respond to this growing problem. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Written Questions 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last November during the fall session we asked a number of 
questions of the NDP government: written questions related to 
fraud, questions about cheques and balances and what frauds 
have been discovered in government. Now we’ve had two more 
cases of fraud coming forward. That’s a total of five — in the 
Department of Environment, Department of Community and 
Resources, two in Liquor and Gaming, and now in Corrections 
and Public Safety. 
 
Mr. Premier, when will you answer these written . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I ask the member to 
direct his questions to the Chair. The member will continue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When will the 
Premier answer these written questions? Will he do so today 
and will he be telling us why his government is hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, you know, the world has 
changed substantially since the Leader of the Opposition 
worked in one of the offices of the Devine government. In those 
days, Mr. Speaker, it was the practice when written questions 
were submitted that they were not answered. That’s quite 
contrary, Mr. Speaker, to the practice of this government. 
 
It has been the practice, it is the strong history of this 
government, to answer written questions. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
point out that in the fall session there were 564 questions 
submitted — 564 — substantially more than would normally be 
the case in an entire year. And, Mr. Speaker, those questions, 
many of them had many parts. 
 
They are complex questions. We want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, 
that the answers provided will be appropriate to the questions. 
We take them very seriously to ensure that they will be properly 
done and they will be provided to this House long before 
they’re required by the rules of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 
QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day I would 
like to read into the record a message from Her Majesty The 
Queen, and I would ask all to rise for the message. 
 
A message from Her Majesty The Queen, Head of the 
Commonwealth, titled “Health and Vitality, The 
Commonwealth Challenge.” 

 
There are few feelings more satisfying than waking to a 
new day with a sense of wellbeing. Good health is a 
precious gift. 
 
Yet many do not share in this. Some forty million people 
today are living with HIV/AIDS, well over half of whom 
are Commonwealth citizens. Half a million women die 
each year in pregnancy and childbirth — and the death of 
any mother has huge consequences for the rest of the 
family. Yet very many of these deaths are preventable with 
adequate healthcare. Ignorance and lack of understanding 
about these issues sometimes breed uncertainty, even fear 
and the inclination to turn from those who are unwell. But 
we know, for example, that someone who is HIV positive 
can, with proper support, lead a full and rewarding life. 
 
I am pleased that Commonwealth governments are playing 
their part in tackling disease and improving health for all. 
Polio, for example, used to cast its shadow across many 
countries. Today, thanks to concerted international action, 
just a handful still need to eliminate polio. The same 
approach and commitment to other global scourges, such 
as malaria and tuberculosis, can achieve equally 
impressive results. 

 
There is also much we can do through non-governmental 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

organisations and especially as individuals. Poor health is 
sometimes linked to the way we choose to live. But many 
of us can often take steps to eat better food or to take more 
exercise. We can also as communities work to improve our 
surroundings to make them cleaner, safer places in which 
to live. 

 
The importance of good health is so wonderfully 
exemplified on the sports field. Sporting events can be the 
spur to extraordinary human achievement. Sport also 
demonstrates the value of co-operation and team-work, 
and the importance of mental and physical control. In 
Melbourne, in just a few days’ time, I will be opening 
what are known as ‘The Friendly Games’. Commonwealth 
athletes will gather once more in a spirit of goodwill and 
fellowship, and will strive to achieve new heights of 
excellence. As we watch our finest sportsmen and women 
compete, we will see clearly what exercise at the very 
highest level can contribute to both body and spirit. 
 
There is a traditional proverb which says, ‘He who hath 
health has hope, and he who has hope has everything.’ 
This year, as governments search for new ways to tackle 
these important challenges, we as individuals can also play 
our part so that, in pursuing health and vitality for all, we 
bring hope to the world. 
 

[Signed] Elizabeth R. 
13 March 2006 
 
I thank you. 
 
Why is the member for Regina Qu’Appelle on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to move a motion under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s requested leave to move a 
motion under rule 49. Could the member state the nature of the 
motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Crisis in Agriculture 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the motion will be seeking full support of this 
Assembly around the issue of agriculture, the negative net 
incomes, and the challenges facing our farm families today. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the text of that motion 
so the people will understand where we are heading with it: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the response of the federal 
government to the present cash flow crisis for producers in 
the agriculture sector, but in doing so this Assembly also 
urge the federal government to provide a fair and equitable 
formula for the 2006 Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization program with a disaster component, and to 
provide a minimum one-time cash payment of at least 
$200 million to Saskatchewan producers in response to the 
fact that the agricultural crisis is a global problem beyond 
the control of producers and the provincial government; 
 

And further that this Assembly urge the federal 
government to allow the current democratic mechanisms 
in the Canadian Wheat Board Act to be the mechanisms by 
which the future of the Canadian Wheat Board as a 
single-desk seller is determined. 

 
That would be the nature of the motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Qu’Appelle, the 
Minister of Ag and Food, has requested leave of this Assembly 
to put the motion that requires unanimous consent. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you also to members opposite. I know this is a 
concern which certainly reaches far beyond partisan politics, 
and we know that there are many people in Saskatchewan today 
who are hurting as a result of many conditions in the agriculture 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over these past few years there have been 
problems created by nature, problems created by a rising 
Canadian dollar, problems created simply by the low 
commodity prices that farmers are being paid for their product, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I really welcome this opportunity to 
join with colleagues to speak about the Saskatchewan 
agriculture industry. 
 
In my comments I want to focus particularly on the difficult 
situation that is facing our farmers today. Mr. Speaker, in 2005 
there was a $77.1 million negative net income. This year it is 
projected, even after funds that will be coming in, to be in the 
neighbourhood of $200 million, and that is compared to the 
previous average of 336 million positive dollars. Mr. Speaker, 
this is of grave concern to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I was in church on Sunday morning, the scripture that 
was read was from First Corinthians, chapter 12. And it is a 
piece of scripture that I think is certainly known by most people 
of Christian background, but it is where Paul talks to the church 
in Corinth about the nature of the body. And he talks about how 
important each part of the body is to the health and well-being 
of the whole, that even though the hand might think it’s great, 
the hand can’t pluck out the eye and say, I don’t need you. No 
part should be excluded. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have heard people, as I’ve travelled the 
province, I’ve heard people say, well you know, we should just 
let the farmers be. You know, let the laissez-faire process take 
place and if they can’t make it, they can’t make it. Mr. Speaker, 
these are our neighbours, our friends, and they need the support 
of the rest of the body, the rest of the community. 
 
The scripture goes on to talk about how important it is that each 
part of the body care for the whole. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it 
is our responsibility as people in community, whether we are 
Christian or not Christian, to remember that there is an element 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

of our society that is hurting deeply today and needs the great 
help that we can provide in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a province we have provided some significant 
support over this last few years. We have looked at the whole 
life of agriculture in Saskatchewan. We have seen, Mr. Speaker, 
over these past years the impacts of BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy]. We have seen the beef industry and the people 
who are involved in the cattle industry suffer significant losses, 
Mr. Speaker, but we invested in that industry and we worked to 
keep prices at least up close to a normal level so that they would 
be able to sustain their operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have programs in place that we have funded 
fully to try and make sure that there is always enough money to 
keep going in agriculture. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t 
enough. Some people have not been able to continue on. And 
we have in my office, Mr. Speaker, received many phone calls 
from farmers, farm families who are just breaking. There is 
little hope in their hearts, Mr. Speaker. They are in significant 
trouble. Sometimes it’s a third, fourth generation farm and a 
young person is calling to say, we need some help because, Mr. 
Speaker, because they just simply can’t see a way to make it 
through until the next year. 
 
And sometimes there are tears, Mr. Speaker. Lots of times 
there’s anger. But the biggest thing for us to keep in mind is, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are real structural problems that keep 
these people — who produce product which is very, very 
important for the well-being not only of this province but this 
nation — to keep them in a situation where they can continue to 
operate viable farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a province we have provided significant dollars 
through the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
program and through other programs in past years. We are 
providing an additional $84.2 million to the original $99 million 
— $183 million, Mr. Speaker, for the CAIS program for 2005. 
In combination with the federal government’s share, that means 
approximately 420 million is expected to flow through CAIS. 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, in ’04 we funded about $400 
million and in ’03 about $485 million. 
 
Along with that there is over $100 million that goes in through 
the crop insurance program annually to help farmers who face 
some disaster. The crop insurance paid in 2002 over $1 billion 
to Saskatchewan producers. In fact the program paid out over 
$2 billion in the last five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Still this industry is struggling, and it’s not because it’s not a 
viable industry. Mr. Speaker, the producers in this province are 
efficient. They provide a product that is very vital to our 
economy. 
 
There are very, very few wealth-creating areas in any economy. 
There are natural resources, Mr. Speaker, and we’re doing well 
in that area with our oil production and with our mineral 
production in this province. And the other area, Mr. Speaker, 
that is really capable of producing wealth is primary agriculture 
production. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that that wealth doesn’t stay with 
the primary producer. The wealth goes out through the rest of 

the system, and various elements that touch the primary product 
are doing extremely well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the issues today around 
agriculture, we know that there is significantly more need. Our 
government heard the appeal of the farmers to try and provide 
some relief for them. And in trying to provide relief that we 
could within our budget, Mr. Speaker, and relief that would be 
sustainable, we were able to add another $52.8 million to the 
farm land property tax to reduce the pressures on them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I was talking with agricultural economists at the 
University of Saskatchewan yesterday. And they said to me, 
you know, it’s good that you were able as a government to 
provide that relief on property tax. But you know, that’s not the 
real problem for farmers. If you figure it out, it’s about $1.45 an 
acre that goes into property tax. 
 
Guess what it is for transportation per acre: 146 bucks an acre. 
That’s a problem, Mr. Speaker, a real problem for farmers. 
Transportation has been a huge issue for many years in this 
province. 
 
We used to have a subsidy that helped with those transportation 
issues, Mr. Speaker. It was removed a number of years ago. 
And what happened? The actual problem there, Mr. Speaker, 
that was created by that removal was farmers still had to pay for 
shipping their goods, and 500 million was taken out of the 
Saskatchewan economy and kept by the federal government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They continue to keep that amount annually that would have 
flown into the province to help with transportation issues. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, that money is coming out of the pockets of 
the primary producers. And they can’t afford it any longer, Mr. 
Speaker; they can’t afford to lift up the rest of the economy on 
their backs. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what they have 
been doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a province we have within the limits of our 
fiscal ability been providing substantial support for the farmers 
of this province. Mr. Speaker, just for comparison I would like 
to note what our per capita expenditures are relative to those of 
some of the other provinces. 
 
[14:45] 
 
If we look alone, Mr. Speaker, at the business risk management 
sector we find that in Saskatchewan we are paying . . . in 2004 
we were paying $391 per capita for business risk management 
alone compared with Ontario’s $28 per capita — $28 per capita. 
This province is right there, Mr. Speaker, as our Premier said 
earlier today, is right there providing substantial support for the 
farmers of this province. 
 
And it doesn’t end with business risk management. Mr. 
Speaker, the investments that this province is making in 
research and development to help move the industry forward, to 
help build success is clear. Just last week we put $4.6 million 
into programs at the University of Saskatchewan that will help 
us to develop frost-tolerant wheat. What a difference that would 
have made in 2004 had we the degree or two or three of frost 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

tolerance, Mr. Speaker. The millions of dollars that that would 
have meant in producers pockets. So we’re investing in the 
future by trying to encourage the research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also investing through PST [provincial 
sales tax] rebates on the inputs into farming to try and cushion 
those costs. Would that the corporations, the corporations who 
are making many of them record profits, would that they had 
some similar consideration for those people who have been 
buying their products faithfully for many years. Would that 
those companies pay attention to what’s happening to those 
upon whom they build their wealth. It’s time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the numbers and we can see what 
needs to be done. Those people, those farmers who brought in 
own-use glyphosate last year at about four and a quarter a litre 
were getting good results on their farms as a result of that 
product. If they were buying one of the brand names, Mr. 
Speaker, out there from this province they’d be paying 6, 7, $8 
for that same litre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the companies are making huge profits that 
agriculture is generating for them and the primary producer is 
bring skinned. We need our federal government to take some 
action that will help change this situation. 
 
Not only, Mr. Speaker, is it those chemical companies that are 
reaping huge profits but, Mr. Speaker, the transportation system 
is doing the same. Record profits for the Canadian National 
Railway last year. And you look at the amount of money that 
they’re charging for moving the grain. Look at the penalties 
because they don’t move it fast enough. 
 
And we’ve tried to make changes, Mr. Speaker; they resist at 
every level. We’ve tried to get in alternatives around the 
tracking to try and get in joint use of track, joint running rights. 
Mr. Speaker, they fight tooth and nail to reduce competition, to 
keep competition out of the rail system so that we can try and 
make sure that at least with competition the farmers may get a 
bit better deal as they move their product out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many ways that this province has been 
working hard to provide support for farmers to help them get 
through these years of crisis. We have put in in the last couple 
of years . . . Add in all the support payments, the investments 
that we make, the support that is provided through the 
department, Mr. Speaker, and we have put in way over $1.3 
billion since April of 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t resent doing that. We know that if we 
could do more, we would do more, Mr. Speaker, but it has to be 
effective. And that’s one of the crucial issues that we call upon 
our federal government to help fund effective support. 
 
And how many times we have said that we cannot, Mr. 
Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan cannot compete with the 
treasuries of the United States of America or the treasuries of 
the European Union. We simply as a province cannot compete, 
especially when the federal government over the past decade 
has taken billions of dollars out of our annual revenues that we 
used to get, Mr. Speaker. We now turn to them and say they 
must help us. They must help the farmers of Saskatchewan and 
they must enable them, not only through funding because 

farmers don’t want subsidies. They want to be paid for the 
product that they’re growing that creates so much wealth within 
our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need our federal government to come to the 
table. It is a shame that they would allow us to even say 
publicly that there is going to be a realized negative net income 
of over $200 million. How can they allow that to happen, Mr. 
Speaker, with the billions that they have pulled out of this 
province over the last couple of decades? 
 
With a new government there, Mr. Speaker, we are hoping and 
we are praying that this government will respond to the needs of 
the people of this province; that they will respond to the needs 
of our farmers and that they will make substantial payment to at 
least bring us up to even. A minimum payment, Mr. Speaker, 
added to what the former government was putting in — the 290 
million that was rolling in this year — a minimum increase of 
$200 million on top of that would at least get us to zero. And 
then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the supports that we 
can provide as a province will really help the farmers to be able 
to move ahead and to survive through these difficult years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And add to that, if they would make some substantial legislative 
changes that would deal with the transportation issues, that 
would deal with the corporate profits that the chemical 
companies and some of the grain companies and the 
transportation companies are making. Mr. Speaker, they are 
making huge fortunes off the backs of Saskatchewan farmers. 
And our federal government can act and needs to act to make 
sure that our producers get an adequate return for the work that 
they are doing, the hard work and the vitally important work 
that they are doing in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years there have been many changes in 
agriculture and the costs in agriculture have continued to 
increase as farmers try to be good stewards. We have seen 
movements to zero till, Mr. Speaker. And the cost of inputs to 
enable that zero till have been high, Mr. Speaker. We need a 
federal government that will allow our farmers to be good 
stewards, to use the best agricultural practices, not to skimp and 
cut and not be able to produce the way that they should be 
producing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The federal government has promised that they will. And I met 
with Chuck Strahl, the federal minister just last week and he has 
made clear that they are already rolling out the $755 million 
that the former Liberal federal government promised. And I was 
pleased that they were rolling it out as quickly as they could. 
 
The other thing that was promised in the federal election by our 
current federal government was that they would add another 
$500 million to the agriculture budget. This is absolutely 
essential, Mr. Speaker, a minimum of $500 million added. And 
I would like to see that added in ways that will have maximum 
effect. 
 
It is our hope that — since we already know that we are going 
to be dealing with the CAIS program in 2006 — it is our hope 
that they will make adjustments in that program, that they will 
add the disaster component that we as provincial ministers are 
unanimous in asking for. The disaster component that would 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

say that whenever margins dropped more than 50 per cent then 
the federal government would fund 100 per cent of that drop. 
Mr. Speaker, that would make a substantial difference to the 
province’s and our ability to respond. 
 
All the provinces are asking for this change. Mr. Speaker, it is 
our hope that the federal government will make those changes 
immediately so that it will lower the burden on the provincial 
governments and respond to the deep need that farmers are 
facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see more need for change within that CAIS 
program. There’s a review going on and we want to see it be 
more effective. We want to see a program that will make sure 
that farmers get the payments in a timely manner. We want to 
make sure that those who through some error — whether theirs 
or accountant’s error or a processing error — are called to make 
a repayment, Mr. Speaker, we want to see something done so 
that they are not penalized while forms are being processed, that 
they are not compelled to pay interest while they are waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many changes that we want to see in that 
program as well as the business risk management programs, Mr. 
Speaker, that we know need to be changed to be effective, as 
well as the legislation that we want to see changed around 
transportation and how corporations can seem to make so much 
money off the backs of primary producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me be fair, Mr. Speaker, if I were on a corporate board 
it would be my fiscal responsibility to make sure that the 
shareholder got the maximum return. Those people who are 
running those operations are doing exactly what their job is but, 
Mr. Speaker, they do it within the limits of legislation. Today 
we would like to see legislation change so that the primary 
producer gets a larger portion of the agriculture pie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, there is another issue 
that has been brought forward. It came out of the campaign 
promises of the federal Conservative government, and that is 
around the Canadian Wheat Board. In their campaign they were 
saying that they were going to change it, and there’s all kinds of 
estimates as to what they meant by changing it — whether they 
were going to get rid of it, whether they were going to simply 
get rid of single-desk selling. Mr. Speaker, there’s been a lot of 
discussion about what is in line for the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
It is our contention and our belief, Mr. Speaker, that within the 
Canadian Wheat Board Act there are mechanisms, there is a 
democratic process that can be used to make changes, Mr. 
Speaker, to determine whether or not there should be 
single-desk selling. 
 
The current Wheat Board electoral process is now being 
reviewed. It is effective today but it is being reviewed to try and 
make it even more effective. It enables farmers who grow 
Board grains to determine the direction of their marketing 
agency. Mr. Speaker, it’s like a co-op marketing pool in a sense 
in that all those who are part of that pool, the members of the 
co-op, have a legal right to determine its future, Mr. Speaker. 
And we urge the federal government to let western Canadian 
farmers who use the . . . to use the process described in the 

Canadian Wheat Board Act to decide what mechanisms they 
want to market their grain. There’s a process in place. That’s 
the process we want to see used. 
 
Now the reason why I’m emphasizing this, Mr. Speaker, is 
because I think there are a lot of risks that people are not really 
thinking about when they say, yes we’ve got to get rid of the 
Canadian Wheat Board because then you know we’re going to 
get value-added processing in the province. It’s going to fix a 
lot of the woes that we’ve been having. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I remember that that was exactly the kind of 
language that was used about getting rid of the Crow rate. If we 
could just get rid of the Crow rate, you know, it would stop all 
this grain moving out of the country; we’d see a lot more 
value-added development. Mr. Speaker, it was to be the 
panacea, the solution to the income problem of farmers. 
 
Well it wasn’t the case, Mr. Speaker. In fact, as I said earlier, it 
was $500 million a year scooped out of the provincial economy, 
scooped out of the farmers’ pockets by the federal government, 
and that has been going on since the change was made. Today 
we’re hearing the same arguments about why we should get rid 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. Are there risks in getting rid of 
the wheat board? You bet there are. 
 
I want to highlight a few of those risks. Mr. Speaker, as the 
wheat board has evolved — and it is continuing to evolve — it 
has been working to try and make sure that there are processes 
by which they can support the development of value-added 
production in the province. That’s important. We want to see 
that evolution continue. But, Mr. Speaker, there have also been 
other developments in this province that, if the Canadian Wheat 
Board was to be taken out of the picture, there is serious 
question as to whether these other institutions would survive. 
 
First of all we are told, and there have been many studies done, 
but we are told that somewhere . . . there is a premium of 
somewhere between 10 and $14 a tonne that farmers get 
through the marketing of the Canadian Wheat Board. Mr. 
Speaker, for those producers who have been using the CGC 
[Canadian Grain Commission] process and using the wheat 
board for producer car loading, they talk about another $10 or 
more a tonne that they save through their producer car loading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without a Canadian Wheat Board, producer car 
loading is at risk. Now I’m not just talking about producer car 
loading, because it doesn’t happen in isolation, Mr. Speaker. 
Most of our short-line railways, in which communities and 
farmers have made significant investment, are dependent also 
on producer car loading. They don’t have big main-line 
terminals out on those short lines, Mr. Speaker. They are 
dependent on producer car loading of some kind in order to 
operate. 
 
Now I’m not saying that there wouldn’t be action in some 
non-board grains; there are today, grains and oilseeds. But, Mr. 
Speaker, to not have the support of the wheat board for 
producer car loading would put those operations at risk because 
they operate on a pretty fine margin. And it would put at risk all 
the investment that many producers have made in those 
operations. 
 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

Secondly it would put at risk the investment that many, many 
farmers and communities have made in the independent inland 
terminals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re starting to think about it. They’re starting 
to talk about it. I’ve had several of them address their concerns 
to my office, Mr. Speaker. And we are concerned because huge 
investments have been made in these independent inland 
terminals. And they’ve been quite successful, and they’ve been 
providing a return for their shareholders. With the board gone, 
Mr. Speaker, they would be at risk. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other parts of our agriculture economy 
that would be facing a very, very difficult time if we did not 
have that Canadian Wheat Board process in place. The one 
concern that I have around this is that people be aware of what 
the issues are, that we don’t see another debacle like we saw 
with the Crow rate. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Debacle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — You can say it however you want it. It 
depends what part of the country you’re from. So debacle, 
debacle — anyway, big problem for people. 
 
A big problem was created when people did not have full 
information about the impact of the removal of the Crow, and 
hindsight has given lots of people that information. I don’t want 
to see that same kind of thinking happen around the Canadian 
Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. It has provided too much value for 
too long to be easily put away. 
 
And I am thankful, I am thankful, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 
minister — when I met with the federal minister, Chuck Strahl 
— that he says he wants to listen very, very carefully to what 
the issues are, that he doesn’t want to just go in and knock it 
down without understanding what those impacts would be. 
 
And it is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that as he looks at what those 
impacts are, as he listens to producers, and as he listens to those 
people who would be hugely impacted, that he will think very 
carefully. And, Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that he will be 
convinced that it would be destructive for many of the farmers 
of this province and many of the communities to pull the wheat 
board out of the system, to get rid of the single-desk selling 
which has provided a premium to so many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many reasons why we should retain the 
wheat board in this country. It is my hope that our federal 
government . . . And I ask for the support of this legislature as 
we ask the federal government to consider all aspects very 
carefully before they make any decisions. And ultimately we 
ask them to allow those producers to follow the Act and allow 
those producers who use the wheat board, who sell board 
grains, who are part of the system, to use their electoral 
mechanisms to make the decisions. That would be our hope, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ultimately what we are asking for today is for our 
federal government to really realize how this part of the nation, 
this part of the body is hurting. And this is a valuable part of the 

body of this nation, Mr. Speaker. The agriculture sector not 
only in Saskatchewan but across this country is a wealth 
producer far beyond any subsidies that are put in, Mr. Speaker. 
When you look at its impact throughout the economy, when you 
look at its impact on rural communities, it is absolutely essential 
to the well-being of this nation, to the health of this nation. And 
we need our federal government to come to the table in a 
substantial way to provide support for the farmers of this 
province and for the farmers of our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask for a minimum payment of $200 million 
cash payment to farmers in this province to help offset that 
realized negative net income. Mr. Speaker, we ask for the CAIS 
program to be adjusted so that there is a disaster component in 
line with what the provincial ministers are asking for. We ask, 
Mr. Speaker, that the federal government will work on 
legislation that will enable some of those profits from this 
agriculture industry to be retained by the primary producers. It 
is vital to their well-being. 
 
And we ask, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government be very, 
very cautious, very thoughtful, very attentive to the voices of 
producers and follow the mechanisms that are available to deal 
with the Canadian Wheat Board and to allow those producers 
who are part of that system to make the decision. 
 
This we ask, Mr. Speaker. And so with those words, I would 
like to move the following motion, seconded by the member 
from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the response of the federal 
government to the present cash flow crisis for producers in 
the agricultural sector, but in doing so, this Assembly also 
urge the federal government to provide a fair and equitable 
formula for the 2006 Canadian agriculture income 
stabilization program with a disaster component and to 
provide a minimum, one-time cash payment of at least 
$200 million to Saskatchewan producers in response to the 
fact that the agriculture crisis is a global problem beyond 
the control of producers and the provincial government. 

 
And further [Mr. Speaker], that this Assembly urge the 
federal government to allow the current democratic 
mechanisms in the Canadian Wheat Board Act to be the 
mechanisms by which the future of the Canadian Wheat 
Board as a single-desk seller is determined. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food, seconded by the member for Yorkton 
and Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the response of the federal 
government to the present cash flow crisis for producers in 
the agriculture sector, but in doing so, this Assembly also 
urge the federal government to provide a fair and equitable 
formula for the 2006 Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization program with a disaster component and to 
provide a minimum, one-time cash payment of at least 
$200 million to Saskatchewan producers in response to the 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

fact that the agricultural crisis is a global problem beyond 
the control of producers and the provincial government. 
 
And further, that this Assembly urge the federal 
government to allow the current democratic mechanisms 
in the Canadian Wheat Board Act be the mechanisms by 
which the future of the Canadian Wheat Board as a 
single-desk seller is determined. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Yorkton, the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased this afternoon to enter into the debate as it relates 
to the importance of agriculture and the motion of which the 
minister just moments ago and you, Mr. Speaker, have read. 
 
I want to begin my comments, Mr. Speaker, by recognizing in 
this province the good work that not only the Minister of 
Agriculture does, Mr. Speaker, as he makes his way around the 
province meeting with producer groups, organizations, and farm 
leaders in order to make a difference on the agricultural file; by 
the same token, Mr. Speaker, I want to also say that . . . the 
good work that also goes on by members on the opposite side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. Because from time to time I see them, 
as does the Minister of Agriculture, in events across 
Saskatchewan sitting and speaking with farm leaders, farm 
organizations. From time to time even in the constituency that 
I’m in, Mr. Speaker, members will come to my constituency 
and suggest that they had been speaking to the member from 
Saltcoats, for example, or the member from Canora-Pelly 
advising that they have had some discussions about some of the 
farm pressures that are in their regions. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, on the onset that the ownership 
of the issues of how we deal with agriculture in the province 
today isn’t all attempting to be accomplished and succeeded by 
members on this side of the House, or by the Minister of 
Agriculture, or the work that I do in rural development, but that 
there is a tremendous amount of activity that’s also happening 
by the members opposite who represent the majority of rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, about how important the 
industry is to the Saskatchewan economy. When you take a 
look at the six sectors that drive the Saskatchewan economy, 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is very much one of those engines. I 
really compare the strength of the province today to that of a 
six-cylinder engine. And that when you take a look at a 
six-cylinder engine, Mr. Speaker, and those sectors that are 
driving the economy today, the six sectors that are driving the 
economy in oil and gas and manufacturing and mining and 
tourism and agriculture, what we find, Mr. Speaker, is that one 
cylinder is on fairly low compression these days. And one 
cylinder has been on fairly low compression now for a number 
of years. 
 
And it’s not uncommon for this legislature to be doing what 
we’re doing again today which is standing in our places and 
having a lengthy debate about how it is that we can make a 
difference in this province for producers who we so largely 
depend on, and not only in producing food in our province but 
adding value, providing jobs, and in many instances, or in most 

instances, Mr. Speaker, feeding the world. And so the 
importance of this kind of a debate today, as it has been in other 
years, Mr. Speaker, is so critical to the strength and the 
economy of our province. 
 
I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that I know that members 
opposite will be speaking in this debate, will be sharing a good 
deal of their thinking and their wisdom about how agriculture 
can be advanced. And I expect that I might hear from time to 
time members of the opposite say that in fact there hasn’t been 
much done by the provincial administration, this provincial 
administration in its work. 
 
And I think what’s important to say, Mr. Speaker, as the 
Minister of Agriculture has highlighted in his comments, that 
there have been a number of undertakings that have occurred in 
this province over the last number of years. Some have occurred 
through the joint efforts of both this minister — that’s currently 
the Minister of Agriculture — when I held the file for a period 
of time, those who preceded me, and members opposite in 
terms of trying to find a better deal for Saskatchewan farmers 
and producers through some very difficult times. And we’ve 
used some very significant language as well about how we 
should be making a difference in Saskatchewan. 
 
The issues today, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Agriculture 
has identified, is not that we’re not diversified enough. The 
reality is, is that in our agricultural community today, we’re 
more diversified than ever in the history of this province. I 
know that I and members opposite and the Minister of 
Agriculture today could make our way into rural Saskatchewan 
and see a crop that might be growing, and I bet you that there 
are some identifications that we wouldn’t be able to determine 
what that crop is, Mr. Speaker, because the varieties there are so 
distinct and are so many. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have something over 60 different crops 
that we grow in the province today. We have diversified our 
livestock in a significant way of where we were say 10 or 15 
years ago. So the diversification of our farm economy, Mr. 
Speaker, is not the issue. We’ve done a tremendous job of 
changing the practices, enhancing what we grow in this 
province today, value-adding in many fronts today where we’ve 
changed the livestock . . . or changed from just growing grain, 
to a large degree in this province, to a very healthy livestock 
industry. 
 
And by the same token, Mr. Speaker, there have been 
significant investments that have been made in this industry 
today in terms of value-added. Some of it has been developed 
alone by the private sector where they have gone forward and 
built the industry on value-added. Some have been done 
through partnerships with the provincial government and the 
federal government and programs that are funded by provincial 
and federal governments as well as the private sector. And 
there’s a whole co-op sector, Mr. Speaker, that have been very 
busy and making a difference in diversifying the economy in 
our province in agriculture. So there has been a tremendous 
amount of investment as well along with the diversification. 
 
I have on my desk today a list of projects that are happening 
across the province from the rural economic development 
perspective. There are something like 170 projects today that 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

people are working on in rural Saskatchewan primarily in terms 
of value-added. And the majority of those projects, Mr. 
Speaker, are related to what’s happening with the agricultural 
industry or they’re farm added-value issue . . . or products. 
 
So the issue is not, Mr. Speaker, the problem that we find on the 
farm today to do with the fact that we are not diversifying or 
investing more in it. The reality is, is what we get for our 
product in terms of what we grow today, the tremendous, 
tremendous pressures that the international community places 
on the commodities of which we sell and the marketplace in 
which we trade to, and for sure — as the Minister of 
Agriculture indicated — the significant input costs that are 
growing in our province today. 
 
I want to just indicate further, Mr. Speaker, that there have been 
a number of attempts in the last number of years to try to make 
a difference in providing support to the farm to ensure that farm 
lives can continue to be enriched and that there is some safety 
nets that are available today for producers in order to make a 
difference. And we know — and I know that I’ll hear members 
opposite talking from this vein as well or this perspective — 
that there has been over the last 15 years a number of programs 
that have come and gone. Some have been very expense in 
terms of their management. Some of have been less than 
efficient in terms of the administration. And on all fronts, 
farmers would say that none of them were really beneficial, 
very beneficial to, at the end of the day, to sustain the family or 
to sustain the farms. 
 
The reality is, is that there has been huge, huge investment that 
has been made by both the federal and the provincial 
government over the last number of years. And at the end of 
that time we still find ourselves in the same circumstances, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is where farm families are continuing to feel 
the pressures of the cost of doing business. We continue to see 
exodus from the farm. Farms are getting far larger, communities 
are getting smaller in rural Saskatchewan. And at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, the value-added industry is growing 
alongside it. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that at this point in time it’s 
important I think for us to realize that there is a whole new 
industry today that’s arriving at the farm gate, and that is to do 
with the work of the biofuels. We know today that there is a 
tremendous amount of effort and energy that’s being placed on 
taking the commodities that we grow on the farm and turning 
them into ethanol or turning them into biodiesel. 
 
And what was really encouraging, Mr. Speaker, is that during 
the last federal campaign there was a tremendous amount of 
commitment made to the whole industry of the biofuels. When 
you take a look at the work that’s been done in this province by 
three or four different companies, you will see that we’ve done 
an excellent job of having those companies meet the 
commitments on the ethanol file where today we have, or will 
have within the next short while, Saskatchewan’s needs for 
ethanol production to the mandate likely matched within several 
months. 
 
This is a tremendous achievement by agricultural producers and 

by investors, to take the value of our grain crop and turn it into 
something that will be far more value added. And I hear that 
from the federal administration, the new administration today, 
which is exactly what the previous administrations of the 
Liberals said. Why don’t we in Canada today have a mandated 
fuel policy? Our mandated fuel policy should reflect 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent. And in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, that would result in something like four to four 
and a half, to five billion litres of fuel — either biodiesel or 
ethanol — that would make itself available to the country. 
 
In Saskatchewan we would be absolutely well positioned to be 
able to meet a large part of that need because we have the 
feedstock right here and certainly we could then be very 
aggressive in terms of our build to ensure that we can supply 
not only parts of Canada but all of Canada with some of the 
biofuels. 
 
And it’s encouraging to see that the federal government has 
decided that it would also, the current federal government 
would match the 5 per cent commitment that were made by the 
Liberals. Our question I think is to the federal government, and 
I’m sure that the members opposite will be concurring, that why 
isn’t that matched somewhere in the neighbourhood of 10 per 
cent which is exactly what the province of Saskatchewan has 
committed itself to? 
 
The province I believe of Manitoba is at the same place and I 
believe the province of Ontario is also suggesting that we 
should have a national mandate of 10 per cent as opposed to 5, 
and this would be a tremendous accomplishment if we could get 
the federal government to go there. And it would provide a 
tremendous opportunity for a number of value-added businesses 
in our province which we could build on because the feedstock 
is here, the intelligence is here to do that, the models of how 
you would do that are already in place in this province. And I 
think it would be a tremendous benefit, Mr. Speaker, if we 
could collectively be able to say to the new federal 
administration that the new mandate that they’re proposing 
should not be 5 per cent but in fact should be 10 per cent. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, further is that when we examine the kinds 
of commitments today that have been made to the farm just in 
the last couple of weeks, you see a number of initiatives that 
have been advanced. There has been a tremendous amount of 
discussion over the last number of years about the importance 
of doing something with the education property tax. 
 
Of course the education property tax piece, Mr. Speaker, is not 
a new issue. It’s been around this Assembly for a number of 
years and nobody has been able to rectify it to the degree of 
which it’s been rectified in the last couple of weeks. And there 
have been other administrations that have preceded us, Mr. 
Speaker. Through the ’80s where we had a Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan, they had an opportunity to 
change that policy. They had an opportunity to shift it back to 
60/40. But they didn’t tackle it either, Mr. Speaker, because it 
has had a lot to do with having the resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And I know that the member from Indian Head will be 
concerned when I make any comment as it relates to the 
Conservatives of the ’80s because it would be a painful thought 
here that there might be some reference to that. But the reality is 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

is that the Conservative administration did not, Mr. Speaker, 
adjust that formula to make a difference for Saskatchewan 
farmers. And as a result of it, Mr. Speaker, this has been left for 
a number of years. 
 

The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that $53.8 million will make a 
difference on Saskatchewan farms today from a couple of 
perspectives. And the changes are made for these reasons. One 
is that it is good public policy that we make the shift. But 
secondly, there is a tremendous amount of hardship on the farm 
today and this small, little commitment that we have been able 
to make in the bigger piece of issues that farmers have today 
will go some way to making a difference on the farms. And we 
have been able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the other piece that members opposite and certainly 
members on this side of the House have forgotten — and I’m 
sure that we’ll hear it in a few minutes again when members of 
the opposition get up to speak — there was dollars that were set 
aside during . . . [inaudible] . . . and 1999 where the provincial 
government, this administration, went to Ottawa, were able to 
bring back for Saskatchewan farmers two opportunities, two 
opportunities of 600 million, of $300 million each. And those 
were significant, significant contributions, Mr. Speaker, in 1998 
and 1999 to Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And most of us in this Assembly have forgotten, Mr. Speaker, 
that we went to Ottawa and were able to achieve that kind of an 
undertaking. And so we hear the rhetoric from time to time that 
nothing’s been done, which couldn’t be further from the truth, 
Mr. Speaker. Because somebody’s delivered, the federal and 
provincial governments have delivered that money, 
Saskatchewan farmers have used it, and very little credit’s been 
paid by anybody to the fact that it did occur, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also on the education property tax piece, we heard 
on a number of occasions over the last number of months as I 
paid attention — particularly in my area of the province because 
that’s where the tax revolt started, Mr. Speaker — that nothing 
had been done on the education property tax reform. And that 
can’t be farther from the truth either, Mr. Speaker. Because in 
the year 1999 and the year 2000, there were two investments in 
education property tax — $25 million each year. And it was 
only targeted to Saskatchewan farmers. And we never hear 
around the province, Mr. Speaker, and particularly from the 
opposition, that education property tax was enriched over that 
period of time. 
 
But what we do hear is the opposition talking about the fact that 
there was nothing done on education property tax. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just not a credible statement, just not a credible 
statement. Also during the period from the year 2000 to the year 
2005, we also made a number of mill rate factor adjustments, 
Mr. Speaker, that were applied only to farm land, agricultural 
farm land, that didn’t apply to industrial or commercial, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And why did we do that? Because we were looking for ways to 
try and mitigate the issues that farm families were experiencing 
today, and accordingly made some of those adjustments, Mr. 
Speaker. And we hear from the opposition then that there was 
nothing done on education property tax for a period of five 
years. Just not a credible statement, Mr. Speaker. It just is not 

accurate because over that period of time there were a number 
of pieces of work that were done. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m really, really excited about 
the notion that there still may be an opportunity in 
Saskatchewan that the Farm Rail Car Coalition might get their 
cars into the province and that the Farm Rail Car Coalition 
might actually become the owners of the fleet. And I listened, 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture speak about this 
piece because he’s been very close to this file, Mr. Speaker, and 
has been front and centre in trying to ensure that the 
Saskatchewan farmers get the best benefit. And he talked at 
length about the importance of getting the freight rate costs 
reduced and the kinds of pressures today that we’re 
experiencing as farmers through the freight rate. 
 
And here is a wonderful opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for us to 
have the grain cars in our own province to be owned by the 
railcar coalition and I’m learning now that there is a bit of 
difficulty here and that this process is not moving along as 
quickly as it should be. 
 
And so I say to the members opposite to join with the Minister 
of Agriculture to work diligently with the federal government, 
to see if we can get the transfer of that fleet into the province. 
Because that fleet, Mr. Speaker, will not only help reduce the 
cost of grain transportation in this province, it will also provide 
a ton of jobs for our province, not only in the manufacturing 
and the building of some of the railcars but some of the 
maintenance that is experienced in fixing and maintaining and 
looking after those railcars. This is a tremendous opportunity 
for Saskatchewan producers and our economy, and so I’ll be 
interested in seeing and hearing and watching the engagement 
of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, in terms of helping us 
get the Farm Rail Car Coalition in their efforts to get that fleet 
part of the railcar fleet here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that some of the work that’s being done in the 
province today is impacted by individuals who are right in some 
of the rural members’ back yards and I expect that they’re 
already having conversations like we are with Mr. Harper and 
his transportation minister to make sure that the railcar coalition 
fleet makes its way and available to our province here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very, very interested in the fact that the 
Prime Minister of course today has a very close working 
relationship with the members opposite and has had that 
relationship for some years. We know, Mr. Speaker, and I know 
and they talk about it openly, that there is a number of 
occasions across the province where they attend each other’s 
nominations, where they’re involved, Mr. Speaker, in their 
conventions. I know, Mr. Speaker, as they do, and they make 
little bone about it, that they share common memberships. And 
so there is a close affiliation and association between the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and the Prime Minister. 
 
So it would be my view that as we pursue the work collectively 
on what we do with the Farm Rail Car Coalition piece, what we 
do with the farm support programs in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, or in Canada to strengthen them, that there will be a 
significant amount of opportunity that members opposite will 
have to put forward not only the federal position but also to 
articulate their own farm policy and seeing whether or not they 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

can in fact influence some of the work that’s happening at the 
national level. 
 
I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I know that the members 
opposite are not happy with the CAIS program. I know that the 
members opposite have said for some time that it isn’t rapid 
enough in terms of its response to farmers today and that there 
should be a separation between the disaster program and there 
should be a separation from the income support program. 
 
In fact I know that the member from Melville, 
Saltcoats-Melville, will be on his feet. And I expect he’ll be 
reiterating again as he did in the last debate that I heard him that 
he will be pressuring the federal government, like he was last 
November, to change the formula, not from a 60/40 split, but 
he’ll be lobbying the new federal government for an 80/20 split 
because that’s the position that he took last November. And I 
expect that his position hasn’t changed much today, that he will 
want to lobby the federal government with a great deal of 
fervour to make sure that we get a better deal for Saskatchewan 
producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I expect that the member opposite and those who will be 
speaking later today will also be saying that they want to see the 
replacement of the CAIS program by two programs, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’ll want to see the CAIS program, and they 
will also want to see a disaster relief program. 
 
And I’m all for that, Mr. Speaker. I’m for separating out the 
CAIS program, having a disaster relief program. I was one of 
the ministers with Minister Wowchuk when we were in 
negotiations of the new CAIS program who held out because 
we said there wasn’t enough money in the pool. We said that 
the program should be separated, and today the new federal 
Conservative administration is saying that that’s exactly what 
should happen. 
 
And so I’m going to be interested in seeing and hearing the 
members opposite articulate that vision and view as they have 
in the past because it is so important for Saskatchewan and 
Canadian farmers that that separation be made. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what else will be important in that 
discussion is to recognize that only a portion of those dollars 
have now flown. I think something like $750 million that was 
committed during the federal election campaign is now on its 
way to Saskatchewan and Canadian producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that’s a commitment that was first made by the old Liberal 
administration. They said they would provide those dollars. Mr. 
Harper and his Conservative administration said they would 
match that, but they would do one actually better. What they 
would do, Mr. Speaker, is that they would top it up by another 
$500 million for Canadian farmers. 
 
Now that works out to about 200 million, I believe, maybe a 
little bit more — 200 million of the 500 for Saskatchewan 
producers. And I expect that the members opposite will be 
joining the Minister of Agriculture and this administration to 
lobby the federal government to make sure that that additional 
$500 million makes itself available for Saskatchewan 
producers, or for Canadian producers. And that the additional 
$200 million would make its way for Saskatchewan farmers 

because as I recall, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the 
members opposite were lobbying for as well under the old 
administration. I expect that they’re going to be extremely 
encouraged or supportive in getting that done for us, as well in 
helping Saskatchewan farmers get that accomplished as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, I want to also recognize the importance of 
the new federal Minister of Agriculture because I remember 
very keenly, Mr. Speaker, when the new . . . when we were 
talking about who we thought maybe will be the new Minister 
of Agriculture for Canada under the new administration. And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, what we were hoping for, and of course 
the members opposite have been very pronounced on it, 
suggesting that we should have had somebody from 
Saskatchewan that would have been our new federal Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
And it makes sense to me that we should have had somebody 
from Saskatchewan who should have been our federal Minister 
of Agriculture given that our support today per capita to the 
agricultural industry exceeds any other province by several fold, 
Mr. Speaker. And so it would have been important. And the 
issues of our Saskatchewan producers are far graver in many 
occasions and our contributions as it relates to the trade world 
are far larger. And so we would have expected, Mr. Speaker, 
that that would have been the case. 
 
But what we have instead is we have Mr. Strahl, Mr. Speaker, 
or Minister Strahl who is the new Minister of Agriculture, 
comes from British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, who has some 
exposure only to the agricultural file, in fact very little exposure 
to the agricultural file. And I was very interested in the 
statement that was made by the member from 
Saltcoats-Melville when he in fact was speaking to the notion 
that we did not get a Saskatchewan member to look after the 
agricultural file. And he thought that that wasn’t such a bad 
idea, Mr. Speaker, that we had somebody who was managing an 
agricultural industry in Canada, providing direction on an 
industry of that magnitude, someone who in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
who would be on an international stage promoting agriculture 
from a Canadian perspective, that he had a very small 
understanding and appreciation of what the industry was all 
about. 
 
And I was keen to hear the member from Saltcoats-Melville say 
that because I remember what some of his comments were, Mr. 
Speaker, when our current member of the legislature, our 
Minister of Agriculture today become named the Minister of 
Agriculture. And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
words that were pronounced by the members opposite when the 
Minister of Agriculture today in Saskatchewan was named to 
the portfolio was that he didn’t have a very good appreciation of 
the industry, Mr. Speaker, is what I heard them say on a number 
of occasions. 
 
And from time to time on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I 
continued to hear them say that. And it’s interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, today, that one of the most accomplished ministers of 
Agriculture today in this province is led by the member today, 
our member today who is the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

Speaker, who not only knows the industry, Mr. Speaker, but 
spends hours and hours and hours of his time not only growing 
it and promoting it and developing but meeting every day with 
the members opposite, with the industry today, and making a 
difference in Canada today, Mr. Speaker, in a way in which 
hasn’t been done for a long time in this province and parallel to 
that of others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I appreciate the work of our minister today, Mr. Speaker. 
And I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
have recognized today fully that agricultural policy today can 
be delivered in a substantive way today by men and women 
who have a good appreciation for it, and that Mr. Strahl and our 
member of agriculture are exactly on the same team, Mr. 
Speaker, are exactly on the same team in building a Canadian 
industry, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud of our member who’s 
doing a tremendous job along with Mr. Strahl, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that I am most interested in the 
work that the new federal government is going to be 
undertaking, Mr. Speaker, because I have a quote here from the 
previous critic of Agriculture of the new Conservative 
government, Diane Finley, who is now a cabinet minister. And 
she says this and I quote, “The Conservative Party believes this 
agricultural crisis is a result of trade relations, and it should be 
the full responsibility of the federal government,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, is that we have now a new 
federal government who has been very clear, particularly 
articulated by the previous member who was the critic, saying 
that agricultural issues today in Canada really are the 
responsibility of the federal government, and they in fact should 
be funding agriculture in its fullest, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
the trade wars and the subsidies that are in place today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that quote came from The Western Producer 
on October 20, ’05. So it’s relatively fresh, Mr. Speaker, in all 
of our minds where the federal government has said, you know 
what? Agriculture is our responsibility, and we should be 
making sure that we actually cover it off fully. And it really is 
the result of the kinds of trade relations that we have today with 
our international players, particularly those in the United States. 
And we should be levelling the playing field, and the federal 
government should be the folks who should be covering it off. 
 
Now it will be interesting to hear, Mr. Speaker, what the 
members opposite, how they speak to this because we 
remember that the . . . we remember, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member from Rosetown, when he gave a articulate speech a 
few years back, said that he didn’t believe. And he was part of 
the same party, Mr. Speaker, as this member, Ms. Finley, is — 
exactly from the same party. And at that time he said that there 
shouldn’t be, Mr. Speaker, any support. There shouldn’t be any 
support to the subsidies, Mr. Speaker. Those were his words. 
And today he sits in the opposition benches and has the full 
access to the member in Ottawa who today believes in fact they 
should be covering off the entire cost to agriculture producers. 
So I’ll be interested in hearing the position that the party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, speaks to this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, the other is that I have a quote here 
from Mr. Gerry Ritz who is now the . . . continues to be a 
Member of Parliament from Saskatchewan who said the 

Conservative government should introduce, and I quote: 
 

A separate stand-alone disaster type program . . . 100 per 
cent funded by the federal government. No more 60/40 
fights with you folks especially in Saskatchewan, [he says 
Saskatchewan people should] . . . not pay the 40 per cent. 
We will fund it 100 per cent. 
 

That’s the quote from Mr. Gerry Ritz. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And so I say to the members opposite 
today, we are on Gerry Ritz’s page. We support Mr. Gerry Ritz. 
 
And so I think it will be interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, how the 
members opposite support that kind of a notion given that in the 
past we had an eloquent speech delivered here by the member 
from Saltcoats Melville, the member from Rosetown 
Kindersley —Elrose, sorry, my apologies to the member — 
Rosetown-Elrose who said that Saskatchewan should pay at 
least 20 per cent towards a disaster type program where our 
Member of Parliament today who sits in the federal benches, 
who anticipated at one point that he might even be the 
agricultural minister and some were purporting that he should 
be, from Saskatchewan. 
 
The reality is that they believe they should own it 100 per cent. 
And on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we agree. They 
should own it 100 per cent, and we’ll be interested to see what 
the members opposite say as it relates to that particular issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m also very much interested in, Mr. Speaker, in the quote that 
says . . . from Mr. Anderson who is the outspoken critic of 
course on the wheat board. Mr. Anderson said, in fact, that the 
wheat board was so upset with him that he started devoting his 
entire section of their website to debunking his claim, is what 
the Canadian Wheat Board were doing. 
 
And why were the Canadian Wheat Board folks doing that? 
Well because the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, believe 
that farmers should have the opportunity to continue to vote 
democratically on the selection of the kinds of grain-marketing 
system that they should have in the province or in Canada. And 
so they have begun a long and hard lobby which is not unlike 
what we believe on this side of the House, that the Canadian 
Wheat Board has a very significant role to play and has played 
a significant role in the past and that in fact the Canadian Wheat 
Board should be left to decide of Canadian or Saskatchewan 
farmers in terms of how they will be structured, how they will 
be run, how they will be managed, and how they will be market. 
 
It should be a democratic process as decided by the farmers. 
And I’ll be interested in hearing how the Saskatchewan Party 
members opposite relates to this issue and whether or not, Mr. 
Speaker, they continue to endorse the Canadian Wheat Board in 
this province or whether they have joined their friend Mr. 
Anderson in the approach to try and rid the wheat board of their 
work today for us in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I was most interested in learning, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Leader of the Opposition from Swift Current is on record, Mr. 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

Speaker, supporting Mr. Anderson. As I said in my earlier 
comments that this family is very much related. Members 
opposite and that of the new federal Conservative government 
— they’re very much related, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact I have the member from Swift Current in quote saying 
this. He said, “I’m supporting Conservative candidate David 
Anderson”, quote finished, where he says, Mr. Speaker, and 
that says to me that he is a strong proponent of Mr. Anderson, 
that he helped Mr. Anderson with his election campaign. And it 
also says, Mr. Speaker, that he in fact supports the position of 
Mr. Anderson, which is the demise of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. But more important than that, Mr. Speaker, not only the 
demise of the Canadian Wheat Board, is the democratic process 
of which we elect our members today to the Canadian Wheat 
Board. So if you do not support the Canadian Wheat Board, 
then you don’t support the process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve seen some of the democratic process at work on that 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We witnessed it in the . . . yes, 
Mr. Speaker, we witnessed it when we had the opportunity to 
see what happened in the by-election in Melville, in how 
democracy didn’t work, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing it 
witnessed, I think, in what we hear from the member who was 
in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, who is no longer the member of 
Weyburn, where she said, it’s not about the politics; it’s about 
the principles, which says something, Mr. Speaker, about the 
democratic process in the members’ opposite caucus. And today 
I think what we’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to 
see members opposite supporting Mr. David Anderson because 
that’s their belief in the demise of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, do I think that that’s the case? Because 
I have a quote that I’ll find along the way here that speaks to 
where in fact the current Prime Minister in fact had a 
conversation or a . . . or here it is here, Mr. Speaker, where the 
Prime Minister applauds the Saskatchewan Party and their 
opposition to the Canadian Wheat Board. And here’s his quote 
from Prime Minister Stephen Harper where he says this: 
 

We hope [that] the Saskatchewan Party continues to 
hammer this issue home in the legislature. Someone has to 
point out how the Wheat Board monopoly is killing 
opportunities. 

 
Now that’s the quote, Mr. Speaker, from Mr. Harper in his 
correspondence with the current members opposite as it relates 
to the relationship, but also in working together collectively — 
as conservative governments, Mr. Speaker — as a Conservative 
government and a Saskatchewan opposition party, both 
conservative, talking about how we dismantle in this province 
and in Canada this very, very significant institution to the 
betterment of Canadian producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to conclude my comments, Mr. Speaker, on these points. 
There is little or no doubt that, in Saskatchewan today and in 
Canada, we have a serious issue on the farm — a very serious 
issue on the farm, Mr. Speaker, and that we need to have all of 
our engines firing in order to try and find resolve or solution to 
the way in which we make a better life or try to find a better life 
for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that it will require even those members 

like those from Wood River who may not understand the 
agricultural economy very well, Mr. Speaker, but can learn 
from their colleagues on their side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
about the importance of the industry. Or they may learn from 
time to time by paying attention to the dialogue that goes on in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because I think that there is that 
kind of an education that needs to take place — not only in this 
Assembly but across the province, Mr. Speaker — about the 
importance of agriculture. 
 
And so, it will require in the next few days, Mr. Speaker, and in 
the weeks ahead the kind of dialogue that we’re having today. 
It’s about making sure, Mr. Speaker, that we look for solutions 
within the commitments that have been made. We recognize the 
commitments that have been made today because, in order to 
grow a Saskatchewan economy, we need to have the 
agricultural engine firing at a far higher degree than it is today. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very much 
appreciative of the opportunity to join in the debate today in 
support of this very significant issue that’s on our plate and that 
collectively in this Assembly we can work with the new federal 
administration in terms of finding solution. 
 
We have today a situation probably better than we’ve had in 
some time where we have 12 members of the federal cabinet. 
They’re from this province. They are all primarily from rural 
Saskatchewan today. They understand the dynamics of our rural 
communities. They understand the issues on the farm. They 
have a very close association with the members opposite. 
 
So I expect that what we’ll see, Mr. Speaker, in the days and 
weeks ahead, a public policy for Canada and particularly for 
Saskatchewan that will be reflective of the kinds of issues that 
we want to see supported — a stronger safety net program, 
some work on the Farm Rail Car Coalition so we can see those 
cars in our province. 
 
[15:45] 
 
We want to see the investment in value-added in both the 
biodiesel and in ethanol by increasing the level from the 5 per 
cent to the 10 per cent. And we’ll want to see, Mr. Speaker, 
some investment by the federal government in some of those 
industries, like they have in the past, the past administration 
has. And to say, Mr. Speaker, that our province will be 
depending and our rural communities will be depending a great 
deal on the collective work that we can participate in this 
Assembly to make it different for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And so in closing, I want to thank this House for the 
opportunity to speak. And to conclude my comments by saying 
that I will very much be supporting the position and the 
recommendation and the motion that has been placed by the 
Minister of Agriculture in this very important debate, Mr. 
Speaker Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition critic for 
Agriculture, the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I appreciated the previous member’s 
comments to a degree. He talked about the present Agriculture 
minister, and if I heard him right, saying he’s the most 
accomplished Minister of Agriculture they had. I think the 
member for Yorkton has a very short memory because if I 
remember right he was the Agriculture minister at one time in 
this province. But I guess if you’re comparing apples to oranges 
to pears or whatever direction you want to go, I guess it’s an 
easy comparison. 
 
I would go on to say though, if that’s the most accomplished 
Minister of Agriculture we’ve had in the last 14 years, it’s no 
wonder our farmers are in so much trouble in this province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 
asking for a $200 million payout and we agree with them on 
that, although I’m not even sure that that’s enough this spring to 
help farmers get a crop in. And the members opposite have also 
talked about the hurt that’s out in rural Saskatchewan, the 
problems with agriculture industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
They’ve talked about the 60/40 split right now. The Deputy 
Premier talked about a new deal with the new federal 
government. He talked about 80/20. We agree with that too. We 
feel that that would be much fairer for the province of 
Saskatchewan and we would support him. In fact we’ve already 
talked to the federal Minister of Agriculture about just that 
thing, that 80/20 would be far more fair for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I might add too that APAS [Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan] has come out with a 
news release asking for a $75-an-acre payment for farmers. 
That’s what they feel it would take to get this crop in, Mr. 
Speaker, and APAS is farmers. They’re farmers from all across 
the province and have a very good handle on the situation and 
the demand that farmers have put on them right now just to try 
and stay above board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the money that the federal 
government has just paid out. In fact they’re in the process of 
just paying out, I think there was $755 million, but that was all 
across Canada, Mr. Speaker. I think when it came to 
Saskatchewan, and I could stand to be corrected, but I believe 
about 240 to 270 of that is supposed to find its way into 
Saskatchewan farmers’ hands. But there’s a catch, Mr. Speaker, 
as there always is. 
 
The CAIS program as we know, and I think the members 
opposite mentioned what a poor program this is, the inability of 
that program to address the needs of Saskatchewan farmers. 
What we are finding now and every member . . . The member 
from Kelvington and a number of other members are getting 
calls from farmers where they may have received a payment 
from CAIS in the last couple of years, last year especially. It 
doesn’t matter to what degree — t might have been a small 
payment; it may have been a half decent payment — but now 
they’re getting letters. And the CAIS program, the people at 
CAIS, they’re saying, we want that money back. We made a 
mistake. We calculated wrong and we want that money back. 

These same farmers took that payment in good faith because 
CAIS had made that payment on the information that they 
provided the CAIS administration people with. Paid bills, were 
up against it, needed that money. And now, lo and behold, the 
CAIS program is asking to return that money, knowing full well 
that these farmers are up against it and don’t have that money. 
 
Now we come to the grain and oilseed payment this spring that 
the federal government, the new federal government has 
honoured and are paying out — and doing it very quickly I 
might add. They’re not getting no payment because what CAIS 
is doing is clawing back this grain and oilseed payment. So not 
only do they owe the CAIS payment back that was previously 
made, they’re not receiving any payment this spring. Can you 
imagine what that does to a farm family out there that’s having 
a hard time buying groceries, paying their power bills or utility 
bills, and something like that comes in the mail, Mr. Speaker? 
It’s enough to drive these people around the bend. 
 
I talked to a farmer last Monday. And it’s just an example of 
what’s going out there, and he said, I’ve really totally had it. I 
don’t know where to turn. On Monday, Farm Credit sent him a 
registered letter and said, we are taking proceedings, starting 
proceedings, and we’re foreclosing on your land. And he said 
that was just devastating. And it is, Mr. Speaker, for any farmer 
out there to get a letter like that. It’s terrible. But that wasn’t the 
end of it. 
 
On Tuesday he got a letter from CAIS saying, we made a 
payment last fall on your behalf to you. I can’t remember the 
exact amount; the amount really doesn’t matter. We overpaid 
you the full amount of what we paid you last fall. We would 
like that back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear of suicides happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. And they aren’t advertised because we’re very 
proud people out there, and it’s not something you want to 
advertise. Why I bring it to the floor today is because it’s so 
devastating to families out there, but it’s reality. It’s reality of 
what’s going on. 
 
And the gentleman that I talked to that day, I didn’t know how 
to help him, Mr. Speaker, but he was at wits’ end. And I really 
worried about this person and his family out there, of what the 
past couple of days had done to him. That’s one case, Mr. 
Speaker. This is happening all over Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a program — AIDA [agricultural income disaster 
assistance], CFIP [Canadian farm income program], and now 
CAIS — and not one of those programs has been adequate for 
our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And I can’t begin to put it across to the public of Saskatchewan, 
for anyone that’s listening today, the hurt that’s going on out 
there to farm families. We talked about the suicides. And we 
don’t advertise them so in most cases we never hear about them 
unless it’s in our own communities. And it’s something we all 
mourn together as a community — don’t have to be related. It’s 
our good friends when it happens, and it’s a very sad thing. 
 
But we’re also having family breakups out there. Some are 
people that have been married 30, 40 years, and that’s another 
sad situation. In some cases with the few young farmers we’ve 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

got it’s even happening to them, Mr. Speaker. It’s driving 
families apart. It’s driving families off the farm and moving out 
of province to find work so that they can feed their families and 
giving up on the family farm. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell you how serious enough and get it 
across enough to the rest of Saskatchewan what rural 
Saskatchewan is up against. We’ve been through the ’30s. And 
I think it was our parents and in some cases our grandparents 
went through the ’30s, and from what I understand things were 
really bad at that time. We’re in a situation that I would believe 
is comparable, in fact maybe worse because we’re in a different 
era right now, Mr. Speaker, where the debt load . . . the debt 
load at that time wasn’t as great but there was just no money. 
Well now there’s just no money but the debt load is fantastic 
and going up. And we’re in a situation where I don’t know 
many farmers if they know where to turn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when the provincial government says to the federal 
government . . . we’re right behind them when they ask for a 
$200 million payment. And we’ve talked to the federal 
Agriculture minister already and I’m very positive in meeting 
him. As the Deputy Premier was talking about before, when he 
was first named Minister of Agriculture, I did have some 
hesitation. I felt at that point we might be far better served by 
one of our Saskatchewan MPs [Member of Parliament], being 
that we have 12 MPs in Saskatchewan out of the 14 on the 
government benches. And I know that’s going to help us down 
the road. In fact the present Agriculture minister said that 
they’ve already been lobbying him about the hurt in 
Saskatchewan. And we also need that support from them and 
are getting that. But the Agriculture minister said he’s not just 
sure just putting more money in is going to help. 
 
So I think what we have to do is keep lobbying from this side of 
the House and that side of the House and keep passing that on 
to him. I think it wouldn’t hurt for every one of us on both sides 
of the House to talk to our 12 Saskatchewan MPs and just 
reconfirm. They’ve been out there campaigning. They know, as 
well as I do or members on that side, just how bad it is. In fact, 
they’ve just finished campaigning so they know things are bad 
out there. But it doesn’t hurt to lobby them again, to call each 
one and say, this is what’s happening in my constituency; I’m 
sure you’re well aware but will you once again pass that on to 
the Prime Minister and to the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker — I’m very positive about this — I 
think they’re going to get a very good reception from the new 
government because finally we have a Prime Minister from 
Western Canada which has been long awaited. We have an 
Agriculture minister from the West. It may be BC, but he 
seemed when we met with him, very receptive to a number of 
the ideas. I know he’s talked to the members opposite already. 
So I think there’s possibility of some good changes in the 
works. But the first and immediate need we need to do is 
address the cash shortfall to get this crop in. 
 
Now I could stand here today, and I believe as the members 
opposite have by including the wheat board in this motion, Mr. 
Speaker; and I think maybe all we’re doing at that point is 
playing politics. This is far too serious to just play politics. My 
constituents are relying on me to bring their message forward, 
and every one of us in this House, to help them address the 

issue and the state that they’re in and find some assistance for 
them to put a crop in, but not just that — to help feed their 
family. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. But I think at this point 
I will put forth an amendment and then I’ll take my place 
because I know there’s a number of other members on this side 
have examples and situations that they want to pass on this 
afternoon too about the situation of agriculture. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this motion, seconded by 
the member for Thunder Creek: 
 

That all the words after “this Assembly” be removed and 
the following words be substituted: 
 
recognize the response of the federal government to the 
present cash flow crisis for producers in the agriculture 
sector and urge the federal government to provide a fair 
and equitable formula for the 2006 Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization program with a disaster component, 
and to provide a minimum one-time cash payment of at 
least $200 million to Saskatchewan producers in response 
to the fact that agriculture crisis is a global problem 
beyond the control of producers; 

 
and further, that this Assembly urge the provincial 
government to take a leadership role in the future design of 
federal and provincial agriculture programs by attending 
the national negotiations as well as properly funding the 
province’s share of these programs. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats, seconded by the member for Thunder 
Creek: 
 

That all of the words after “this Assembly” be removed 
and the following words be substituted: 
 
recognize the response of the federal government to the 
present cash flow crisis for producers in the agriculture 
sector and urge the federal government to provide a fair 
and equitable formula for the 2006 Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization program with the disaster component 
and to provide a minimum one-time cash payment of at 
least 200 million to Saskatchewan producers in response to 
the fact that the agriculture crisis is a global problem 
beyond the control of producers; 
 
and further, that this Assembly urge the provincial 
government to take a leadership role in the future design of 
federal and provincial agriculture programs by attending 
the national negotiations as well as properly funding the 
province’s share of the programs. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night in Lloydminster a Sask Party candidate for nomination, 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

Leo Paré, said these words. He said many farmers are scared 
that they won’t be able to pass their farm on to their children 
and many farm children are scared that they won’t be able to 
succeed on the family farm no matter how hard they work. 
Prophetic words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, grain and oilseed prices have fallen in the last year 
from between 25 and 30 per cent. Pulse crop prices have fallen 
considerably more than that. The real price of wheat has been in 
decline from about $400 a tonne in 1992-93 dollars in the early 
1950s to under $200 a tonne in 2003. Half that price, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while our . . . Madam Deputy Speaker, while our 
neighbouring provinces have been looking at ways to ensure the 
viability of the family farm, the NDP maintains the status quo 
and merely oversees the slow death of Saskatchewan farms. In 
real terms, Madam Deputy Speaker — and this is over and 
above inflation — farm liabilities have increased by over 40 per 
cent since 1981 while farm capital values have remained almost 
constant since the late 1980s. 
 
Energy prices have skyrocketed, affecting major inputs on 
Saskatchewan farms. Fuel, nearly $1 a litre for farm diesel fuel, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. Recently the price of fertilizer over the 
last couple of years has increased from about $300 a tonne to in 
the neighbourhood of $500 a tonne and that’s related as well to 
fossil fuels, i.e., the increased price of natural gas. 
 
[16:00] 
 
With the increased costs of fuel and fertilizer, farm inputs have 
increased on a very small farm, Madam Deputy Speaker, of 
1,000 acres. Farm input costs on fuel and fertilizer alone on that 
small farm have increased $12,400 in the last year. A 
1,000-acre farm is very small by today’s standards, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and the increase of 12,400 for that farm would 
be extremely exacerbated and much larger on more viable and 
substantial farms. 
 
The Ag minister recently said in the September Leader-Post, 
and I quote: 
 

. . . existing farm support programs will meet the “basic 
needs” of producers . . . 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they clearly won’t. Farmers are 
leaving the business in unprecedented numbers, so fast that 
auction companies are turning down more auction sales this 
coming spring than they’re able to take on. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan also has the highest 
number of CAIS claims in federally administered provinces, 
which does not include Alberta or Ontario. The provinces that 
administer the CAIS program for their own producers say that 
they can administer the program more economically than the 
federal CAIS administration and that leaves more money on the 
table for producers in those provinces. But this NDP 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan allows 
the federal government to administer the program and provide 
employment to Winnipeg. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, many Saskatchewan producers are 

being phoned by CAIS requesting that they pay back money, 
money now that they can least afford it. The provinces that 
administer their own CAIS programs also have far fewer of 
these requests. As well, in both Alberta and Ontario 
applications are processed much faster where they process their 
own applications, Madam Deputy Speaker. Producers in 
Saskatchewan face a daunting task in completing the paperwork 
associated with the CAIS program, this program that is 
unnecessarily complicated and unfair, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
This has led to claims being rejected, producers having to 
appeal their claims, and producers being asked to return many 
payments after money is spent in an effort to pay their bills. 
 
The federal government at least realizes that there is a farm 
income crisis in Canada. In Manitoba and Alberta we’ve seen 
provincial governments move to adapt their crop insurance 
programs to the prices that have affected their producers. 
Alberta’s introduced floor-insured prices and spent 20 million 
to lower premiums, while Manitoba’s introduced excessive 
moisture insurance to deal with the heavy rains from the last 
couple of years. Meanwhile over the last now four years, this 
government has increased premiums and lowered coverage. 
 
Saskatchewan producers, Madam Deputy Speaker, currently 
receive no financial benefit for the variety of ecological goods 
that we produce on our farms, even though Manitoba has 
announced a pilot project where producers will receive money 
for those reasons. 
 
Producers in this province supply society with clean water 
through filtration by potholes on their land, provide clean air by 
sequestering CO2 and N2O and other air pollutants. Now, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, approximately 50 per cent of 
Saskatchewan farm land is farmed with no-till practices, and at 
50 per cent, Madam Deputy Speaker, 12.9 million tonnes of 
CO2 are removed from the atmosphere. Saskatchewan 
producers receive no credit or no payment for that service, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, although it will help us to comply with 
Kyoto. 
 
Agricultural land provides habitat for deer, waterfowl, coyotes, 
numerous other prairie animals, gophers, you name it, rabbits. 
Prairie potholes are responsible for the production of 70 per 
cent of North America’s waterfowl. Yet Saskatchewan 
producers receive no funding for these services that they 
provide to society in general. Yet out of this NDP government 
we’ve seen no meaningful, proactive policy that would 
recognize our producers for that contribution. 
 
The state of Minnesota has enabled producers to own ethanol 
plants, and that’s also been aided by the federal US [United 
States] government, Madam Deputy Speaker. This provides 
producers with an opportunity to have their loans underwritten, 
to buy into ethanol plants in their state wherever it may be — 
Minnesota was the first, but now it’s spread across the 
country— and to reap profits on not only the sale of the grain to 
their plants but also on the sale of the ethanol down the road. 
 
But in Saskatchewan this NDP government, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, would like to own the ethanol industry. They’ve tried 
to build ethanol plants, Madam Deputy Speaker, one in my 
constituency at Belle Plaine, this imaginary ethanol plant that 
didn’t ever happen, Madam Deputy Speaker, but was 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

announced previous to the last election and in so doing has set 
ethanol production in this province back several years. 
 
Ethanol drives the price of corn in the US where the corn crop 
is about 10.5 billion bushels a year. Compare that to our less 
than 1 billion bushel wheat crop in Western Canada and it’s not 
too hard to see, Madam Deputy Speaker, that ethanol could as 
well drive the price of wheat in Western Canada if our 
government was more co-operative with the private sector and 
proactive in introducing the policies that would encourage it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this NDP government pays lip service 
to the crisis in Saskatchewan agriculture but their record is 
dismal on the file. They don’t ante up the province’s portion of 
CAIS until payments should be coming out to producers every 
year. Each year they reduce the level of coverage and increase 
the premium for crop insurance. They reduced the farm fuel 
rebate by 3 cents a litre two years ago, pleading poverty at the 
time. Now when they’re sitting on a pile of resource revenue 
there’s no move to reinstate that 3 cents a litre. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, today they dare to say in this motion 
that the farm crisis is beyond the control of the provincial 
government. They have a responsibility and the province can 
have an important impact on the problem. And it’s time for this 
NDP government to live up to their responsibilities to our farm 
families and to stop abdicating their responsibilities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they dare to play politics with the lives 
of our producers and their families by including a paragraph on 
the wheat board at the end of their motion — a paragraph that 
they know we cannot and will not in all conscience support. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in spite of the value-added killing 
effect of the wheat board in Western Canada — the fact they 
will only call for about half of last year’s durum crop in the 
current crop year — and the hardship of farmers going broke 
with their bins full and those producers’ inability to generate 
cash flow on their farms even though they have been very 
successful producers and the fact that under the board system 
producers are responsible for demurrage, insurance, and other 
charges where under the open market the grain companies that 
own the grain take those responsibilities, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the minister says that producer car loading will be at 
risk under the dual marketing system. 
 
That right, Madam Deputy Speaker, can be safeguarded by the 
stroke of the federal minister’s pen and this provincial Ag 
minister ought to be making that case to the federal minister 
instead of fearmongering among our beleaguered producers in 
rural Saskatchewan on this issue. 
 
He talks about, and I quote, “pulling the wheat board out of the 
system” and of, I quote again, “eliminating single-desk selling” 
— things we in the opposition, things nobody else is even 
suggesting. And it’s my understanding that this is also the 
position of the federal government where — as we do in the 
provincial opposition: we advocate marketing freedom, we do 
not advocate the abolition of the wheat board — this is the point 
that seems to be missed by the members opposite, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about the democratic mechanisms of the 

wheat board. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, what is democratic 
about compulsion? Surely democracy and compulsion are not 
compatible in marketing. 
 
It is inexcusable that this cynical, tired, old government that 
hasn’t had a new idea since they decided back in the 1930s to 
eliminate capitalism is sabotaging their own motion here by 
adding the wheat board clause to the end of it and by abdicating 
all provincial responsibility for the ag crisis. This is simply not 
acceptable, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is immoral and 
irresponsible. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when the federal NDP Party held the 
balance of power during the recent Martin Liberal 
administration — was bragging about all of the influence that 
he and his party were exerting on that Liberal federal 
government — we didn’t hear one word about a better farm 
program to replace CAIS or more funding for CAIS. Nothing 
about an emergency program to help out Western Canadian 
agriculture, Madam Deputy Speaker, or to improve the crop 
insurance program — nothing of that nature. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this emergency motion is nothing 
more than a show that every producer in this province will see 
through. And I will not support their phony motion, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and soon to be Mr. Speaker, I think. I first want to say 
a couple comments regarding standing in this position in the 
House. It’s the first opportunity that I’ve had to rise on my feet 
and speak from this position in the House. And it is a humbling 
experience because a fellow that has spoke here many, many 
times — for as long as I have been elected, for six years — he 
stood here and spoke on many, many different issues. And 
every time that he stands to speak, I can honestly say I’m quite 
interested in what he has to say. 
 
I have this irresistible urge to have kind of half glasses and 
pulled down to the bridge of my nose and start pointing a finger 
from this position. And I don’t know what it is, but I guess it’s a 
precedent that has been set by the member that was here and 
I’m sure, I’m 100 per cent positive, will be back here in the 
very near future. And I’ll be very glad to yield this position and 
take whichever position I am allotted. In the back corner will be 
great as long as the member from now Martensville but 
formerly of Rosthern will be in this position, and we look 
forward to that day. 
 
It’s an honour to stand today again and speak on behalf of the 
constituents of Indian Head-Milestone regarding agriculture. It 
was not long ago that we had our fall session and I remember in 
that fall session a debate that went on regarding agriculture — a 
debate that went on into the evening regarding agriculture and 
government members and opposition members talked about the 
different situations that were taking place in agriculture. 
 
But I remember a few of the statements that were made by the 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

government members regarding agriculture and regarding 
programs that were in place in the ’80s. And I remember a 
certain member on the government side saying that every 
farmer in this province abused that program and they were 
intent on falsifying records so they could get payments from 
that program. 
 
And I said at that point, I said, you know it’s amazing that they 
would expect to go out into rural Saskatchewan and ever get a 
seat, ever win a vote, ever win a seat federally or provincially. 
And I told, I said — I think I spoke right after that member — 
and I said I will thank you personally, and I have yet to do that, 
because I think you’ve ensured a seat for every Conservative 
MP in the next federal election. Well I was off a little bit. Not 
all 14 ridings federally were won by the Conservatives but I 
think what is even more significant — 12 were — but even 
more significant than that not one NDP member was elected in 
the last federal election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And there is a reason why there wasn’t one 
federal MP elected in the last federal election. It’s because of 
statements made by this government. It was because of 
statements made by the member from Yorkton, statements 
made by members from the government benches that continue 
to look at rural Saskatchewan as something else, you know. 
And I’ve had many people in the last number of months and a 
year or two, when the farm crisis has been escalating, and I’ve 
had so many of them say to me — and it’s, you know, it’s tough 
to answer back — but they’ll say you know, really I don’t think 
the government really cares what happens in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Look at where they get their votes. Look at where this 
government gets its votes. So what are they going to cater to? 
Who are they going to cater to? They are not going to cater to 
rural Saskatchewan. They are not going to cater to the 
community of Riceton or Gray or Francis or Indian Head or any 
other of the great communities in Indian Head-Milestone. They 
won’t cater to those communities. They tend to throw their 
support more behind the urban centres. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now this isn’t me. This isn’t what I was saying. These are the 
statements that I hear continually when I attend a hockey game 
in Milestone or when I attend a . . . This summer with all the 
centennial events, people were in a good mood. But what they 
kept saying about agriculture is that the commodity prices are 
so depressed that we’re in trouble, and quite frankly we don’t 
think the provincial government cares. 
 
And I think that was very reflective in the last federal election. I 
believe it was reflective in the 2003 provincial election and 
even the 1999 general election provincially when the NDP party 
itself was virtually wiped out in every rural riding, Mr. Speaker 
— virtually wiped out. And I think it carried on in 2003, and it 
will carry on in the next general election. The scary part is that 
even urban Saskatchewan now is feeling like the NDP has lost 
touch. And I know there is much fertile ground in the urban 
areas for our party to make further inroads than what we already 
have had. 

But the whole issue around agriculture and where we are today, 
the member from Thunder Creek talked about some of the 
different prices that we are experiencing. And really I think, you 
know, we can look at many different aspects of agriculture. 
 
But to me it’s simply . . . we have extremely low commodity 
prices with quite high input costs. And because you have rising 
input costs and you have falling commodity prices, there isn’t a 
business or a company that can withstand that type of pressure. 
And that’s what we’re seeing all over the province. It doesn’t 
seem to matter. 
 
And I will say that in the constituency that I represent we have 
been very, very fortunate over the last couple years to have 
some extremely good crops. We have been insulated a little bit 
from some of the poor quality of crops that people experienced 
last year. Even the year prior when there was a devastating 
frost, some of our producers made out not too bad. 
 
So we have been insulated, but I have never, in six years that I 
have been elected, been to the different communities and talked 
to farmers in my constituency that have been so negative with 
the prospects of this coming year. Because they don’t see one 
commodity that is kind of the Cinderella story or that people 
can look at and say, this is something that we can grow and 
make money. 
 
Just quickly, I’ll just quickly talk about some of the commodity 
prices. When you’re looking at canary seed at 8 cents a pound 
. . . for the people that don’t understand agriculture, canary seed 
at 8 cents a pound is a record low. Not very long ago, three to 
four years ago, we were looking at 20 to 25 cents a pound. So 
it’s been cut by 300 per cent. Your income, if you had been 
growing canary, this past year has been cut by 300 per cent. 
Devastating. 
 
You can look at wheat prices at $2. You can look at lentils. And 
the wheat price we’re going to talk a little bit about because that 
is the one commodity that I’m going to list here that is under the 
wheat board jurisdiction. But you can look at no. 1 lentils that 
are at 11 cents. And for years, you wouldn’t sell any lentil . . . 
an extra three would be 14 cents. This is a no. 1 lentil that has 
been dropped down to 11, if you can get rid of it. 
 
Flax prices are at 5.50 a bushel, canola at less than $5. These 
prices are unheard of, absolutely unheard of. So when you’ve 
got falling prices and rising inputs, it puts everybody in a 
squeeze. 
 
As I said, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood talked 
about chemical prices. He talked about fertilizer prices. Fuel 
costs are going up, equipment and parts, taxes, crop insurance. I 
was very interested to hear the Minister of Agriculture talk a 
little bit about the Crow rate and the issue around transportation 
of grain. And that’s another cost, another cost to producers. 
 
But it’s also interesting when he talked about the Crow rate and 
how all that money was taken out of the hands of agriculture 
producers. At that time the NDP government was in power — 
the NDP government was in power. And also at that time, 
strangely enough, agriculture was going through a bit of a high 
at that point. Commodity prices were pretty good. The input 
costs weren’t too terribly high. People were making a little bit 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

of money on the farm through those years. 
 
And I remember people in my area — because I was farming at 
that time — people that I talked to said, yes, you know, this 
Crow rate, it’s going to hurt into the future. We’re getting a bit 
of a payout. We’re making a little bit of money now. It didn’t 
seem to have the impact as what it’s having now because now 
we’re in the squeeze. We’re not making any money, but we’re 
seeing those costs escalate. And it’s just another cost on the 
input side. 
 
It’s been interesting. So what are the solutions? I’ve talked 
about the real base cause of the problem is lower commodity 
prices and increased inputs. What are the solutions? 
 
And I was just thinking back in the time that I farmed all the 
different programs that have been put into place. And I really 
believe it’s probably taken one person a full-time job to think of 
an acronyms for all the different farm programs that we’ve had. 
I remember there was WGSP, the western grain stabilization 
program. And then there was NISA, the net income stabilization 
account. And there was AIDA and there was GRIP [gross 
revenue insurance program] and there was CFIP. And now 
there’s CAIS. I mean, that’s been in about the last 15 years 
about 10 different programs and an acronyms that have been 
put into place. 
 
And none of them really have met the need. Certainly GRIP I 
would say was about as close as it could come, but 
unfortunately that was ripped up by this government. So when 
he talks about the Crow rate and he talks about the issues 
around the Crow rate, I think he also leaves out . . . He’s also 
got kind of a selective memory when he didn’t mention, yes the 
Crow rate is hurting now; it wasn’t as much of an impact right 
at that time. But right around that time as well we were losing 
programs like the GRIP program that farmers were able to take 
to the bank that was bankable. 
 
So you know, he says that yes there is some issues around the 
federal government. But every time I’ve heard the minister 
speak, whether it was last fall or now this spring, he fails to ever 
look within his own government and say, well there are some 
issues within this government that we need to take care of and 
we haven’t. Because those are the issues that we hear about on 
an ongoing basis, that there are issues that this provincial 
government has failed to address. 
 
I heard the member from Yorkton talk about the ethanol 
industry and the biodiesel industry. And you know when you 
look at input costs and commodities, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle, the Minister of Agriculture, talked about the input 
costs and he talked about the big corporations taking the money 
and getting rich. That’s one side of it. That’s only one side of it. 
The other side is the input costs and what do we do to try and 
. . . is the commodity prices. And what do we try to do in our 
province to use more of our commodities and so we can kind of 
control the price. The value-add I guess is what we’re talking 
about. 
 
The minister or the member from Yorkton talked about the 
ethanol industry which is something we need to move towards. 
I know our side of the House supported the legislation that 
came forward mandating ethanol use. But the unfortunate part 

is is that they can come up with a good idea, and I think that 
was a great idea, and biodiesel is a great idea. But what they did 
at that same time is they said, but we think value adding and 
ethanol is a good idea but really the only people that know how 
good of an idea it is and that can make this work in the province 
is we, the government. 
 
And I remember at that time they decided that they were going 
to start an ethanol plant at Belle Plaine, and they spent $100,000 
on levelling the ground and they had a big contractor come in 
and level the ground and put a bunch of gravel down. Then they 
went over to Bazaar & Novelty and rented a huge tent, and I 
don’t think that was quite big enough. They went over to 
another, A-1 Rent-Alls, and they rented a great big circus tent, 
and they put it up on this chunk of land that’s been flattened 
with graders and they put gravel down. A couple of hundred 
thousand dollars has been put into just the site so that this tent 
could be set up on. So then that’s not quite enough. Now we 
need to get some people in to fill the tent because we’re going 
to make the huge announcement that we, as a government, are 
going to start the ethanol industry. 
 
Ethanol is a good idea. And it must be a good idea; they got the 
opposition to support. We’re going to support the government 
in the fact that ethanol is what needs to happen so let’s get this 
big dog and pony show . . . So they’ve got the base. They’ve 
got the land flattened out. They’ve got all of the gravel down. 
They’ve been to all the tent rental places in Saskatchewan, got 
the biggest tent they could find. 
 
So now we need some people. So obviously they went to some 
of the community schools around the area and into Moose Jaw, 
and they got busload after busload of kids, and they brought 
them all out to this big revival meeting or I shouldn’t say . . . 
ethanol meeting and they’re going to tell the people how we as 
a government are going to create the ethanol business. 
 
So all these busloads came out and busloads came out. And 
they had bands playing and they had balloons and they had 
everything going on. It was a big happening. But you know 
what happened was, it was a big announcement. They got to 
stand out there in front and the Premier was out there talking 
about how wonderful it is and how they’re going to partner with 
a company and we the government are going to make this 
happen. 
 
How many years ago was that? It was about five years ago and 
not one thing has happened from that side because — you know 
what happens in this and has happened time and time again — 
as soon as the government gets involved, as soon as the 
government gets involved, people start backing away and 
saying ho, ho this doesn’t look so good. And that’s exactly what 
happened with Broe industries, they backed away. 
 
And you put this industry, you put this industry back five to six 
years, which quite frankly the industry couldn’t afford because, 
when you look at what’s happened across the line in the states, 
in some of the states and the advancements of the ethanol 
industry there through private industry, we should be absolutely 
ashamed of what’s happened in this province. 
 
You’ve taken a good idea and you’ve absolutely smothered it 
because ethanol would have been a great help in the agriculture 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

sector. It would have been an economic generator, but 
unfortunately the government had to get in the middle of it with 
their big revival meeting in the tent. And you know when you 
go out to that site right now, I think the only thing left is maybe 
one tent peg. And that’s the exact sum amount that we have got 
out of this government’s ethanol announcement. For probably 3 
to $400,000, $800,000 of investment, we have got maybe one 
tent peg left there and that’s all there is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of troubles in farm land, in the 
agriculture sector across the province. The solutions aren’t easy 
and it’s not one solution. It’s many, many, many solutions. But 
one thing I know will not solve the problem is when the 
government tries to directly inject itself into the economy. 
 
People out in rural Saskatchewan are saying yes we need help. 
We need support for low commodity prices. We need support 
on high input costs. But what we don’t need is this government 
directly injecting itself into the economy. 
 
The other thing that people are saying out there — and I just 
want to touch on it because it was part of the motion — is the 
whole issue around the Canadian Wheat Board, and we’ve 
talked about dual marketing. But when I look at the crops 
grown in southern Saskatchewan, such a small portion are 
wheat board grown crops anymore. Farmers have voted — they 
talk about a democratic process — farmers have voted by what 
they produce. And what they produce now compared to 20 
years ago has changed significantly for one reason: they want 
the option to market it on their own. 
 
They grow canary seed. They grow flax. They grow canola 
because . . . Pulse crops, they grow all sorts of crops because 
they have the ability then to market it when they see fit. And 
there has been one reason for that because under the Canadian 
Wheat Board there is no option. You take what they give you 
and that’s it. Farmers wanted to no longer have their destiny 
controlled by somebody else but try and control part of their 
own destiny. 
 
As far as the Canadian Wheat Board is concerned on my farm, 
we still grow some board grain, it hasn’t been . . . it’s been a 
couple of years since we have. And I would probably still 
market it through the Canadian Wheat Board but the option of 
controlling your own destiny is where people want to be, I truly 
believe. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. I won’t be 
supporting the motion and thank you for the opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to speak on this emergency debate on agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had far too many of these emergency 
debates on agriculture. And it’s frustrating for those in the 
industry and for families dependent upon a strong agriculture 
sector in rural Saskatchewan to continually see a lack of action 
and a lack of solutions coming forward for their industry. 

I could talk — as have members on both sides of the House and 
they’ve spoken very accurately — about the plight of 
agriculture at the current time the province of Saskatchewan. 
I’m not going to go through a litany of statistics although I 
could. I don’t disagree with a lot of the numbers and figures 
used by the government members and certainly agree with my 
colleagues on this side of the House. But I will mention a 
couple of facts and figures before I get on to discuss some of 
the issues that have been brought forward today. 
 
First of all, this is the third year of negative farm income in 
Saskatchewan. You simply cannot sustain an industry when you 
have year after year of negative farm income. And I spoke to 
one of my constituents who said that the local credit union is 
telling farmers, when they are trying to make their financial 
arrangements for the coming year, that it pretty much doesn’t 
matter what they grow, pretty much doesn’t matter which crop 
they grow — whether it’s grains, oilseeds, board, non-board, 
special crops, non-special crops — they can expect to lose 
about $40 an acre in this current crop year, this upcoming 
season. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take a mathematician or an economist or 
a bookkeeper to figure out that there’s a real dilemma facing 
agriculture in this province if you are faced with the prospect of 
going out and losing money on the industry that you are 
involved in. And, Mr. Speaker, that demands attention. It 
demands attention from all levels of government and, Mr. 
Speaker, there certainly isn’t a lot of time to sort this out. 
 
I was talking to my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena and she 
talked about last fall, 17 inches of rain in harvest time. They 
had to put dual wheels on the combine. They still made such 
ruts in the field that they can’t get through the fields this spring. 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no disaster program in place to deal with 
this kind of an issue and that could happen whether you’re in 
Wadena, Saskatchewan or whether you’re in Summerside, 
Prince Edward Island. Mr. Speaker, there are some national 
requirements in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you drive throughout Saskatchewan you realize 
that last year there was a bountiful harvest. There are piles of 
grain still out on the ground and the quality of those piles of 
grain are deteriorating rapidly. And again these crops are board 
crops, non-board crops. They are thousands and thousands and 
thousands of tonnes of product that producers were expecting to 
be sold into the marketplace over the winter, or even before the 
winter began, to maintain their business and to support their 
family. 
 
What do we hear from the Minister of Agriculture today? 
Instead of bringing forward solutions that we could all get 
excited about in this emergency debate, he’s complaining about 
per capita expenses. He’s never really explained it very well. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has high per capita 
expenses because agriculture is a significant part of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. I haven’t noticed very high per 
capita expenses when it comes to the auto industry in 
Saskatchewan, or the fishing industry. We have some per capita 
expenses with the forestry industry. 
 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that Saskatchewan and our provincial 
government has more of a responsibility to agriculture than the 
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador or even the 
Government of Ontario where agriculture is a much smaller 
portion of their economy. So rather than just throwing out these 
numbers and saying it’s too big, we can’t do anything, it’s time 
that the Minister of Agriculture began to say, this industry is 
important to Saskatchewan. The people in this industry are 
important to Saskatchewan and doggone it, we’re going to do 
something about this industry. And we’re going to be positive, 
constructive players in solving the problems facing agriculture, 
rather than complaining about some per capita formula that 
doesn’t even make sense here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also listened to the Agriculture minister talk 
about the loss of the Crow rate. Well, Mr. Speaker, I happened 
to be in the Parliament of Canada when Mr. Goodale and the 
Liberal government decided to discontinue the Crow rate. And I 
voted against it because, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, producers 
were not getting value for giving up the Crow benefit at the 
time. The member for North Battleford was also in the House of 
Commons. He knows I stood up and voted against that 
proposal. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, earlier there was a multi-billion dollar offer 
on the table for producers in lieu of the Crow rate, but the NDP 
stood against that. And, Mr. Speaker, that fund would have 
gone on in perpetuity to provide the benefits of the Crow rate 
without the problems of preventing processing industries from 
developing here in the province of Saskatchewan and in all of 
Western Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the problem with the Crow rate are the 
members and the party on the other side of this House, the 
NDP, who couldn’t see the solution when it was right in front of 
their noses and had to settle for not even second best, not third 
best, but an inadequate solution to the transportation needs of 
the agriculture sector here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I hear the minister chirping over there 
so I must be touching on the truth because he’s getting pretty 
upset, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want you to know that I listened to the minister very carefully. 
And he talked about somebody somewhere — I don’t know if 
he was talking about us or if he was talking about the new 
federal government — but he said somebody was trying to get 
rid of the Canadian Wheat Board. I don’t know who he was 
talking about, Mr. Speaker. He certainly wasn’t talking about 
me. He wasn’t talking about the Saskatchewan Party. And I 
listened pretty closely in the federal election and I don’t think 
he was talking about the federal Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve never talked about getting rid of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. There are many producers that 
appreciate the board and the board can provide some services 
and some benefits to the agriculture sector that I support and my 
colleagues support. What we are saying on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, is that the Canadian Wheat Board needs to 
be a player in the marketing of grains in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I quite frankly think they could do it right 
across the country and truly be a Canadian Wheat Board, but 
they must do it in a competitive environment. 

Mr. Speaker, if you have a hockey team and that hockey team 
never gets to play another hockey team, are they going to be a 
good hockey team? Not at all. They’re going to become pretty 
slack. They’re going to be there for the party between periods, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m not saying that the wheat board is slack and 
without some ability and expertise. But, Mr. Speaker, the wheat 
board needs to be sharpened by competition in a voluntary 
marketing environment. Mr. Speaker, they have had that 
environment in the past and they have been successful in that 
environment. Mr. Speaker, they have thrived in that 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the members on the other side 
would think it was very good if we said, let’s have single-desk 
political party in Saskatchewan and let’s call it the 
Saskatchewan Party. We don’t want any competition 
politically; let’s just let the Saskatchewan Party do it and let’s 
let them be the single-desk political party in Saskatchewan. 
They’d say no; they’d say the Saskatchewan Party needs 
somebody to challenge them, someone to question their ideas, 
someone to provide an alternative. 
 
Well the marketing of products requires the same challenges — 
competition, someone to offer another way, someone to say 
perhaps we can do it better, someone to make the Canadian 
Wheat Board better. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s common sense but 
the members over there are playing this silly game saying 
people want to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board when 
nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about the plight of special crops in 
Saskatchewan. As my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone 
mentioned, the price of, say, lentils has never been lower in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s at all-time lows. We say, well 
why is that? Well there’s a couple of reasons. One reason is that 
the Americans are now subsidizing these specialty crops and 
that has been an influence to lower the price. The other reason 
was that there was a transportation tie-up on the West Coast. 
Just when we really needed to move lentils, there was a strike 
out on the West Coast. 
 
And you know I’m sure that there were NDPers out there, 
locked arms with those workers destroying Saskatchewan 
agriculture and destroying the Saskatchewan marketplace. I’ve 
seen NDP members on the picket lines picketing and supporting 
strikes that debilitate Saskatchewan agriculture. And they think 
not twice of it because their party is supported by these unions 
and these actions. They don’t care about the wellbeing of 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. They’re more concerned about 
their narrow political objectives. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s part 
of the reason why the price of lentils are at a historic low in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the comments by the member 
from Yorkton, the minister responsible for rural development. 
And this is a small issue but it bugs me because Saskatchewan 
is so far behind the other provinces. You know we do have 
Crown lands in Saskatchewan for agriculture purposes. And 
you know if there is oil and gas found on those Crown lands, 
that government pulls in all the surface right revenues and the 
poor producer, the farm family out there trying to make a living, 
receives almost nothing. It doesn’t happen in other provinces 
but this greedy NDP government is not prepared to give up one 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

little red cent to agriculture once they get their paws on this 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister for rural development could fix that 
really easy in cabinet one of these days if he really cared about 
rural Saskatchewan. But quite frankly, while he can get up and 
say nice things here in the Assembly, when he goes to his office 
and when he goes to cabinet and when he’s in his NDP caucus 
he forgets all about rural Saskatchewan and its needs, and he 
does absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Yorkton also talked about the 
railcar coalition, and that’s fine. If there’s a group of farmers 
that want to buy these railway cars, let them go ahead. If 
Sinclair Harrison wants to buy them, we’ve said, you know, 
blessings to you; we hope you enjoy having them. But I want to 
tell the provincial government, I don’t want them to spend my 
tax dollars buying railway cars, quite simply. 
 
I’ve got a tractor and I’ve got a cultivator, an air seeder on my 
farm. The air seeder isn’t worth a whole lot without the tractor. 
If I’ve got a nice air seeder there I can spend $100,000 on that 
air seeder, but if I don’t have a tractor to pull it, it isn’t very 
valuable to me until I find that tractor. And if somebody else 
has control of the tractor, I don’t have a whole lot of control 
over the air seeder. 
 
So maybe there are some benefits to farmers buying these 
railcars. And if they want to do that and they can make the 
financial arrangements to do that, that’s fine. I support that. I 
say let them do that. But I say to the minister, don’t invest my 
dollars, because as a farmer I don’t want to buy any railcars. 
My neighbour might but I don’t want to, and I don’t want my 
tax dollars going into that investment. 
 
Now my time is slipping away here but I have a couple of other 
issues that I want to talk about. I want to talk about subsidies. I 
think it was the minister from Yorkton, or the member from 
Yorkton again that was quoting some little thing out of context 
saying that I was opposed to subsidies. Well I can tell the 
minister — because I’ve been consistent on this throughout my 
entire political career — yes I have a position on subsidies. I 
think that generally they’re a bad thing because they . . . As I 
mentioned, when the Americans began to subsidize special 
crops our price went down. 
 
But I have never ever said that when the rest of the world is 
subsidizing products that Canada should walk away from its 
support for farmers. I have never said that. And if the minister 
. . . I’m sure the minister wasn’t aware of that. And I’m sure he 
wouldn’t have stated that in this legislature had he been aware 
of the truth. So I want to make him aware of the fact that I’ve 
been consistent in that position. 
 
In fact when I was involved in designing agriculture policy, we 
proposed what should be in place is a trade distortion 
adjustment program which actually looked, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And it still has some legitimacy today, should have been 
implemented a long time ago. It would have been easier to 
implement with the trade rules of those days than the trade rules 
that we deal with today. But basically it said, look at a 
commodity. I don’t care, let it be spring wheat or let it be hogs 
— any agriculture product — and if there are international 

subsidies that determine what the amount of hurt is to the price 
received by Canadian producers for that product. And then look 
at what you have in your treasury and say to farmers — be 
honest with them — and say you know, the hurt caused by this 
trade distortion, this international subsidization of your product 
is costing your industry, let’s say, $1 billion. Throw out a nice 
round number. 
 
And so the Finance minister says, well you know we can cover 
50 per cent of that. We can cover 500 million and that’s what 
our trade distortion will be. Maybe they can do better. Maybe 
they have a stronger purse and they’ve been more prudent than 
the NDP are with tax dollars and they say we can cover 75 per 
cent of the shortfall. That’s the kind of subsidies that I think 
should be in place here in Canada to counteract international 
subsidies. 
 
Quite frankly the grains and oilseed program is kind of along 
that line. Not as good as we’d like to see, I admit, but pretty 
easy to implement. Basically they said there’s a real problem in 
grains and oilseeds and instead of going through all of the 
intricacies of CAIS and crop insurance and that, they basically 
said, what’s your farm income from grains and oilseeds? We’ll 
pay seven-point-some per cent of that. 
 
And so if you have a $100,000 income on your farm from these 
commodities, expect a cheque for between 7 and $8,000. It 
should be a lot more, should be a lot more, but pretty simple, 
doesn’t take a huge bureaucracy like CAIS to figure out a 
program like this. Farmers understand it. Far less expensive to 
administer. Pretty clean cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why hasn’t the NDP been leading the charge on 
this kind of a national agriculture program? Why has the 
Minister of Agriculture been sitting at home complaining about 
the 40/60 split or the per capita cost of funding support for 
agriculture? Why hasn’t he been out there doing something 
useful, like putting together a long-term program that actually 
works? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not here to be a defender of the federal 
government. I don’t know how they’ll do. I know . . . Yes it’s 
true, I know some of the people involved. Lots of them I don’t 
know. I don’t how they’re going to deal with the issues. But I 
was impressed when that new federal cabinet, when they came 
out of their very first cabinet meeting, the very first 
announcement after the Prime Minister had said we had a 
cabinet meeting, was the Minister of Agriculture came out and 
he said, there’s a problem on the farm; we have to do something 
about it. 
 
We’re going to implement as speedily as we can the grains and 
oilseed program. And not only are we going to implement it the 
way it was designed prior to the election, but we’re going to put 
more money in upfront in the initial payment because farmers 
need that assistance, they need that help now. 
 
It was the very first thing on their agenda. And as a farmer, that 
made me feel good. That made me feel like somebody thought 
my industry was important. Somebody thought feeding people 
not only in Canada but around the world is a noble vocation and 
something that we as farmers should be proud of here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

So at least, Mr. Speaker, they got off to a good start. And I 
applaud the new Agriculture minister and the new federal 
administration for that fast action. 
 
[16:45] 
 
What do we see from the NDP? Well, Mr. Speaker, when 
there’s a crisis, first of all they won’t admit there is a crisis until 
it becomes so obvious as, you know, the nose on their face. And 
then they say, well yeah, there is a problem, but we’re going to 
wait and see what the federal government does. Or we’re going 
to wait and see if it goes away. Or we’re going to wait until the 
opposition tells us what to do. They’ve got a hundred reasons. 
Or we’ll wait and see what the new American farm program is. 
Or we’ll wait until we see who wins the World Series. Who 
knows, Mr. Speaker, what reason they will come up with as to 
why they should wait before they act? 
 
To deal with agriculture is always on the bottom of the NDP’s 
cabinet list. It’s always the lowest. It’s the lowest priority, Mr. 
Speaker. Agriculture is just one of those nuisances for the NDP 
that they don’t want to have to deal with until it becomes so bad 
they can’t help it, and then they call an emergency debate. Then 
they call an emergency debate and say, hey, look what we’ve 
done. We’ve had an emergency debate about the farm crisis. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the farmer families of Saskatchewan much 
more appreciate an NDP government that would roll up its 
sleeves and get to work and do the job, do the job that they were 
elected to do, whether it be to deal with the agriculture 
problems or the crystal meth problems or the hospital waiting 
list problems. There’s a whole bunch of them, enough for all 30 
of those members over there to be busy with. 
 
But instead, Mr. Speaker, they find excuses. They try to point 
the finger at anybody but themselves. That will not do. And for 
that reason, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to support the amendment 
put forward by the member for Melville-Saltcoats. And I’m 
pleased to have been able to participate in the debate on 
agriculture today. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to enter into this emergency debate 
on agriculture. It seems, Mr. Speaker, that we have done this in 
the past on an annual basis, and now we’re doing it on a 
semi-annual basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason we are doing it, as many of the speakers in this 
debate have said earlier, is that there is a very, very serious 
crisis out there, Mr. Speaker. It has been building over the last 
few years, and we have producers and a segment of the 
agriculture industry that are hitting the wall, Mr. Speaker. And 
the grain and oilseed producers and the pulse producers are 
those people, the people that initiate production, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Without them we would not have a livestock industry. We 
would not have a feeding industry. We would have no value 
added to agriculture products because it is those primary 

producers that put the seeds into the ground, that nurture their 
crops and harvest the crops and deliver them into the handling 
and transportation system, Mr. Speaker. And those are the very 
people who are not participating in the income stream and have 
seen their incomes decline year after year after year while their 
costs have risen to the point now where they are in a cost price 
squeeze that they cannot handle it any longer. 
 
But I won’t dwell on those issues because many of the speakers 
on both sides of the House have recognized the hurt and the 
crisis out there. But particularly on that side of the House, we 
have heard very few if any solutions to the problems, Mr. 
Speaker. And as per usual, and I was listening both to the 
Minister of Agriculture and to the Deputy Premier; they laid the 
blame at the feet of the federal government. It’s always the 
federal government’s fault, Mr. Speaker. A poor provincial 
government can do nothing. That is the position they have 
taken. 
 
Yet when you look around at other provincial governments in 
Western Canada, Mr. Speaker, they realize what their 
limitations are. Certainly provincial governments don’t have the 
financial resources that a federal government has, but provincial 
governments, including this provincial government, have 
significant resources. We have over $1 billion in surplus, Mr. 
Speaker, coming to the coffers of Saskatchewan this year, so 
they cannot claim poverty, Mr. Speaker. But what is lacking on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is the vision and 
leadership. 
 
I was at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 
spoke and he talked about all the tools and all the resources and 
all the skills and all the people that we have in this great 
province. And he was right. We have everything we need in this 
province except the plan. It’s like having the recipe. And we 
have all the ingredients, but with every recipe, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a how-to, in other words the instructions . . . is how to 
put them all together to bake the cake. And what these folks on 
that side of the House lack is that how-to plan. They have no 
vision. They have no idea how to solve and address this 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are groups and organizations within our province and 
particularly in the farm community that have ideas, that have 
plans. And what does this government, what has this 
government done in the past? They would hold the token 
meetings with the groups, listen politely, do the lip service but 
really nothing became of them. Then finally on March 2 there 
was a news release from the Minister of Agriculture. He’s going 
to meet with farm leaders. At the 11th hour, the 59th minute, 
and the 45th second before we hit the wall, the Minister of 
Agriculture, our provincial Minister of Agriculture is finally 
going to bring the farm leaders of our province together to see if 
they have some idea as to how to solve this situation. And there 
are ideas out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems, in my opinion and I think in the opinion of a number 
of our farm leaders across Western Canada, that the grain and 
oilseed sector of agriculture is at a crossroad. For the first 
hundred years, farmers and particularly the people that grew 
field crops did that for food production. 
 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2006 

Wheat — Saskatchewan was opened and settled because we are 
a great area of the world to produce wheat. And for many years, 
it provided a good living for many farm families. It’s the reason 
why Saskatchewan and the Western provinces were settled, Mr. 
Speaker. But that is no longer the case. 
 
There are other areas of the world that are growing foodstuffs 
and frankly they are beating us at our own game in some cases 
and in other cases with the help of their government. And 
primarily our major competitors — those farmers in the 
European Union and our neighbours to the south — they have 
the large federal treasuries that are subsidizing them, that are 
supporting them, that are replacing income that is not there in 
the marketplace that has led to overproduction and so on. I 
think we’ve heard the story before. 
 
So what is the solution? Well we need to look at other income 
streams to the farm, to the family farm. And the family farm has 
changed over the years, Mr. Speaker. At one time it was a 
family — a father and a mother and their children — operating 
a smaller acreage. Now it’s a combination of brothers and 
neighbours and father and sons. But they have been . . . many of 
them are incorporated because they need to operate large 
acreages because the margins have been so slim and have 
declined, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there is a movement or concepts out there, Mr. Speaker, 
that what we need to do is provide other income streams to the 
farm. And one of the basis of those income streams could be 
payments for environmental goods and services that our 
producers are providing to society for the good of society And 
society values those goods and services. Up until now, all those 
services that producers are providing to society, they bear the 
full costs and they receive no compensation for them. 
 
Take the example of wildlife habitat; water; protecting, 
repairing areas and watersheds; minimizing soil erosion by 
adopting technology. All those sorts of things are happening out 
there, Mr. Speaker. And society — and I think the citizens of 
our province and the citizens of our country — are recognizing 
that these are valuable services, and they are willing to 
compensate the producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in that whole area there is a unique 
opportunity for western Canadian farmers, and particularly 
Saskatchewan farmers, in this whole area of dealing with 
climate change. It’s scientifically proven that agricultural soils 
have great capacity to store carbon. And our federal government 
has signed on to a climate change international treaty to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and to sequester carbon. And that 
whole area, Mr. Speaker, will provide or could provide some 
opportunities for our producers. But we need to develop that. 
 
And the federal government is developing or started down the 
road of developing a whole system of offset credits and so on, 
but it’s in its very preliminary stage. And when I asked the 
Minister of Agriculture, our provincial Minister of Agriculture, 
where he and his department were on this issue last spring, they 
said well we think it’s a little too early to get involved in this. 
Well the fact is anybody that’s knowledgeable in this whole 
issue realized, Mr. Speaker, that they are two or three years 
behind. 
 

I have made a point of asking each minister whose department 
may have a role to play in this whole area of sequestering 
carbon and carbon offsets and carbon trading to see where this 
government is on this whole issue. And you know where they 
are, Mr. Speaker? They’re not even in the ballpark or on the 
planet as such as far as this issue. They pay a bit of lip service 
and they’ll say, well if you ask the Minister of Agriculture, well 
it’s actually the Minister of Environment. And if you ask the 
Minister of Environment, it’s actually the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that’s dealing with this issue. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a group, a farm group out there. It’s 
called the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association who 
have done a lot of work led by John Bennett and now Edgar 
Hammermeister — who’s the new president — who are very, 
very knowledgeable, have met with their counterparts across 
Canada, have met with the federal bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker. 
And they are the people that are the go-to people when anyone 
in this province — and I dare say in Western Canada — want to 
know how this whole system should be set up. What are the 
pitfalls? What are the opportunities? They are the people that 
have done the research and have the knowledge, but it’s an 
ongoing process, Mr. Speaker. And this is an organization that 
is largely funded by memberships and also by accessing various 
funding sources through both provincial and federal 
government. 
 
Well the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that their funding sources will run 
off as of March 31, Mr. Speaker, and both federally and 
provincially. And so they have made proposals to this 
provincial government to help in developing this whole carbon 
offset trading system and all the extension work that needs to go 
along with that, and the research and development. And you 
know what the response was, both from the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Minister of Environment? They got Dear 
John letters, Mr. Speaker. They said yes, we think you’ve got a 
great idea, but we haven’t got any money for you. 
 
And yet there is no capacity within this provincial, within this 
NDP government to deal with this issue. They’ve got an 
organization that can deal with the issue. Do you think they 
would have enough sense to at least provide them with some 
funding so that they can continue the work, Mr. Speaker? No. 
And what is the reason? Well I don’t know what the reason is, 
but I think they have the feeling that if they can’t do it 
themselves, we’re not going to let anybody else do it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And who will suffer? The people that will suffer will be the 
farmers of this country, Mr. Speaker. So they stand up. They 
propose emergency debates, pay some lip service. Then they go 
home and say, well we’ve dealt with agriculture and whatever 
happens in farm country will happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is pathetic, Mr. Speaker, excuse me. There’s no vision. 
There’s no leadership. And my voice is going, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would move that we adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on this motion be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



March 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The debate is 
adjourned. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
stand adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................549 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................549 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................549 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................549 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................549 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................549 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................549 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................550 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................550 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................550 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................550 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................553 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Selection of Lloydminster Constituency Candidate 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Celebrating the Life of Saskatchewan’s Oldest Citizen 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 A Woman’s Service in Afghanistan 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Welcome to Brier Participants 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Historic Anniversary of Women’s Suffrage in Saskatchewan 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Recognition of Saskatchewan’s Olympians 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Appreciation and Encouragement for a Legislative Colleague 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................555 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Jobs and the Economy 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................555 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................555 
 Readiness of Addiction Treatment Beds 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................558 
 Safety Concerns for Residents of Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................559 
 Written Questions 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................560 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................560 
MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................560 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Crisis in Agriculture 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................561 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................566 



 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................571 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................581 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


