






















































Hansard: March 28, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 29A  TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 827 
 March 28, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the second 
consecutive day, Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf of 
individuals concerned about the availability of the 
cancer-causing drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Swift Current, Dodsland, Rosetown, 
Meadow Lake, Martensville, and Nokomis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding the drug of Avastin and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are pages and pages of this petition. People 
from Saskatoon and many other locations have signed it. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions dealing with Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon and 
Borden, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have a petition to present, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Langham and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
residents of this province with a similar prayer, with the exact 
same prayer actually. And it reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today I represent are from the city 
of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
coverage of the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Langham. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to fund Avastin, signed by people from Saskatchewan 
who say that forcing patients to pay for this drug is an example 
of two tiered health care. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from Wiseton, 
Rose Valley, Saskatoon, and Dillon. And I’m pleased to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Where your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The communities that called . . . the signatures on this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Wadena, Saskatoon, 
and Luseland. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition signed by citizens concerned with cancer relief, and 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens concerned with cancer care. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina and 
the great community of Strasbourg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have several 
pages of a petition of citizens who are concerned that forcing 
patients to pay for a certain cancer drug is an example of 
two-tier health care. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the great city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues to present a petition in regards to the funding of 
Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon, LeRoy, and Humboldt. And I am pleased to present 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of my constituents that are 
deeply concerned over the government’s refusal to fund the 
drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Bienfait, and Macoun. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens that are concerned about the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government’s lack of funding for 
the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens who are very worried about a two tiered 
health care system in this province. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Regina, and Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to read a petition. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Wadena, 
Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll join my 
colleagues too with a petition for the government to fully fund 
the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on behalf of citizens 
wanting to tailor a solution to two-tier health care. I’ll read the 
prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by Saskatchewan residents from 
Wadena. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned that the Department of Health officials are 
incorrectly reporting the drug Avastin as an experimental drug. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And it’s signed by good people from Saskatoon, Radisson, and 
Tisdale. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petition has 
been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) is hereby read and 
received: a new petition concerning funding for the cancer drug 
Avastin, sessional paper 639. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Private Bills Committee is 
recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I present the fifth report of the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petitions for private Bills and finds that the provisions for 
rule 75, 76, and 79 have been fully complied with: 
 

Of the Faith Alive Ministries Outreach Centre Inc. in the 
province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to confer 
religious and theological degrees at Faith Alive Bible 
College; 

 
Of the Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan in 
the province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to 
broaden the society’s powers to perform charitable acts 
and to increase its powers to distribute funds for 
charitable purposes; 

 
Of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Inc. in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to repeal The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, the Chair of the Private Bills Committee, 
seconded by the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried, and pursuant to rule 82, the 
Private Bills 301, 302, and 303 are deemed to have been read 
the first time and are ordered for second reading on the next 
private members’ day. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth, and Recreation: is the 
Government of Saskatchewan a party to any agreements to 
broadcast the Tommy Douglas movie on SCN or local 
community cable stations in the province? And if so, how 
much money has or will the Government of Saskatchewan 
pay or receive as part of these agreements? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: did management of the 
department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2000-2001? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also have the same question for the fiscal years 
2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how did management of the 
department monitor any established programs and controls 
to mitigate fraud risks or help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2000-2001? 

 
And I also have the similar question for the fiscal year 
2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: does management of the 
department have any knowledge of any actual or suspected 
fraud or illegal activity within the department during the 
year 2000-2001? If so, what is that nature of this activity? 
 

I also have similar questions for the fiscal year 2001-2002 and 
2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what did management of the 

department find as a result of its monitoring of any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 

 
[13:45] 
 
And I have a similar question for the year 2001-2002 and the 
fiscal year 2002-2003. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my final question. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 34 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2000-2001 such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others. If so, what is the nature of this 
activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also have the same question for the fiscal years 
2001-2002 and 2002-2003. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority: did management of the authority have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2000? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
Gaming Authority: how did management of the authority 
monitor any established programs and controls to mitigate 
fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 
2000? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority: does management of the authority have 
any knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activity within the authority during the year 2000? And if 
so, what was the nature of this activity? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority: what did management of the authority 
find as a result of its monitoring of any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or detection 
fraud during the year 2000? 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority: is management of the authority 
aware of any allegations of fraud or other illegal activity 
within the authority or its agency in the year 2000 such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others. And if so, what is 
the nature of this activity? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also have similar questions for the years 2001 
and 2002. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

One-Year Anniversary of Swift Current’s 
Southwest TV News 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday evening in 
Swift Current, community leaders from my hometown of Swift 
Current and indeed people from southwest Saskatchewan 
attended a very special celebration, marking the one-year 
anniversary of a new venture in Swift Current called Southwest 
TV News.com. 
 
It’s Swift Current’s own locally owned television news channel. 
It’s owned and operated by George Tsougrianis and Carol 
Andrews. George and Carol are a husband and wife team whose 
enterprise now provides the people of Swift Current and indeed 
southwest Saskatchewan with daily news coverage. It provides 
people with a community forum and an outlet to promote the 
achievements of the people and the organizations of southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Originally a news service operating solely on the Internet, 
Southwest TV News is now on Shaw Cable 10. It is growing 
significantly, Mr. Speaker. It now boasts as a partner SCN 
[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. And SCN officials 
were down for the evening’s event yesterday to confirm that 
SCN, now in partnership with Southwest TV News, will air the 
broadcast — the news programs of Southwest TV News — to 
the whole province. So you could see, Mr. Speaker, now 
Southwest TV News is not only providing, is not only providing 
this important service to Swift Current but through SCN to the 
entire province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, George and Carol have stepped out in this 
entrepreneurial endeavour. They’ve taken a risk. And it is 
greatly appreciated by the people of Swift Current and indeed 
by the people of all of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I want to ask my 
colleagues to join me in extending congratulations to George 
and Carol and their entire team at Southwest TV News on their 
first anniversary. We look forward, we look forward to their 
efforts to tell Southwest’s Saskatchewan story to ourselves in 
the southwest but more importantly to Saskatchewan and the 
rest of Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Outdoor Hockey League’s First Annual Tournament 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Ehrlo 
Sport Ventures is a sport and recreation program designed to 
provide all youth and families with access to good quality 
recreational activities. 
 
A prime example, Mr. Speaker, of Ehrlo Sport Ventures’ good 
work is the Outdoor Hockey League which gives inner city kids 
a chance to play organized hockey by removing the barriers 
associated with the cost of equipment and hefty registration and 
ice-time fees. 
 
This past weekend, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to attend 
the OHL’s [Outdoor Hockey League] first annual Mayor’s 
Cup-Dream Weekend Hockey Tournament held here in Regina 
— indoors for a change — at the Brandt Centre. Sixteen teams 
from the OHL, as well as teams from Carry the Kettle First 
Nation, took part in the two-day event. 
 
It was an Olympic-style tourney with each team representing a 
different country. I must admit I had a certain bias in favour of 
my home rink team, The Grassick Slovakians. There was some 
great hockey played. There was a momentous parade of 
athletes, and all players received a medal following their final 
game because, Mr. Speaker, in the OHL everyone is a 
champion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the players, officials, 
coaches, organizers, and sponsors of the OHL. And I especially 
want to acknowledge Regina’s Mayor Pat Fiacco who followed 
through on a commitment to the athletes to host the tournament; 
Kris Johns, the terrific coordinator of Ehrlo Sport Ventures; and 
Ken Jones, Susan Lytle, and all the wonderful volunteers on the 
organizing committee who put a gold medal effort into the 
Mayor’s Cup and the OHL. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Weyburn Hosts Saskatchewan Youth Parliament 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the Weyburn Comprehensive School hosted the 
Saskatchewan Youth Parliament. About 30 young people 
between the ages of 15 to 21 years from all over our province 
spent the weekend debating issues from capital punishment to 
mandatory military service. A large room was transformed into 
a legislative chamber where members learned how to put 
together Bills and resolutions and hone their debating skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to act as the lieutenant governor 
delivering the throne speech on Saturday morning. My 
aide-de-camp was our very own legislative Page Nicolas 
Stulberg. Legislative Pages Patrick Button and Kyla Will also 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

participated. Mr. Speaker, upon election of the speaker, the 
speaker used more than the traditional resistance to taking her 
place. The premier, getting a little weary from the resistance, 
said, we don’t really need a speaker this bad. 
 
I’d like to congratulate everyone involved. Thank you to Myles 
Fish for making arrangements at the Weyburn Comprehensive 
School, and I would like to thank Brad Vermeersh for my 
invitation. It was wonderful to see so many young men and 
women involved. Apparently a few years ago, one of the items 
up for debate was if women should even be allowed to 
participate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Junior Achievement Awards Banquet Held in Regina 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday I had the privilege of attending to represent 
SaskEnergy at the Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame 
and Awards Banquet, held at the Conexus Arts Centre. As a 
graduate of the Junior Achievement program myself, I was 
especially pleased to attend. 
 
Junior Achievement is a non-profit organization, Mr. Speaker, 
that educates young people in the areas of economics and 
entrepreneurship. Junior Achievement is all about inspiring and 
educating young Canadians, helping them to understand 
business and economics while developing entrepreneurial and 
leadership skills. 
 
The business hall of fame and awards banquet is a celebration 
recognizing the Saskatchewan youth and schools in 22 
categories that were winners of Junior Achievement Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is a major sponsor of the awards, and 
I was proud to present the SaskEnergy Educator Award, 
awarded to the high school and representative that showed the 
greatest leadership in promoting and encouraging Junior 
Achievement programs. Mr. Speaker, this year the winner of 
the SaskEnergy Educator Award in Regina was Helen 
Sukovieff and Sheldon Williams Collegiate. 
 
I would like to invite the Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the winners of every category for their wonderful 
accomplishments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Eastend Arts Council Hosts the Wallace Stegner 
House Dinner 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month I 
had the privilege of attending the 19th annual Wallace Stegner 
House dinner. This annual fundraising event allows the Eastend 
Arts Council to maintain the childhood home of renowned 
author Wallace Stegner as an artist’s residence. A record 

attendance of over 200 people was treated to an evening of 
socializing, fine food, and first-class entertainment including 
Saskatchewan musician Connie Kaldor. 
 
A special guest of honour, author Sharon Butala, regaled those 
in attendance with a reading from her latest book, Lilac Moon. 
She then followed with the well-established tradition of reading 
from a work by Wallace Stegner. And this year she presented 
excerpts from letters exchanged between Wallace Stegner and 
Corky Jones — a local businessman, historian, and amateur 
archaeologist — following Stegner’s visit to Eastend in 1953 to 
do research for his book, Wolf Willow. 
 
A special part of the event was the recognition afforded to 
Sharon Butala for her leadership and dedication to the Wallace 
Stegner House project. In earlier days, Sharon was one of the 
charter members involved in the formation of the Eastend Arts 
Council, and since then she has worked tirelessly with the 
council raising funds and refurbishing the beautiful home that 
now serves as an artist’s residence. 
 
To thank her for her dedication to the arts in Eastend and the 
hard work in developing the legacy of the Wallace Stegner 
House, Sharon was presented with a plaque and an honorary 
lifetime membership in the Eastend Arts Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join with me at this time to congratulate 
Sharon Butala and the Eastend Arts Council for the 
establishment of the Wallace Stegner House and the continued 
success of the annual Wallace Stegner House dinner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Powwow Celebrates Traditions in Song and Dance 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I recently had the opportunity 
to attend a powwow that took place in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Fairview. Dance Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre co-hosted the event. 
These two organizations have been collaborating for the past 
year to help ensure the traditions in First Nations song and 
dance continue on in young people from in and around 
Saskatoon. 
 
The powwow was an opportunity to celebrate the elders’ 
gathering that occurred between March 8 and 11 and had a 
particular focus on education. The dancers ranged in age from 3 
to 73 and more than 600 people attended the event. Mr. 
Speaker, the powwow featured inter-tribal dances as well as 
traditional powwow dances and a variety of drum groups. The 
evening also featured presentations by the Saskatoon 
Pushpanjali India dance centre and the Yevshan Ukrainian Folk 
Ballet Ensemble. Both groups performed traditional works and 
shared the meaning of each dance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any of us who had the opportunity to attend the 
Saskatoon powwow will tell you First Nations culture is alive 
and well in Saskatchewan. And the event not only celebrated 
the culture of First Nations but also the multicultural spirit of 
this great province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I invite all 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

members to join me in congratulating Dance Saskatchewan as 
well as the Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre and the city of 
Saskatoon on this very successful event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Junior Achievement Awards Banquet Held in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the member from 
Regina Walsh Acres spoke about the Junior Achievement Hall 
of Fame Banquet in Regina. I had the privilege of attending the 
same banquet in Saskatoon on Friday, March 24. The banquet 
was an extraordinary success. Over 650 people were in 
attendance. 
 
These awards recognize the hard work and professionalism of 
over 240 youth from grades 9 to 12. For 22 weeks they operate 
their own company. And I would like to acknowledge some of 
the individuals and their companies who were awarded and 
recognized for their accomplishments that night. 
 
The Canjack Achiever of the Year was awarded to Nick Purich 
of the company the Front End, who is a grade 12 student at 
Walter Murray Collegiate. The Professional Leadership Award 
was presented to Seema Grover of the company Illuminusion, 
who is in grade 12 at Walter Murray Collegiate as well. The 
Company of the Year Award was presented to the company 
AiLi, whose president, Michael Zhang, is in grade 11 at Walter 
Murray Collegiate. The President of the Year Award was given 
to Derek Guinan, in grade 12 at Holy Cross, whose exceptional 
leadership of the company Epsilon Omega won him this award. 
And last but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, the Volunteer of 
the Year Award was presented to Barry Grant. 
 
I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating these fine young men and women and also the 
businesses and sponsors that promoted this event and Les 
Morrison and Rod Antonichuck, the organizers of the event. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Plans for Population Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
afternoon is for the Premier. Statistics are out with respect to 
Saskatchewan’s population. And in the last three months of 
2005, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population dropped, 
dropped by over 2,000 people. Two thousand people lost in one 
quarter while every other Western province, including 
Manitoba, has grown. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, not too long ago when faced with similar statistics 

the then minister of Economic Development, current Highways 
minister had this to say. He said, we ought not to worry when 
people leave Saskatchewan because when they do, there is 
quote “more left for the rest of us.” That’s what came from the 
front benches of that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the Premier today is this: does he agree with 
that? We have lost 2,000 people. Does he believe there’s now 
more left for the rest of us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the 
Opposition neglected to tell people is that in the last quarter, 
which he referred to according to Statistics Canada, 9 out of 10 
provinces in Canada had net out-migration, Mr. Speaker, 9 out 
of 10. And he didn’t mention, Mr. Speaker, that in the last 
quarter . . . He says Saskatchewan had a population loss. It’s 
true, Mr. Speaker — 7 out of 13 provinces and territories had a 
population loss. The only province that had net in-migration 
was the province of Alberta. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, would we like to do better? Yes we would. 
But if the member opposite says that we’re doing something 
terribly wrong in NDP Saskatchewan, he should remember 
we’re in the company of his conservative cousins in BC [British 
Columbia] who call themselves Liberal, and his cousins the 
Liberals in Ontario as well. But where are we going? We’re 
going to go higher, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s amazing, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Economic Development says, well don’t worry about it because 
other provinces are having challenges right now. But other 
provinces, Mr. Speaker, are not this country’s second largest 
producer of oil and other provinces aren’t the third largest 
producer of natural gas. Other provinces don’t have a third of 
the world’s supply of uranium and a third of the world’s supply 
of potash and all of the potential of our province — that is, I am 
of course describing Saskatchewan. And in those conditions, 
with booming prices in those commodities, this NDP 
government happens to be presiding over massive population 
losses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask the Premier to stand up, the Premier to stand up today and 
answer the basic question in this Assembly because we don’t 
believe they actually want to grow the province. We know that 
former Economic Development minister said, when people 
leave, there’s more left for the rest of us. Does he believe that? 
Does he believe that we’re all better off when we lose our most 
precious resource — the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the 
Opposition was talking about some of the good things going on 
in Saskatchewan, I think it’s the first time I’ve ever heard him 
say anything good about this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So that’s an improvement. But I want to 
say this to the Leader of the Opposition. Do we have a plan to 
grow the population of this province and grow jobs? Yes we do, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s called the personal income tax reform plan. 
It’s called the oil and gas royalty reform. It’s called the mining 
tax reform that has gone on. And I have every confidence that 
my colleague, the Minister of Finance, will present an 
optimistic, positive plan when he delivers the budget next week, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say to the Leader of the 
Opposition, what will not grow Saskatchewan, unlike the plan 
set out by this government, is endless complaining and calling 
down our province. That will not grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what will begin the growth in this 
province that is so long overdue is a change in the Government 
of Saskatchewan that is so long overdue. 
 
That minister wants to talk about job creation. We’ve lost 4,400 
jobs under his and the Premier’s economic policies. With all of 
these fundamentals in our economy as positive as they are, 
they’re managing to squander it. We’ve lost jobs, 4,400, and 
now in a matter of three months we’ve lost 2,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the plain reality of all of this that the minister 
seems unfamiliar with. 
 
What does he have in mind? Does he have a goal for population 
growth? We know the Premier didn’t a couple of weeks ago. 
Does he at least have a plan to grow the population of the 
province of Saskatchewan? And if not, will he explain to the 
people of the province what he’s doing to earn his paycheque, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 
the Opposition says maybe we’re unfamiliar with what he’s 
talking about. No, no, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve heard it all 
before. We heard it all before that all you needed was a change 
of government to do all these great things. We saw it in the 
government that the Leader of the Opposition was associated 
with in the 1980s and, Mr. Speaker, what we also saw then was 
the highest out-migration from Saskatchewan in the province’s 
history. 
 

And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, beware when you 
listen to the Leader of the Opposition because when he is asked 
what is his plan, what does he say, Mr. Speaker? He says, if I 
become Premier — heaven forbid — I will appoint a committee 
which will advise me what to do. That’s quite a promise, Mr. 
Speaker. And his other comment when asked what he would do 
is, I would attract business because I’m a different brand. I 
don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, not only are Saskatchewan people 
being left behind right now by this NDP government. 
Grandparents and parents are saying goodbye to their kids and 
their grandkids. 
 
The province itself, Saskatchewan, is being left behind. Every 
other province in the West is growing — every single province 
in the West is growing except ours. Manitoba managed to grow 
by 3,400 people in the last year and I noted that their NDP 
government didn’t need a commission. They’re going ahead 
and lowering those taxes on growth we talk about. BC grew by 
54,000. Alberta grew by over 80,000. 
 
What about NDP Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? What happened 
here? In that same time period we lost nearly 3,800 people. Isn’t 
it time for the Premier to stand up now and answer some 
questions on this issue? How in the world could he be 
squandering all the potential and all the opportunity of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we will see. We will 
see next week when the Minister of Finance stands up because, 
I say this, because the Minister of Finance issued this challenge 
last week. If the Minister of Finance presents a plan which the 
Leader of the Opposition says is needed in this province to 
create growth, jobs, and opportunity — very simple question, 
Mr. Speaker — if such a plan is presented, will the members 
opposite support such a plan? Yes or no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Meadow Lake Pulp Mill 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
started as a $159 million loan has ballooned into the biggest 
financial debacle in Saskatchewan history. With interest owing, 
cash flow loans, and other guaranteed advances over the years, 
total losses from an investment in the Meadow Lake pulp mill 
are now in excess of 800 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government agree to a public inquiry into 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

the Meadow Lake pulp mill? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what would a public 
inquiry tell us? Would we want to have a public inquiry to tell 
us that the Meadow Lake pulp mill deal was a bad deal? We 
already know that, Mr. Speaker. It was a bad deal. 
 
Would we want to have a public inquiry, Mr. Speaker, to tell us 
who made the deal, Mr. Speaker? We know who made the deal, 
Mr. Speaker. The Devine Conservatives supported by those 
people over there made that deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Would we want to have a public inquiry to find out how much 
money went into the deal so far from the government? I’ll tell 
you how much went in, Mr. Speaker. It’s been audited. A total 
of $340 million of which, Mr. Speaker, 246 million was spent 
by the previous government between 1988 and 1991; $94 
million in the last 14 years to preserve jobs in Meadow Lake in 
what has been an unfortunate deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a public 
inquiry could review the books. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Order, order. Member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, a public inquiry could 
review the books to discover why the losses took place and how 
could they have been avoided. But just as important are the jobs 
of the local people working at the mill and connected to the 
mill. An inquiry could involve those local people in reviewing 
options available to save these jobs. 
 
A public inquiry could involve First Nations. It would give us a 
chance to hear the voice of those who need to be heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a public inquiry with a well-defined 
mandate and a clear timetable. Will an inquiry be held? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we do not need a public 
inquiry to tell us that it was a bad deal. We do not need a public 
inquiry to tell us who made the deal. We do not need a public 
inquiry to tell us how much money was spent. 
 
And if the members opposite think we need a public inquiry to 
tell us how to prevent such a deal from ever happening again, 
we don’t need an inquiry into that, Mr. Speaker. The way to 
prevent that from ever happening again is never, ever elect 
those people to run the finances of this . . . [inaudible] . . . 
That’s the way. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, when this government came 
to office it inherited a series of bad deals from the previous 
administration. That is a fact. We fixed the Lloydminster 
Upgrader, we fixed the NewGrade deal, and we tried to fix this 
one in good faith. But if that member thinks he’s going to hang 
that deal on this government, Mr. Speaker, that member has 
another think coming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, shutting 
down the mill immediately as some people have suggested 
would be heartless. It would throw hundreds of people out of 
work. Further public investment would be unwise. This 
government appears incapable of mustering any other coherent 
course of action. So why not hold a public inquiry, Mr. 
Speaker? The taxpayers have already lost 800 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that the Leader of the 
Opposition, who was working for the minister of Economic 
Diversification when this deal was being made, does not get up 
and ask these questions. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, while we’re on 
the subject of a public inquiry, since the Leader of the 
Opposition worked in the office of the minister of Economic 
Diversification, why doesn’t he just tell us everything that 
happened, Mr. Speaker? You know, why spend millions of 
dollars and months on lawyers for a public inquiry when the 
Leader of the Opposition was right there at the time, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Funding for Avastin 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the NDP government reaffirmed its new-found 
commitment to two-tier health care by refusing to reverse its 
decision on covering Avastin. 
 
Let’s review. Right now in NDP Saskatchewan, you can only 
access this drug if you can pay for it. For those people suffering 
from this disease that cannot afford Avastin, they have to go 
without the drug, Mr. Speaker. So much for medicare. So much 
for the Tommy Douglas legacy. 
 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why he’s promoting 
two-tier health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated yesterday, the decision taken by this government was 
a difficult one back at the beginning of March. It continues to 
be a difficult decision, Mr. Speaker. But we made the 
responsible decision to ensure that the sustainability of the 
system remains in place. But the cancer agency work would be 
available to people in Saskatchewan should they have the 
resources to access it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated yesterday I was aware of the Throne 
Speech, Tommy Douglas’s Throne Speech in 1961. I would like 
to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Throne Speech in 1961 in 
which the premier at the time, Tommy Douglas, said, and I 
quote: 
 

I believe . . . if this medical care insurance program is 
successful . . . it will prove the forerunner of a national 
plan . . . ultimately [to] cover all services — not just 
hospitals and . . . [medicare], but eventually dental . . . 
[and] drugs and other . . . services [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister 
to reverse his decision on two-tier health care. I also went on to 
say that there are alternative plans for Avastin and would he 
look into them. The minister’s answer was that he’d bring it up 
with the provincial counterparts in the meeting this summer, 
sometime this summer. 
 
Well the timetable of this minister may be well and good for 
him, but people suffering from this disease cannot wait on his 
timetable. They don’t have the luxury of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 2003 election platform, this government 
promised to have the best health care system in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, why won’t it act on those words? Why won’t it keep 
its promise, reverse its decision, and cover Avastin for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite is aware, I’ve talked frequently in regards to 
this drug, about the need for the provinces to work together to 
review the access, the assessment, and the funding of new drugs 
coming on to the system. Mr. Speaker, Avastin is still not 
universally available in any province in this country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the provincial ministers of Health and the 
premiers have been talking about a national pharmaceutical plan 

and a program to review new oncology drugs under the 
common drug review. Mr. Speaker, I support the enhancement 
of the common drug review to include IV [intravenous] 
administered drugs. And, Mr. Speaker, I will work with the 
other provincial Health ministers to ensure that we have the 
ability to build a national pharmaceutical plan that would 
address some of these issues. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the members on the 
opposite side of the House to see if they know who made this 
quote. The minister just quoted. I have a quote as well and this 
is the quote: 
 

. . . I came to believe that health services ought not to have 
a price tag on them, and that people should be able to get 
whatever health services they require irrespective of their 
individual capacity to pay. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was spoken by Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has forgotten their roots with the 
decision of Avastin. Mr. Speaker, this government has money 
to put together a Tommy Douglas film, as distorted as that film 
was, but it did talk about the birth of medicare. Without the 
reversal of this decision, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be a movie made 
of this Premier, this Premier, and it will be about the death of 
medicare. 
 
Will the Premier stand up and ask his Health minister to reverse 
his decision? Because without the reversal of the decision, this 
Premier’s legacy will be the destruction of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If 
there’s one thing that’s very clear coming through on this 
debate, it goes back to the member from Cannington’s original 
statement that if Health Canada says it’s okay, we should fund 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 400 new drugs in the system. If we were 
to fund absolutely every one of those drugs without assessing 
them on a sustainability basis, on a provincial level, Mr. 
Speaker, that would bankrupt the system. Mr. Speaker, that 
would deny people access to not only drugs but hospital care 
and doctor care, ophthalmic care in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is committed to sustainability of the system 
and providing care for the people of Saskatchewan, and we will 
do this in a provincial and national context, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

Agriculture and Food to speak to a noticed question. 
 

Crop Insurance Premiums 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I took under advisement a question regarding the 
registered letters that were sent out to those who are investing in 
crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. I followed up on that. Indeed there 
were 3,800 registered letters sent out. As of today, Mr. Speaker, 
there are over 1,000 of those people who received the letters 
who have now come forward and have either paid or made 
arrangements for their crop insurance coverage. It is our 
expectation that most of the rest will make those in the next day 
or two, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For 45 years there has been a deadline on crop insurance, Mr. 
Speaker. For 45 years most of the people who want in to crop 
insurance know what the deadline is and make the arrangements 
on time, Mr. Speaker. And we anticipate that is exactly what 
will happen this year as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that minister’s not getting off that easy. This is without a doubt 
the worst crisis in the history of the province of Saskatchewan 
for farm families, and that minister doesn’t have a clue. He said 
yesterday — and got sarcastic saying it — it’s really the 
farmers’ fault. It’s up to them — make arrangements, go to your 
bank, tell the banker to stroke you a cheque and you’ll go pay 
your crop insurance premium. Well it doesn’t work that way. 
Many cases out there the only way a farmer can get money is if 
he went and held it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will that minister admit today there is a crisis in agriculture and 
explain to farmers out there what he plans to do to help them 
instead of adding to the stress levels like he did yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize clearly that this is one of the most difficult times 
that farmers have faced. Mr. Speaker, we have come to the table 
with over $700 million last year, 1.32 in the last couple of 
years, billion in the last couple. Mr. Speaker, where are the 
federal Conservatives, their cousins, who said they were going 
to provide support? They were going to do it quickly. These 
people were all behind them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did Chuck Strahl, what did Chuck Strahl, Minister of 
Agriculture for the federal government, say to the farmers when 
they were telling them how bad it was? What did he say? He 
said buck up, buck up farmers; forget it. 
 
That’s not what it’s about. It’s about the government being 

responsible like other federal governments in this world, 
coming to bat for the farmers in this province and every 
province across the country. They are suffering, Mr. Speaker, 
and we need our federal government to be there for them like 
other federal governments in this world. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I didn’t hear Chuck Strahl make that comment but I’m 
hearing that minister telling our farmers, get lost, because 
there’s no help in that NDP government and on that side of the 
House. And the minister himself said today, and repeated it, 
3,800 farmers received registered letters. And if it all costs the 
same — about $7 — he spent $26,000, in excess of that, telling 
farmers we’re going to help put the last nail in your coffin. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, precedent has been set before. They’ve had 
extension deadlines in crop insurance, 1996, 1999. It’s 
happened before. It wouldn’t cost this government or Crop 
Insurance one cent to give them a two- or three-month 
extension to try and get the money together to make their crop 
insurance payment. 
 
And if they don’t have crop insurance, which that minister said 
you’re not going to have by Friday if you don’t pay up, they 
also don’t get a spring cash advance. It’s tied to being in crop 
insurance. Of course that minister wouldn’t understand that 
because this is involving agriculture and that minister does not 
have a clue about agriculture. It’s showing more and more. 
 
Will the minister do the honourable thing and resign and maybe 
somebody else over there could take the portfolio? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have seen again a fine example of how uncredible that Sask 
Party is, Mr. Speaker, completely uncredible. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we very clearly have said that we are there and we have shown 
that we are there for farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
have been there far more than any other province, Mr. Speaker, 
far more on a per capita base. In real dollars we have been there 
— $700 million this past year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every farmer who is into crop insurance knows the 
value of that. They know that there is a deadline. I got a call 
today from a farmer, Mr. Speaker, another farmer who says 100 
per cent support for the position of this government. This is 
responsible government, he said, that will stand firm and it’s 
only fair, Mr. Speaker, only fair to those other farmers who 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

conscientiously meet their deadlines and make sure that the 
program is in place for themselves and others. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister . . . Order 
please. Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister 
of Agriculture and Food. 
 

Advancing the Biodiesel Industry in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have to say I’m very pleased to rise before this 
House this afternoon to share with you, Mr. Speaker, and with 
all members of the Assembly the efforts and the progress that 
we are making in advancing the biodiesel industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are looking forward, Mr. Speaker, we do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. I will have to ask for 
order so the ministerial statement can be heard. Order. Once 
again the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We do see a 
positive future for agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
areas that we see positive future is in the area of biodiesel. 
 
In June 2005, this government partnered with industry to launch 
a new biodiesel development task force. The task force 
presented me with an interim report and the draft 
recommendations in January 2006. Some of the key issues they 
identified include the need for a consistent national policy for 
mandating a blended product, a common . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask a few 
members, including the member from Prince Albert Northcote, 
to take a deep breath. And I’d like to hear the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of the 
key issues that the biodiesel task force identified include the 
need for a consistent national policy for mandating a blended 
product, a common set of quality standards, and the need to 
consider development incentives to encourage rural 
participation in new facilities. The task force is finalizing its 
report and we expect to have it very soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the meantime, I’m very pleased to report that the province 
has taken their initial ideas and carried them forward to the 
federal government. Renewable fuels including biodiesel 
represent a huge opportunity for farmers here in our province. 
With 42 per cent of Canada’s farm land and 46 per cent of 
Canada’s cropland, we have the potential to become a major 
player in the collection and processing of biomass into biofuels 
and related industrial products. This will create new markets for 
our agricultural and agroforest products and new value-added 
opportunities and economic activity in rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you and the members of this House, 

that on March 9 when I met with federal Agriculture and 
Agri-Food minister, Chuck Strahl, here in Regina, I urged him 
to act on our request for a national renewable fuels mandate — 
one that his party campaigned on during the last federal 
election. Minister Strahl was very much aware that 
Saskatchewan was the first province in Canada to mandate the 
use of ethanol in gasoline under our greenprint strategy. On 
March 23 the Deputy Premier and I once again met with 
Minister Strahl and again urged him to energize his cabinet 
colleagues in moving this file forward in a timely way. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Once again I see several 
members very eager to get into the debate, but unfortunately we 
can only handle one at a time. Order please. Once again the 
Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 23 
the Deputy Premier and I once again met with Minister Strahl 
and again urged him to energize his cabinet colleagues in 
moving this file forward in a timely manner. Renewable fuel 
production is well under way in many countries. 
 
The US [United States] is now producing 10 times more ethanol 
than it did in 1980 and is now using 14 per cent of its corn to 
make ethanol. With new policies being implemented in the US 
for biofuels, it is expected that in the near future 25 per cent of 
the US corn crop will be consumed in ethanol production. 
Similar events are taking place in Europe and Brazil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will not be left behind. The 
province is working to bring this opportunity to fruition by 
lobbying the federal government, by supporting the biodiesel 
development task force, and by funding the Saskatchewan 
Research Council for quality testing equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is also supporting a number of 
specific research projects and activities including: $165,000 per 
year for a five-year agreement with the University of 
Saskatchewan for a Chair on lipid quality and utilization; 
278,000 for a project entitled industrial products for vegetable 
oils in support of the recently established Chair; $10,000 for a 
study on biodiesel combustion emissions; 20,000 for a study on 
recovery of glycerol, a by-product of biodiesel production; 
15,000 for a biodiesel co-product market study; 10,000 for a bio 
oil symposium; and funding to support a biodiesel 
demonstration project involving city buses in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many reasons for the province to pursue 
the development of a bioenergy industry here in Saskatchewan. 
Bioenergy is good for the environment. It will promote 
economic diversification, and it will create jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan. It will take us beyond primary production to 
value-added economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to investing in our agriculture 
industry and to supporting our producers. We see the 
tremendous potential that bioenergy holds for the province, and 
we are anxious to realize the benefits to our economy and our 
environment. We have the drive and the enthusiasm to become 
leaders in the bio economy, and we are taking action to move 
this promising sector forward. Thank you very much, Mr. 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate having the opportunity to respond to the minister’s 
statement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also realize the enormous potential that 
exists in the province of Saskatchewan for a biodiesel industry. 
In fact we also had the opportunity — the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current, and myself — to 
meet with the federal minister when he was here for SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 
and talk exactly about things like biodiesel and ethanol and 
projects such as that, that we’re going to need to help save 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more to this. There’s a thing 
called investment dollars and there’s a thing called trust. And 
the problem right now is, with this government, there is no trust 
anywhere out in the financial world to put money into 
Saskatchewan and trust that government not to change the rules, 
change the regulations, and tax them to death. And that’s why 
there’s no investment money coming to this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we often see this government sitting 
idly by while farmers in our province are being left behind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we saw announcements by this government 
before. It was not long ago — a year or two ago — that we saw 
the Premier himself announce the Broe deal for the ethanol 
project. In fact if I remember right . . . And I’m quite sure if you 
went out and looked by Belle Plaine, Mr. Speaker, you’d 
probably see the shovel still stuck in the ground. It seems to me 
there was a backhoe there, but probably the guy that owned it 
has gone to Alberta to get a job and actually be able to make a 
profit and get ahead and grow his family in Alberta where . . . 
something that doesn’t seem to be able to be happening right 
here. And, Mr. Speaker, we know what happened with the Broe 
deal and actually it probably set the ethanol industry back in 
this province by many, many years. 
 
We saw the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] venture that this government 
announced many years ago, got in, and then neglected to tell the 
public about how many millions of dollars they’d actually 
blown of taxpayers’ money in a venture they should have never 
got into in the first place. 
 
We also remember the Channel Lake deal where this 
government got involved in business, had no clue what they 
were doing, and lost millions and millions of dollars of 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
And then today again, Mr. Speaker, we see the job numbers. 
We see population drop in the province of Saskatchewan — 
exactly why we need a bio industry, an ethanol industry. We 
need many of those projects to go in Saskatchewan. 

But talk is cheap. We’ve seen this government when they have 
no resolve and they have no answers to what is going on in the 
province, they create a study or they’re going to check it out for 
a number of years. And when we announce these things, 
nothing ever seems to really come of it, Mr. Speaker. And I 
hope that isn’t what’s happening this time — that all we’re 
doing is talking about it and until the next election’s past 
nothing ever, ever happens. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m supportive of what the minister’s saying 
here. I just hope this project has some credibility, not like many 
of the projects they’ve announced in the past and absolutely 
nothing has turned out good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I 
am tabling response to written question no. 596. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 596 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake, the Minister for First Nations and Métis 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before I begin I’d ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Meadow Lake has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
to my colleagues as well who have granted leave. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are several chiefs who are 
here to hear some of the remarks as it relates to the motion I’m 
about to make. I’d like to introduce first of all Tribal Chief 
Helen Ben from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. I would just 
say for those who don’t already know, Chief Ben is the first 
female tribal chief in our province’s history, so please join me 
welcoming Tribal Chief Ben. Give a little wave. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’d also like to introduce from the 
Flying Dust First Nations, and a former tribal chief leader 
actually, is Chief Percy Derocher. So Chief Percy. 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Seated between the two of them and 
from the Waterhen Lake First Nation is Chief Sid Fiddler. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And from the English River First 
Nation, and behind them, is Chief Archie Campbell. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Kelowna Accord 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If I 
could, then I will go straight into the motion. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased to be able to stand in my place today to talk about 
the Kelowna accord. And at the end of my remarks I will move 
the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the progress and goodwill 
that resulted from the action plan to improve the 
socio-economic conditions of Aboriginal people which 
was advanced and achieved at the first ministers’ meeting 
in Kelowna; and, 
 
that this Assembly recognize the leadership role 
Saskatchewan has undertaken to close the gap in quality of 
life between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people; and 
further 
 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to share a 
greater percentage of the costs associated with the 
investments required to improve the social and economic 
conditions as well as support structures to Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan; and that it begin to work on 
achieving the targets identified at the first ministers’ 
meeting in Kelowna by developing new policy and 
program arrangements. 

 
Last November, Mr. Speaker, in Kelowna, British Columbia, a 
meeting of immense significance to Saskatchewan took place. It 
was a first ministers’ meeting on Aboriginal issues with the 
leaders of national Aboriginal organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this meeting placed a national focus on working 
more effectively to improve the quality of life of First Nations, 
Métis, and Inuit people right across our country. It was a 
historic meeting. It opened a new era of co-operation with the 
federal government, with the provinces, and First Nations, 
Métis, and Inuit people in policy development and of course in 
service delivery. 
 
It demonstrated that Aboriginal people must be at the table 
when important decisions that affect their lives are being made. 
In the end, it resulted in agreement between first ministers and 
Aboriginal leaders on a course of action to improve the 
socio-economic conditions of Aboriginal people. 
 
I cannot emphasize enough, Mr. Speaker, how important this 
agreement is. In Saskatchewan, as you know, we have a large 

and growing First Nations and Métis population. We are 
working hard together to ensure that First Nations and Métis 
people are able to participate fully in the economic and social 
prosperity of this province, Saskatchewan. 
 
However we also know we all need to work harder and that 
more needs to be done. Let me just touch on a few of the 
reasons why. In terms of jobs, an increasing number of 
Aboriginal people are taking part in the Saskatchewan labour 
force, but there is still a significant gap. In 2001 the 
unemployment rate for Aboriginal people was five times — five 
times — higher than for non-Aboriginal people. The average 
annual employment income of First Nations people on-reserve 
is just about half that of other Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, 48 per cent of Aboriginal people have 
less than high school education compared to 31 per cent of 
non-Aboriginal people. More than 70 per cent of the people in 
Saskatchewan jails are unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal. 
 
The point is that Aboriginal people and communities rank 
significantly behind non-Aboriginal people and communities in 
every socio-economic indicator. With the growing Aboriginal 
population, these bleak statistics will continue if changes aren’t 
made now and if we don’t all work to make sure that this 
happens. 
 
The challenges facing First Nations and Métis people are not 
peculiar to Saskatchewan. They are right across the country, 
and that’s why this national meeting was so very, very 
important. This is what the Kelowna meeting was all about and 
this is why it is so important. 
 
The former prime minister was there, the leaders of all the 
provinces and territories were there, and the leaders of the five 
national Aboriginal organizations were of course also there. 
They were working towards the same goal and that goal was to 
develop a plan to help close the socio-economic gap that exists 
between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people right across 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan this government works closely 
with First Nations and Métis people. We respect their 
constitutional relationship with the federal Crown and the 
Aboriginal and treaty rights that exist. The treaties signed more 
than 100 years ago created a code of friendship that continues 
today even as we work together to address unfinished business. 
 
At the meeting our Premier said, and I quote: 
 

The future of Saskatchewan, as the future of Canada, is 
much linked today to a large and a growing Aboriginal 
population. We in Saskatchewan see the relationship, first 
and foremost, being founded on a historic treaty 
relationship; a constitutional relationship. In our view, the 
treaties are vital, living, and sacred undertakings that are 
the foundation of the definition of our relationship. 

 
The cornerstones of our relationship with First Nations and 
Métis people are mutual co-operation and mutual respect. 
 
We also recognize that, as in any relationship, things do not 
always run smoothly. We sometimes do have disagreements. 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

However with a strong foundation we attempt to work through 
those disagreements. One thing we do know is that we cannot 
take our relationship for granted and that we must continually 
direct efforts towards building and strengthening it. We are 
committed to strengthening that relationship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One example of that commitment is taking place in these 
legislative chambers tomorrow, March 29, Mr. Speaker, where 
a special ceremony will be held that recognizes the fundamental 
contributions of First Nations to the creation of this province 
and honours the special treaty relationship between First 
Nations and the Crown. And I hope that everyone here will be 
in attendance to witness that historic event, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we all have more to do in resolving the 
issues facing Aboriginal people, no one person or one 
government can do it alone. We all have to work together. Here 
in Saskatchewan we have taken a leadership role in trying to 
close the gaps in the quality of life between Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal people in areas such as housing, education, and 
economic development. 
 
We want to urge Ottawa to fulfill the commitment it made at 
the first ministers’ meeting in November to work with the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the First Nations and Métis 
people of Saskatchewan, to achieve the goals and targets 
identified at that meeting. The federal government announced 
an ambitious plan to improve the lives of Aboriginal people. 
There were a number of financial commitments in key areas 
that were made: $1.8 billion for education — 1.05 billion of that 
would be used to promote education innovation on-reserve; 500 
million would go to post-secondary education including 
bursaries, scholarships, and apprenticeships; and 100 million to 
fund existing initiatives for urban Métis and northern 
Aboriginal children. $1.6 million for housing and infrastructure 
which included 600 million to support market-based approaches 
and the transformation of social housing on-reserve and 300 
million of that for northern housing partnerships. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that there was 200 million for 
economic opportunities — 188 million of that 200 would go 
toward economic development framework initiatives and 12 
million toward accelerating the regulatory regime under the 
First Nations Commercial and Industrial Development Act for 
commercial and industrial activities. And 1.3 billion for health 
— 870 million of that would go to stabilize the First Nations 
and Inuit health system and 445 million to promote 
transformation and to build to capacity. 
 
Add it all up and the federal government promised a total of 
about 5 billion over five years, all aimed at improving the social 
and economic conditions for Aboriginal people. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the Kelowna meeting came just a 
day after the federal government made another significant 
promise. It announced a compensation package for victims of 
abuse in the residential school system. Aboriginal people who 
suffered in those schools are looking forward to the 
implementation of that promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commitments made by the federal government 

at the Kelowna first ministers’ meeting marked a significant 
step forward in terms of its usual approach and established 
policies. We welcome that step forward, as did First Nations, 
Métis, and Inuit leaders at the conference. 
 
Saskatchewan supports this ambitious plan, and we are eager to 
begin working with Ottawa and First Nations and Métis people 
on these initiatives. Saskatchewan is well positioned to begin 
working collaboratively with federal agencies and the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the provincial 
Métis agencies to meet new policy directions and take a 
leadership role on initiatives that will provide increased 
investment towards better outcomes for First Nations and Métis 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, through our Premier, took a 
leadership role at Kelowna first ministers’ meeting. One thing 
he did at that meeting, Mr. Speaker, was to offer to host a 
national economic summit with First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
people, governments, the private sector, labour, and other 
relevant partners. Planning for that symposium is currently 
under way. We believe this event could help to jump-start new 
and innovative economic solutions to the many, many 
challenges that we face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the communiqué at the end of the first ministers’ 
meeting outlines opportunities for the provincial government to 
work collaboratively with the federal government and the First 
Nations and Métis people. We can do this through the sharing 
of information, the building of capacity, providing expertise, 
joint planning, and many other areas. This kind of co-operation 
would improve how the two orders of government and First 
Nations and Métis service providers deliver services to 
Aboriginal people. Saskatchewan’s objective, Mr. Speaker, is 
the development of new policy and program arrangements that 
will result in Ottawa sharing a greater percentage of the costs 
associated with investments required to improve the social and 
economic conditions of Aboriginal people in the province. 
 
As you all know, since the November Kelowna first ministers’ 
meeting, we have obviously had a change in federal 
government. The prime minister who made the promises is no 
longer there and a new one is in place. And that brings us in 
part to today’s motion. We need the federal government to 
uphold the commitments made in Kelowna, Mr. Speaker. 
Because the new federal government has indicated it supports 
the objectives, the targets, and principles agreed to in Kelowna, 
we invite it as well to honour the federal financial commitment 
of $5.1 billion over five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First ministers and national Aboriginal 
leaders agreed that the commitments outlined in the main 
document of the first ministers’ meeting must be implemented. 
And they agreed that this must be done by working together at a 
provincial level with implementation focused on practical 
approaches. We therefore urge the federal government to fulfill 
the promises and commitments that it made. 
 
The results of the first ministers’ meeting marked a new 
beginning for Ottawa, the provinces, and the Aboriginal people 
of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

eager to begin working with the new federal government to 
close the gap in the quality of life between Aboriginal people 
and non-Aboriginal people. We are committed to working to 
achieve the targets identified by the federal government at the 
Kelowna first ministers’ meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about working together, I don’t just 
mean the federal government and the provinces. I mean the 
federal government, the provinces, in co-operation with national 
and provincial Aboriginal organizations. Ottawa’s commitment 
to invest $170 million in Aboriginal organizations that provide 
services will go a long way to building the capacity to ensure 
that co-operation; 90 million of the 170 million was committed 
to provincial, national, and regional Aboriginal organizations to 
enhance their own capacity to work with governments in policy 
development and in other initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kelowna meeting represented an 
unprecedented level of consultation and co-operation between 
governments and Aboriginal organizations. A lot of good work 
went into planning it. A lot of good work came out of it. I 
believe it’s imperative that we continue to build on this good 
work and that the federal government honour commitments 
made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge Ottawa to live up to its promises to not lose 
the precious momentum and goodwill that was developed 
through a lot of hard work by a lot of people. And it’s not just 
Saskatchewan and other provinces that want Ottawa to live up 
to these commitments. So do the Aboriginal leaders who were 
also at the Kelowna table. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I note and I would like to quote from in fact 
the Leader-Post of today, March 28 of this year, from Grand 
Chief Bird. He says that, if account . . . This isn’t a quote but a 
lead-in to the story. It says: 
 

If accountability is a top priority, the federal government 
should honour the former Liberal government’s $5-billion 
Kelowna agreement on native poverty, says Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations . . . Chief Alphonse Bird. 
 

And he goes on, and this is a quote. It says: 
 

If we three (governments) can agree to improve and close 
the gap on poverty by putting all our minds together that is 
where the real solution is. 
 

And I couldn’t agree with him more, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
what really what this motion is all about. 
 
So expectations were raised and Aboriginal leaders expect them 
to be met as is evidenced by that quote, Mr. Speaker. So I 
would like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, with the following 
motion, seconded by the hon. member from Cumberland. And 
the motion again is as follows: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the progress and goodwill 
that resulted from the action plan to improve the 
socio-economic conditions of Aboriginal people which 
was raised and achieved at the first ministers’ meeting in 
Kelowna; and 
 

that this Assembly recognize the leadership role 
Saskatchewan has undertaken to close the gap in the 
quality of life between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 
people; and further 
 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to share a 
greater percentage of the costs associated with the 
investments required to improve the social and economic 
conditions as well as support structures to Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan; and that it begin to work on 
achieving the targets identified at the first ministers’ 
meeting in Kelowna by developing new policy and 
program arrangements. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I urge all my colleagues to 
support this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for First 
Nations and Métis Relations, seconded by the Minister for 
Northern Affairs: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the progress and goodwill 
that resulted from the action plan to improve the 
socio-economic conditions of Aboriginal people, which 
was advanced and achieved at the first ministers’ meeting 
in Kelowna; and, 
 
that this Assembly recognize the leadership role 
Saskatchewan has undertaken to close the gap in quality of 
life between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people; and 
further, 
 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to share a 
greater percentage of the costs associated with the 
investments required to improve the social and economic 
conditions, as well as support structures to Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan; and that it begin to work on 
achieving the targets identified at the first ministers’ 
meeting in Kelowna by developing new policy and 
program arrangements. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Minister for Northern Affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak in favour of this very important motion. As mentioned by 
my colleague, a first ministers’ meeting on Aboriginal issues 
with the leaders of Canada’s First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
organizations took place last November in Kelowna, British 
Columbia. The result of the meeting was an historic agreement 
between First Nations and Aboriginal leaders on a course of 
action to improve the lives of Aboriginal people in Canada. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agreement known as the Kelowna accord was 
a very significant achievement and is important to all 
Canadians. A tremendous amount of hard work was done by 
many people, especially by the Aboriginal leadership. A lot of 
goodwill went into the first ministers’ meeting, and we should 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

be building on this as we attempt to move forward in making a 
difference in the lives of Aboriginal people. 
 
At that first ministers’ meeting, the federal government 
committed approximately $5 billion over five years. We must 
urge the federal government to honour the commitment that was 
made in Kelowna. 
 
It is no secret that First Nations, Métis, and Inuit people face 
horrible social, economic conditions today on- and off-reserve. 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to begin 
working with a new federal government and the Aboriginal 
leadership to close the gap in the quality of life between 
Aboriginal people and the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan took a leadership role at the first 
ministers’ meeting in offering to host a national economic 
summit with Aboriginal people, governments, the private 
sector, labour, and other partners. At the first ministers’ 
meeting, it was agreed to take immediate action to improve the 
quality of life for Aboriginal people in four key areas: number 
one, health; number two, education; number three, housing; and 
four, relationships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a huge First Nations and Métis 
population. It is also a population that is growing faster than the 
non-Aboriginal community. And there is no question we have 
many challenges, but we also have much potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a bit about some of the 
challenges that First Nations and Métis people of Saskatchewan 
face every day. According to Indian and Northern Affairs 
Canada, the life expectancy gap between First Nations and 
other Canadians is seven years. The suicide rate for First 
Nations youth ages 15 to 24 are eight times the national rate for 
females and five times higher for males. First Nations have a 
6.6 times greater incidence of tuberculosis. They are three times 
as likely to be diabetic, and two times as likely to report a 
long-term disability. The state of water and sewer facilities on 
First Nations communities is forefront in the news these days. 
 
In regards to education, more than half of First Nations people 
have less than a high-school certificate. Approximately 23 per 
cent of First Nations people have achieved a post-secondary 
education as compared to 39 per cent of the rest of Canadians. 
 
The statistics dealing with housing are no better. According to 
the latest census, 125 of houses in First Nations communities 
are considered overcrowded as compared to 1 per cent for the 
rest of Canada. 
 
[15:00] 
 
In northern Saskatchewan where the vast majority of the 
population is First Nations and Métis, there is an exploding 
youth population. Forty-five per cent of the northern population 
is under the age of 20, compared to 28 per cent for the rest of 
the province. Only 19 per cent of the northern population is 
over the age of 44, compared to 36 per cent for the rest of the 
province. 
 
We have unique challenges in northern Saskatchewan in terms 
of infrastructure. Many northern communities are isolated and 

access to educational, training, and employment opportunities 
are very limited. This government is attempting to do its share 
in improving the infrastructure as it announced a $65 million 
contribution late last year. But we need help from the federal 
government in the many issues facing the Aboriginal people, 
whether you’re in the North, South, on- or off-reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have listed some startling statistics which 
demonstrate the urgency of acting on the commitments made at 
the First Nations meeting. Just as important as the statistics is 
the capacity and ability to understand and comprehend the 
reasons why Aboriginal people are in trouble today. The First 
Nations, Métis, and Inuit find themselves in these conditions 
because of the often misguided displacement of assimilated 
policies of past governments including the failure to honour 
treaty commitments. 
 
Everyone has heard of the legacy of Indian residential schools 
and their devastating effects on Aboriginal people. The forced 
removal of children from their homes led to the devastation of 
generations of Aboriginal people. Many suffered loss of their 
languages which resulted in a loss of cultural identity. The 
lasting effects of displacement, assimilation, and residential 
schools has led to a breakdown of relationships within the First 
Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities themselves. They have 
also led to the breakdown of relationships between Aboriginal 
people and other Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time to mend these relationships whether they 
be political, legal, constitutional, social, or other. But the will 
must be there from all governments. The commitments made at 
the First Nations-first ministers meeting in Kelowna, if fulfilled, 
will further the healing of these relationships and help 
immensely in dealing with the many issues facing Aboriginal 
people. 
 
In addition to the funding commitments, there was a 10-year 
commitment to closing the economic gap between Aboriginal 
and non-Aboriginal people. Saskatchewan believes in the 
principle of working in partnership with Aboriginal people to 
ensure that their interests are respected and addressed. 
 
The commitment of strengthening relationships and closing the 
economic gap is supported by the First Nations leadership in 
Saskatchewan. Chief Alphonse Bird of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, in speaking about the accord is 
quoted in today’s Leader-Post as saying: 
 

“If we three [meaning] (governments) can agree to 
improve and close the gap on poverty by putting all our 
minds together that is where the real solution is.” 
 

I ask all members to support the motion urging the federal 
government to fulfill the commitment made for the first 
ministers’ meeting. Let us demonstrate to the First Nations, 
Métis, and Inuit people that we are committed to strengthening 
relationships and to closing the gap between First Nations, 
Métis, and Inuit people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to end with a quote from Francis 
Frank, a First Nations elder from British Columbia. He states: 
 

By tackling the issue of dependency, by creating more 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

independent people and communities, we will change the 
manner in which our communities function so that we will 
be contributing to the wealth not just of our communities, 
but of this country. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, the critic for First Nations and Métis 
Relations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin my 
remarks, I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member is requesting leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to my 
colleagues. I too would like to welcome the First Nations 
chiefs: Tribal Chief Helen Ben, Flying Dust Chief Percy 
Derocher, Waterhen Chief Sid Fiddler, and English River Chief 
Archie Campbell to their Assembly today. It’s very important 
that you’re here today to understand that the issues that are 
dealing with First Nations are something that affect everybody 
in this Assembly and that we are working towards a better life 
for everyone in our province. So thank you very much for 
attending. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Kelowna Accord 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to be part of the 
debate today, the historical agreement that was discussed in 
Kelowna last fall. The Sask Party, the official opposition, 
supports the principles of the Kelowna accord. The question 
that we have and that many people in Saskatchewan have is 
why did it take 100 years before we have been addressing the 
issue that’s affecting so many people in our province? 
 
There’s too many people in this province that don’t understand 
the treaties — the sacred agreement that was made — and 
understand how it affects everybody in this province not just the 
First Nations people. I think many non-First Nations people 
would be surprised if they understood that the reason they have 
a right to own their house, to own a business, and to make plans 
and dreams for the future is because of the treaty agreements. 
 
But you know too many of our First Nations have never thought 
about rights and they have never thought about the agreements, 
what they are allowed under the treaties, because too many 

spend much of their days thinking about just plain existence. 
They think about food and housing and medical needs; some of 
the things that many of us take for granted. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes fundamentally that the 
province will never succeed, will never reach its potential 
without the support, without the co-operation, and without the 
input of our First Nations people; side by side, equals in a 
consensus-building relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party reviewed their 
policies last year, we had an opportunity to lay the foundation 
for what we believed would be a beginning relationship with 
anybody when we are talking about building together. And we 
didn’t decide, talk about how the fine details of every 
agreement was to be worded, because if you’re going to build a 
partnership where everybody is at the table, you can’t talk about 
what all the end products are. You have to talk about the 
foundation. 
 
The foundations that we agreed on were working proactively 
with Saskatchewan’s First Nations to encourage the federal 
government to fulfill its responsibilities to First Nations people 
living both on and off the reserve. We passed the resolution that 
a framework for relations between a Saskatchewan Party 
government and First Nations and Métis people will be based 
on respect and inclusion. We talked about the partnership with 
First Nations and Métis people to implement existing 
agreements and develop new agreements to build our province. 
 
Our leader has spoken many times in the last year and a half 
about the enterprise, our enterprise agreement and that the First 
Nations people will have a membership on that board at all 
times, not something that will be taken away at any time. But 
when it came to making agreements on building the economy, 
their voice would be at the table at all times. 
 
We also passed a resolution that talked about consulting with 
First Nations and Métis people in development and prior to 
implementation of provincial legislation that impacts on 
jurisdiction of Saskatchewan First Nations. 
 
And I know that the members across know that one of the 
issues that wasn’t consulted on was the issue that came to the 
forefront last year when we talked about the smoking ban. The 
First Nations people weren’t consulted. And the opportunity 
that we had to build a relationship that would be healthy for 
First Nations and non-First Nations was lost. And I think it’s 
the type of thing that shows that there has to be more than just 
words; there has to be actions when people make agreements. 
 
A year ago in November, the Supreme Court talked about the 
duty to consult. And that issue is something that we look at very 
intensely when we think about developing the province and the 
opportunities there’s going to be in Saskatchewan over the next 
few years and the importance that First Nations voice is going 
to have. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s government would work in 
partnership with First Nations and Métis people and the federal 
government to improve the health and well-being of First 
Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan and that we would 
work in partnerships with First Nations and Métis people and 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

the federal government to identify and remove barriers that 
impede the participation of First Nations and Métis people in 
the economy. 
 
One example I have of that, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the 
other day somebody told me at the Public Service Commission 
right here in Saskatchewan, there is nobody at the front desk to 
talk to First Nations people about some of the things . . . 
questions they may have when it comes to trying to get a job 
with this government. There is nobody there to answer the 
direct question that will help people who maybe don’t 
understand the process that we have in government. And it’s the 
type of thing that has to be addressed if we’re going to ensure 
that everybody has an opportunity to work in every area of this 
province. 
 
This is a Saskatchewan Party policy, and they are the points that 
are covered in the Kelowna accord, and that’s why we support 
the principles of the Kelowna accord. 
 
We know that some of the issues that are covered in the 
Kelowna accord deal with things like the education issue. It’s a 
very troublesome trend in the province when we have an 
education gap between First Nations and Métis people and 
non-First Nations people in the province. 
 
According the 2001 consensus, 39 per cent of Aboriginal males 
and 35 per cent of Aboriginal females of the age 15 to 34 did 
not complete their elementary or high school education. 
According to the 1996 census, 14 per cent of Aboriginal people 
age 15 to 24 in Saskatchewan didn’t complete grade 9, 
compared to only 2 per cent of non-Aboriginal population. Of 
that, First Nations on reserve had the lowest level of educational 
attainment. The disparity in attainment between younger 
Aboriginals and non-Aboriginals signals the continued quality 
of life differences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was just not too long ago that the then minister 
of Learning had brought forward a training systems review that 
talked about programs like our SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology] programs. And we’ve 
been waiting patiently for this government to deal with this 
issue that will actually ensure that all people will have the 
opportunity to get the trades they need as our workforce is so 
very short of skilled people, and yet we have a study on the 
shelf that would have an opportunity for more people to be in 
the trades area. 
 
We know that advanced schools have attained a higher rate of 
graduation and that’s very, very important. But we need to have 
more. We need to do more and make sure it’s a principle that 
everybody believes in. 
 
According to Stats Canada, in December 2005 the Aboriginal 
unemployment rate was a startling 14.6 compared to only 4.8 in 
the non-Aboriginal population. Mr. Speaker, these numbers 
signal several things. It signals that this government hasn’t done 
enough to reverse the dismal unemployment record, that the 
NDP government has not moved to help First Nations and 
Métis people into skills training and education programs. 
Saskatchewan is facing a labour shortage, and there is a huge, 
young, unemployment Aboriginal population, and the NDP’s 
job to join these two. I’m sure the members across would like to 

get involved in this because they must have something to say 
about it, or they didn’t have anything to say about it as our 
young Aboriginal people are not working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health issues that we have in First Nations are 
something that we also can’t be proud of. First Nations people 
have significantly higher levels of diabetes than non-First 
Nations people. Type 2 diabetes affects First Nations and Métis 
people three to five times more than the general Canadian 
population. 
 
There is a considerable gap in life expectancy between 
Aboriginal men and women compared to non-Aboriginal 
population. On average First Nations men live seven years less 
than other Canadian men and First Nations women live five 
years less than Canadian women. 
 
Higher rates of suicide, especially amongst Aboriginal youth, 
the suicide rate of First Nations youth is five to six times higher 
than the national average. Suicide is the single greatest cause of 
injury-related deaths for Aboriginal people. I believe our 
Aboriginal youth are being left behind. 
 
FAS [fetal alcohol syndrome] is a huge concern in 
Saskatchewan, not just in First Nations but in non-First Nations 
as well. But we do know that it affects a number of people. And 
one of the devastating facts that I personally as a legislator am 
embarrassed about is that if people have a reason to suspect 
FAS, they will check it out for First Nations but in non-First 
Nations they’ll consider it ADD [attention deficit disorder]. 
That’s the type of thing that sends the idea that we have 
different problems within different groups of people in this 
province, and it’s very wrong. Children with FAS usually attain 
lower economic status, have poorer education attainment, and 
much greater likelihood of becoming part of the justice system. 
 
This government has dragged their feet on the issue, and First 
Nations people have suffered. This government has refused to 
fund an FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] centre of 
excellence. They’ve sat on the mountain of money when First 
Nations and Métis people are being left behind. Many of these 
issues in which the province has a large role, if not a sole 
jurisdiction, is theirs to deal with. And I believe Aboriginal 
people are being left behind. 
 
I also was on the committee not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, to 
deal with children who were being sexually exploited on the 
street. Again too many of those young people were First 
Nations. And this government had seen a set of 
recommendations — 49 recommendations to be exact. And I 
believe that there are three or four of them have been dealt with 
and the other ones too are left on the shelf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 44,000 children living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. That’s 44,000 kids that are being left behind. 
First Nations children and children of lone parent families 
headed by women experience poverty rates that are far higher 
than the provincial average. Aboriginal people experience a 
ratio of poverty almost four times greater than the general 
population. 
 
[15:15] 
 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports the principles of 
the Kelowna accord. The objective to aid in lifting Aboriginal 
population out of poverty, providing better health care and 
educational opportunities and housing for our communities is 
what must be done. 
 
The federal government has much more to do but so does 
provincial governments. The provincial government has not, but 
it should be, taking a leadership role in helping out our 
Aboriginal people. The minister a few minutes ago noted that 
Saskatchewan has the highest ratio of Aboriginal people per 
capita of any place in Canada. Why would this not be the place 
where we take the leadership role in ensuring that our First 
Nations are a part of our economy? The NDP government in 
this province, they must have the commitment to improve the 
lives of our Aboriginal people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government motion before the House requests 
that the federal government take more responsibility for First 
Nations issues, and we agree that the federal government must 
live up to its roles and responsibility. In fact the Premier said, 
“These jurisdictional lines are not serving anyone well 
anymore.” And he went on to say: 
 

For people to be falling through the cracks because 
governments can’t get their jurisdictional act together, is 
not satisfactory in my view. 

 
And I applaud the Premier on that statement. But we do believe 
that it’s the fault of governments, both federal and provincial, 
that First Nations people are falling through the cracks. This 
government has been on that side of the House for 15 years. I’m 
asking them, how is First Nations peoples’ lives any better now 
than they were 15 years ago? 
 
This government motion asks the federal government to do 
more but so should they, and they cannot absolve themselves of 
responsibility. Mr. Speaker, the NDP government directly 
contributes to the jurisdictional line that the Premier has talked 
about. In another news article it says that the Kelowna accord 
may lead to significant different relationships between the 
province and First Nations, including a larger role for the 
province that had traditionally been the responsibility of the 
federal government. So my question is, does this government 
have a plan to deal with the possibility of new responsibility? 
They didn’t have one for nurses. 
 
How does this government feel about a new role for the 
province? Is the NDP government willing to take on this 
possibility of a new role, or will it play jurisdictional games 
while First Nations people get left behind? The government is 
content and willing to play jurisdictional games while First 
Nations and Métis people suffer from higher rates of addictions, 
poverty, unemployment, and lower educational levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kelowna accord is just more words if there 
isn’t a plan, if there isn’t a commitment, and if there isn’t a time 
frame. There has to be measurable outcomes. Saskatchewan has 
the highest number of First Nations people per capita, and 
therefore we have a responsibility to take the lead with ideas, 
with commitments, and with time frames. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anybody can give money. Anybody can say the 

right words. But the reality is, unless something is actually 
accounted for and unless there is a difference, it’s just words. 
 
How is our First Nations people better off under this 
government? Last year, I waited with anticipation to find out 
how First Nations women and Métis women would be better 
after the government declared this the Year of the First Nations 
and Métis Women. Is there fewer people, fewer First Nations 
women abused? Is there fewer First Nations babies dying? Is 
there anybody that really benefited for making the show? Mr. 
Speaker, there has to be something tangible if we’re talking 
about issues dealing with people. 
 
The Kelowna accord is being applauded by the Premier and 
cabinet as it is by the Saskatchewan Party. Call me a doubting 
Thomas, but I have to wait to see how this government will 
react differently to First Nations issues when the Kelowna 
accord goes ahead. 
 
Why does the federal government basically have to bribe the 
province to work with our First Nations people? Our people are 
our greatest asset — all of our people, non-First Nations and 
First Nations. 
 
What is this provincial government’s plan to deal with the 
Kelowna accord? As such, Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment 
moved by myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast: 
 

That all the words after “first ministers’ meeting of 
Kelowna” be deleted and the following be added: 
 
that this Assembly will work proactively with 
Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal people to encourage the 
federal government to fulfill its responsibilities to 
Aboriginal people living both on- and off-reserve; and 
further, 
 
that this Assembly recognizes the need for true and equal 
partnerships of the three levels of government in areas of 
housing, economy, health, and social services to improve 
the socio-economic status of Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan; and further, 
 
this Assembly urge the federal government to share a 
greater percentage of the costs associated with investments 
required to improve the social and economic conditions, as 
well as support structures to Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan; and that it begin to work on achieving the 
targets identified at the first ministers’ meeting in Kelowna 
by developing new policies and program arrangements. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast: 
 

That all of the words after “first ministers’ meeting in 
Kelowna” be deleted and the following be added: 
 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

that this Assembly will work proactively with 
Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal people to encourage the 
federal government to fulfill its responsibilities to 
Aboriginal people living both on- and off-reserve; and 
further 
 
that this Assembly recognize the need for true and equal 
partnerships of the three levels of government in areas of 
housing, economy, health, and social services to improve 
the socio-economic status of Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan; and further 
 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to share a 
greater percentage of the costs associated with the 
investments required to improve the social and economic 
conditions as well as support structures to Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan, and that it begin to work on 
achieving the targets identified at the first ministers’ 
meeting in Kelowna by developing new policy and 
program arrangements. 
 

Debate on the amendment and the motion will proceed 
concurrently. The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to 
speak to the motion and the amendment, and I would like to 
join with the previous speakers in welcoming the chiefs to their 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been said that we live in two solitudes with the 
First Nations and the non-First Nations people in this province. 
Unfortunately I am part of that problem with two solitudes. I 
spent the first 30 or 40 years of my life not being aware which 
treaty I was governed by or that I was governed by any 
particular treaty and had virtually no understanding of the 
background of that part of our province’s history. 
 
I’m not alone in that. Many members of the House would share 
my life experience, and unfortunately far too many members of 
this province share that kind of life experience where they’re 
not aware of our shared history and our shared culture and the 
steps that we’re going to have to take to try and overcome that. 
 
I spent several years working with the Legal Aid Commission, 
and it was one of the more eye-opening and interesting 
experiences that I’ve had in my life. I had the opportunity to 
travel to many of the First Nations in the northern court points 
and to a large number of the First Nations and met with people 
that lived on- and off-reserve and had discussions with them 
about the challenges that they were facing and the failings that 
government and non-First Nations peoples had caused them and 
the way the system worked had created economic and social, 
educational, health, justice barriers that are unfair and are things 
that we cannot and ought not let to continue in what we regard 
as a civilized society. 
 
The undertakings in the Kelowna accord must be continued, 
must be fulfilled by our federal counterparts. But as a province 
we must do more, and we must recognize the needs and the 
failings that we have had as a provincial government in the past. 
We have to recognize and promote the economic and 
development goals of First Nations people, and they should be 

commended and thanked for undertaking many of the initiatives 
that they’ve taken. 
 
In my own constituency is Whitecap First Nation. I’m pleased 
to say that I enjoy a good relationship with the people at 
Whitecap. I’ve been there. They are very aggressive, very active 
in promoting economic developments, economic partnerships. 
They’ve developed a world-class golf course and have 
undertaken to build and have started construction on what will 
be the largest casino in this province. And I’m proud to have 
that in my constituency and proud to have worked to support 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we go forward we have to understand and 
develop abilities to negotiate with First Nations people on a 
nation-to-nation basis. We need to develop a framework for 
continuing the relationships. We need to recognize the treaties 
as the basis for our relationship with those peoples. We have to 
consult with those people. We have to understand. We have to 
develop methods of understanding. And we have to educate 
people both on- and off-reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an embarrassment that people such as myself 
were able to go through the grades K to 12 [kindergarten to 
grade 12] system in the city of Saskatoon and develop a 
university education without knowing anything about the 
treaties, without the treaties having been taught or anything 
more than passing reference to the fact that they exist. 
 
I’d like to commend specifically the work of the Treaty 
Commissioner in reaching out to non-Aboriginal people to try 
and develop some form of understanding. The Office of the 
Treaty Commissioner I think has taken great steps forward in 
developing an understanding of what the needs are, and hope 
that that is a process and something that will continue for a long 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I’ve met with and had the opportunity to go 
to various First Nations, it’s abundantly clear that we have some 
grotesque and embarrassing failings. The education system that 
exists on our First Nations, on our reserves, is not acceptable, is 
not satisfactory. We have not committed sufficient resources as 
a province to try and assist and work with the First Nations to 
allow them to develop appropriate schools. The same can be 
said for the health system that exists. There are many problems 
that exist there that don’t exist elsewhere because of inadequate 
health facilities being there. 
 
As a lawyer I can comment more specifically on the failings 
within the justice system. We have had studies, we have had 
inquiries, we’ve had royal inquiries, we’ve had any number of 
things that all come with a common theme or common 
recommendations at the end of it. 
 
We need to have more Aboriginal police officers. We need to 
have more cultural and sensitivity training for non-Aboriginal 
officers. We need to work to develop partnerships with First 
Nations so that the officers can be trained and can get an 
understanding of what’s taking place. We know that our 
prosecutors have to have more training. We need more 
Aboriginal and First Nations prosecutors and defence counsel. 
We know that we need more Aboriginal court workers. We 
know that we’ve come a long ways to educate our judges and to 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

work within the court system but we have not yet done enough. 
 
When I have had the opportunity to go to the various 
correctional facilities in the system, I think my reaction would 
be the same as many of the people. You’re overwhelmed at the 
number of Aboriginal people that are in the correctional system. 
It is a disproportionately and unacceptably disproportionately 
high number of First Nations people that are in the correctional 
centres. And it’s a sign of the failings that we have had in our 
education system and the lack of economic opportunities and 
the lack of economic partnerships, a lack of economic abilities 
for those people to try and develop meaningful careers both on- 
and off-reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has made considerable 
progress in this area and has developed policies in this area. 
And I’d like to just review some of those policies very briefly. 
One of them is clarifying the role and responsibility of the 
government. This is by way of a resolution that was held at 
Saskatchewan Party convention, and I will read it: 
 

Be it resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government will 
work proactively with Saskatchewan’s First Nations 
people to encourage the federal government to fulfill its 
responsibilities to First Nations living both on and off 
reserve. 

 
[15:30] 
 
Another one to build a framework for relations between the 
province’s First Nations and Métis people. 
 

Be it resolved that the framework for relations between a 
Saskatchewan Party government and First Nations and 
Métis people will be based on respect and inclusion. 

 
Another one: 
 

Be it resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government will 
work in partnership with First Nations and Métis people to 
implement existing agreements and develop new 
agreements to build our province. 

 
We must consult, Mr. Speaker, with the legislation that affects 
both First Nations and Métis people, another resolution from 
the Saskatchewan Party. Another one that deals with health and 
well-being of First Nations and Métis people, and I will read 
that one as well. 
 

Be it resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government will 
work in partnership with First Nations, Métis people and 
the federal government to improve the health and 
well-being of First Nations and Métis people in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And one of the most important ones, Mr. Speaker, is one that 
deals with removing barriers to employment for First Nations 
and Métis people. 
 

Be it resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government will 
work in partnership with First Nations, Métis people and 
the federal government to identify and remove barriers that 
impede the participation of First Nations and Métis people 

in the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine a better thing to try and make as 
one of our priorities as we move into Saskatchewan’s second 
century than to try and deal with economic opportunities and 
employment opportunities for First Nations people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to just look at some of the 
specifics of the Kelowna accord. This is a $5.1 billion, five-year 
initiative by the federal government for funding. It was done in 
consultation with and direct result of meetings with First 
Nations people. This is a large amount of money and will go a 
long ways trying to address some of the needs. 
 
It will include $1.8 billion in federal funding over five years for 
education; $50 million of that money will flow to the North. By 
2016, Native high school and post-secondary graduate rates 
should be similar to non-Aboriginal people. I hope that that is a 
goal, Mr. Speaker, that will be met. $100 million over the next 
five years to be spent on existing programs in the North to 
prepare children for their school-age experience. 
 
$1.32 billion will be invested in health care, including an effort 
to double in the next 10 years the number of Aboriginal doctors 
and nurses from 150 to 1,200 respectively. $1.6 billion to be 
spent over the next five years to advance the federal 
commitment to reduce housing shortfalls by 40 per cent over 
the next five years and by 80 per cent over the life of the 
10-year plan. $200 million will be invested in economic 
opportunities, $170 million within the next five years to build 
relationships and accountability among First Nations and 
non-First Nations people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports in 
principle the Kelowna accord. The Saskatchewan Party believes 
the federal government’s role needs to be clarified and a 
Saskatchewan Party government would encourage the federal 
government to fulfill its commitment to First Nations people in 
Saskatchewan. A Saskatchewan Party government would work 
with First Nations and Métis to implement new and existing 
programs to better the lives of First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP government has a 
terrible record of consultation with Saskatchewan First Nations 
people. The smoking ban that was implemented by the 
provincial government last year was one example. What has 
now become a major hurdle, and something that has now 
become the subject of racist comments and a racist issue 
between our peoples has now grown and escalated to that point, 
when what should have happened was that type of initiative 
should have been something we could have worked together on, 
and developed something that would have been positive for all 
people in the province. Unfortunately the utter lack of 
consultation, the utter lack of understanding or the ability to go 
forward has created a major impediment and now we have 
something that’s got to be worked through rather than 
something where we just go forward on it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will work with 
First Nations and Métis people. One of the initiatives of the 
Saskatchewan Party is a document called, Enterprise 
Saskatchewan, which will be an initiative of partnerships, 
consultation, and developing a system to remove barriers to 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

growth in this province and to develop economic initiatives, and 
to remove specific barriers that would impede or prevent the 
province and prevent First Nations from moving forward 
through consultation, through partnerships. 
 
I’d like to encourage the members opposite to go to the Sask 
Party website and download a copy of that agreement, or that 
document — read it carefully, study it, because it’s something 
that would benefit their party and would certainly go a long 
ways to promoting our relationship with First Nations people, 
not to mention the rest of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m particularly troubled by the 
educational opportunities and lack of educational opportunities 
for First Nations people. We know that in our cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina there are hundreds and hundreds of 
children that are not enrolled in any kind of school system and 
are outside of the educational system and outside of any kind of 
the supports and other things that are delivered through our 
school system. 
 
It would be a Saskatchewan Party priority to try and identify 
those children and try and find ways to get them back so that 
they become engaged in the educational system. That’s one of 
the failings that we have in our society right now and it is an 
unacceptable failing. Every child deserves to have an education. 
Every child deserves to have a warm, secure home. Every child 
deserves not to live in fear. Every child deserves something 
where they have a warm, secure, loving home environment and 
unfortunately the current system with the NDP is not providing 
that in a system that it should be. 
 
What should happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
government of the day should work with Aboriginal people, 
work with First Nations, to try and develop the partnerships, try 
and develop the method for delivering those services to ensure 
that those students are not left behind and are able to participate 
fully and are given every opportunity to grow and prosper and 
flourish within our society. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unemployment rate among First 
Nations people in our province is unacceptable. In December 
2005 the unemployment rate amongst Aboriginal people was 
14.6 per cent compared to 4.8 per cent in the non-Aboriginal 
population — a statistic that is not acceptable and should not be 
acceptable to either us or the First Nations people. We need to 
work with those people to try and develop employment skills, 
employment opportunities, and to ensure that there are 
appropriate employment situations for them. And hopefully 
those employment situations could be found in Aboriginal and 
First Nations businesses that could be developed over a 
relatively short period of time. 
 
The large percentage of Aboriginal people that we have in our 
province should be seen as an opportunity for growth for this 
province. And we should target our resources to ensuring that 
those people are the ones that get first priority and new 
opportunity for education, for economic growth rather than 
looking elsewhere. It should be a first priority to try and deal 
with the existing people in this province. 
 
Unfortunately our health system as well has failed Aboriginal 
First Nations people. There is a gap in life expectancy. On 

average First Nations men live seven years less that other 
Canadian men, First Nations women five years less than other 
Canadian women. An unacceptable statistic when you have one 
segment of the society that actually is living a shorter lifespan 
than other portions of the society. 
 
We also know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have a huge 
problem with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, much higher 
occurrence in First Nations children. These people usually 
attain lower economic status. They have poor education and 
much greater likelihood of interacting with the justice system; 
something that is unacceptable and must be addressed by our 
province. The NDP have dragged their feet on this issue and as 
a result First Nations people have suffered. 
 
Much as we support the initiatives of the Kelowna accord, we 
also have to accept responsibility within this province for the 
education system and for the failings that are within provincial 
jurisdiction. We support the initiatives that take place within the 
Kelowna accord, but we recognize as well that we are leaving 
people behind as a province. We have to increase those people 
and the commitment that we make. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will 
be supporting both the motion and will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
I believe that there is one more speaker on this side of the 
House that wishes to participate in the debate as well. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I understand there’s 
another speaker and I recognize the hon. member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you Mr. Chair. I would like to, with 
your permission, Mr. Chair take this opportunity while I’m on 
my feet to introduce someone who is sitting in the west gallery. 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the house, my sister Gail Smith who has unexpectedly appeared 
in the Assembly to observe the proceedings this afternoon. I ask 
all members to welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Kelowna Accord 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Chair, I stand in support of a motion 
put forward by the member from Meadow Lake, the Minister of 
First Nations and Métis Relations, and seconded by the Minister 
of Northern Affairs, the MLA from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Chair, last Friday I made reference to a presentation that I 
heard from Professor John Borrows, who’s on the faculty with 
the University of Victoria. And I acknowledged him as being 
Anishinabe from the Nawash First Nation and Canada’s leading 
indigenous law scholar. 
 
And as I indicated last Friday, Mr. Borrows introduced the 
concept of reconciliation with the definition that I had not heard 
before. And this definition for reconciliation was, to sit back 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

down together. And he reminded us that we as peoples all sat 
down together through the Crown when the treaties were first 
signed and that as a result we are all treaty in a sense, all 
signatories of the treaties. And he talked about five aspects of 
reconciliation. 
 
He talked about legal reconciliation to see that the values and 
beliefs and practices of Aboriginal people are reflected in the 
justice system. He talked about social reconciliation to ensure 
that indigenous people have the health, education, and social 
services that they need and deserve. He talked about political 
reconciliation so that there is a recognition of sovereignty along 
with the mutual exchange of respect and understanding. He 
spoke of economic reconciliation to provide for Aboriginal 
economic development. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, he spoke of spiritual reconciliation which 
includes a recognition and respect for indigenous belief systems 
and underlying this, an important foundation of trust and 
relationship. 
 
So treaty was and is not just a political and legal entity but one 
of honour, of respect, of trust, a spiritual trust. And it rested on 
a very firm foundation of relationship, a powerful sense of 
relationship. 
 
Our Premier stated this in Kelowna in November. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

In our view, the treaties are [vital] vital, living [and] sacred 
undertakings that are the foundation of the definition of 
our relationship. 

 
The Kelowna summit, Mr. Chair, was a time, to quote, “to sit 
back down together.” It was a time for reconciliation. It was a 
historic meeting on Aboriginal issues that included federal and 
provincial leaders meeting with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
leaders. 
 
The summit responded to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
initiatives and to a plan by the Assembly of First Nations to 
close the gap and the quality of life between First Nations and 
the average Canadian. The result in the words of Phil Fontaine, 
national chief of the Assembly of First Nations was, quote: 
 

A plan to improve First Nations health, housing, access to 
education and economic opportunity, and opportunity for 
self-government. A plan to help eliminate First Nations 
poverty and to improve quality of life for Canada’s First 
Peoples. 

 
[15:45] 
 
The ministers of First Nations and Métis Relations and of 
Northern Affairs have already quoted provincial statistics that 
illustrate the inequalities that exist in this province and in this 
country for Aboriginal people. And I’ll give two or three more 
of those statistics, Mr. Chair: 44 per cent of First Nations people 
off-reserve and 47 per cent of First Nations people on-reserve 
live below the poverty line; 52 per cent of Aboriginal children 
living in Canadian cities live in poverty. And, Mr. Chair, in 
2003 Canada’s Aboriginal people ranked 78th on the United 
Nations development index — an index on which Canada as a 

country is always in the top three. 
 
The purpose of the Kelowna accord was to set a framework to 
significantly address this shameful reality. Again Phil Fontaine, 
chief of the Assembly of First Nations, quote: 
 

This is not about more money and more spending, but 
about investing. This is about creating a solid and stable 
foundation for future growth and productivity. We will 
turn poverty into prosperity, and turn Canada into a 
country where First Nations peoples and cultures survive 
and thrive as First Nations citizens in the modern age. 
Today is about turning Canada into the kind of country 
that Canadians want it to be. 

 
The Kelowna accord was, I believe, an act of economic, social, 
and political reconciliation. Five billion dollars over five years: 
200 million for economic development and economic 
opportunities; 1.8 billion for education to create school systems, 
train more Aboriginal teachers, and identify children with 
special needs; $1.6 billion in housing including $400 million to 
address the need for clean water in many remote communities; 
$1.3 billion for health services. It was an act of political 
reconciliation because it involved a commitment to developing 
and increasing opportunity for self government. 
 
National chief of the Assembly of First Nations, Phil Fontaine, 
said, quote: 
 

The fact that the Prime Minister and the First Ministers sat 
with the First Peoples of this land to engage in a real 
discussion on our issues and our agenda, our inherent 
Aboriginal and Treaty rights, is in itself historic. 
 
But more importantly, we are making history by taking the 
first steps towards creating a new Canada and forging a 
new Federation; a Federation where the First Peoples of 
this land enjoy the same quality of life as other Canadians; 
where we control the decisions that affect our lives; where 
we give life to the spirit and intent of the Treaties and full 
expression to their inherent rights. 

 
Where we give life to the spirit and intent of the treaties. The 
Kelowna accord was not just a social and economic and 
political reconciliation, it was a spiritual reconciliation as well. 
It was an accord that was a matter of trust. And I would argue 
that this matter of trust, although not as significant as the 
treaties, builds on the spiritual nature of the treaties and that this 
trust should be fulfilled. It should not be betrayed. 
 
In the March 7 issue of the Globe and Mail, John Ibbitson 
wrote: 
 

In Kelowna, everyone finally declared enough is enough 
All sides resolved to spend their energies on improving the 
aboriginal quality of life, on breaking the cycles, on finally 
going to work on closing the gaps . . . If Kelowna is lost, 
then that opportunity is lost, an act of faith is betrayed, and 
there is nothing to look forward to except a return to the 
bad old ways . . . Because Kelowna is the last, best hope to 
improve the lives of native people in this generation. 

 
So now, Mr. Chair, we wait for the federal government to 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

endorse the Kelowna accord. We wait for the federal Speech 
from the Throne in April to see if it endorses the Kelowna 
accord. We wait for the federal budget to see if it includes the 
agreed-to provisions and the financial commitments of the 
Kelowna accord. 
 
And as Ibbitson points out in his column: 
 

If neither of those circumstances comes about, or if the 
funding is inadequate compared to their needs, it will be 
just another broken treaty that the Native people have 
signed. But if the Conservative government can honour the 
Kelowna accord, it could mark the time we finally turn the 
corner after years of neglect, and Native people can begin 
the ascent into a world with a future for the first time in 
hundreds of years. 
 

So, Mr. Chair, there is a trust here, a reconciliation that has 
resulted in Métis, Inuit, and First Nations people sitting down 
together again, representing hundreds of communities from the 
north and south and east and west, rural and urban, meeting 
with the first ministers who represent another great diversity, 
forming relationship and finding common ground in the form of 
an accord, taking a great step forward toward social, economic, 
political, and spiritual reconciliation. 
 
Mr. Chair, I began by talking about a presentation by 
Anishinabe, John Borrows. I’d like to close with the words of 
my friend, Willie Ermine, who is Cree from Sturgeon Lake 
First Nation. Willie is a renowned artist, educator, researcher, 
and presently administrator at First Nations University in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Last summer at the Sturgeon Lake centennial powwow he 
spoke to me about a paper that he had written and presented last 
spring called “Ethical Space: Transforming Relations.” And I 
spoke to Willie about a week ago about the same paper. And I 
think he would appreciate the words and thoughts of Professor 
John Borrows, and I think says many of the same things in a 
different way. 
 
Since the treaties, Willie says, we’ve ended up in, he says, an 
entangled dilemma. He also calls it a schism of understanding. 
And Willie says that this misunderstanding has occurred 
because of the encounter of two solitudes, and I quote: 
 

 . . . each formed and guided by distinct histories, 
knowledges, traditions, values, interests, and social, 
economic, and political realities. 

 
But Willie says there is a space where we can speak in the 
language of possibility. And he calls this an ethical space. He 
says it is a, quote, “ . . . precarious and fragile window of 
opportunity . . . ” And he says it will form, quote, “ . . . as new, 
previously oppressed . . . [and] silenced voices enter the 
discourse.” 
 
Willie says, quote: 
 

The new partnership model of the ethical space, in a 
cooperative spirit between Indigenous Peoples and 
Western institutions, will create new currents of thought 
that flow in different directions and overrun the old ways 

of thinking. 
 
Reconciliation, relationship, ethical space — these are lofty 
ideas and lofty goals. And they offer great hope for all of the 
people of this province and this country. 
 
The Kelowna accord is a landmark agreement. I urge the new 
federal government to honour it and members of this House to 
honour it as well by supporting the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure 
to speak to this motion. Mr. Speaker, we do not need to find 
solutions for First Nations people and Métis peoples. We have 
to find solutions with them. We must find ways of reaching 
goals that are beneficial to all people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We must find solutions that are based on mutual respect and 
understanding to achieve any long-term objectives. We must 
build a framework between the province’s First Nations and 
Métis people. Mr. Speaker, we cannot advance the cause of 
either side under a cloud of mistrust. When we start to work 
together, then we will start to see real success. 
 
If we approach Ottawa with a united front, we will achieve 
success. Together we must implement existing agreements and 
develop new agreements to build our province. Mr. Speaker, we 
on this side of the House believe that together with First 
Nations we can carry our issues to the federal government with 
such force that we can lay the groundwork for an exciting new 
Saskatchewan, a Saskatchewan the likes of which the world 
will look at with admiration and new respect. 
 
A large part of this framework must be built around 
consultation. How can we achieve anything if there is no 
consultation? I look to the no-smoking Bill that was introduced 
last year. Mr. Speaker, we are still struggling with the results of 
the lack of communication and consultation that should have 
occurred before that Bill became law. 
 
Government of the people, by the people, for the people does 
not occur without extensive consultation. The right of the 
people cannot be understood without consultation. One side 
cannot impose its will on the other side and expect not to have 
any backlash. In today’s political climate this is no longer 
acceptable. 
 
We must form partnerships, and in doing so we will have to 
make some sacrifices. But the rewards will be as big as our 
dreams. All of these lofty platitudes that I have mentioned must 
be achieved in order to reach our common goal. Mr. Speaker, 
the term being used by that side of the House is, no one is left 
behind. Let’s apply that to the current First Nations and Métis 
people. 
 
According to the 2001 census, 39 per cent of Aboriginal males 
and 35 per cent of Aboriginal females of the age 15 to 34 
non-reserve population did not complete elementary or high 
school. According to the ’96 census, 14 per cent of Aboriginal 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

people age 15 to 24 in Saskatchewan did not complete grade 9, 
compared to 2 per cent of non-Aboriginal population. Of that, 
First Nations on-reserve had the lowest level of educational 
attainment. The disparity in attainment of education between 
younger Aboriginals and non-Aboriginals signals continued 
quality-of-life differences. And the NDP say no one is left 
behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to Stats Canada, in December 2005 the 
Aboriginal unemployment rate was a startling 14.6 per cent 
compared to only 4.8 per cent in the non-Aboriginal population. 
Métis people in Saskatchewan have a higher unemployment 
rate than the non-Métis population. As of December 2005 it was 
10.1 and was as high as 15.2 in the last 18 months. 
 
These numbers signal several things. The NDP government has 
not done enough to reverse this appalling unemployment 
record. The NDP government has not moved to help First 
Nations and Métis people into skill training and educational 
programs. Saskatchewan is facing a labour shortage and there is 
a huge, young, unemployed Aboriginal population. And the 
NDP have done little to join these two. 
 
The NDP have finally moved to build a northern road network. 
This has been 10 years in the making and is a positive move 
toward improving life conditions of the northern Saskatchewan 
people, many of whom are First Nations and Métis, by lowering 
the cost of goods and improving access to economic 
opportunities. Except the NDP have dragged their feet and all 
we have is a press release and an announcement. Again the 
NDP have turned their back on First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations people have significantly higher 
levels of diabetes than non-First Nations population. Type 2 
diabetes affects First Nation and Métis people three to five 
times more than the general Canadian population. As a result 
there’s a considerable gap in life expectancy of Aboriginal men 
and women compared to non-Aboriginal population. On 
average First Nation men live seven years less than other 
Canadian men, and First Nation women five years less than 
other Canadian women. Mr. Speaker, this is being left way 
behind. 
 
The suicide rate of First Nations is five to six times higher than 
the national average; and for Inuit youth, 11 times higher. This 
is not acceptable. Suicide is the single greatest cause of 
injury-related deaths for Aboriginal people. Aboriginal youth 
are being left behind. FASD has a much higher occurrence in 
First Nations children. Children with fetal alcohol syndrome 
usually attain lower economic status, have poorer education 
attainment, and much greater likelihood of interacting with the 
justice system. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Again the NDP have dragged their feet on this issue and First 
Nations people have suffered. The NDP has refused to fund an 
FASD centre of excellence. They have sat on their mountain of 
money while First Nations and Métis people are being left 
behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 44,000 kids live in poverty in Saskatchewan. 
That’s 44,000 kids being left behind by this government. First 

Nations children and the children of lone parent families headed 
by women experience poverty rates that are far higher than the 
provincial average. Aboriginal people experience the ratio of 
poverty almost four times greater than the general population. 
The 2001 census indicates that 50 per cent of Saskatchewan 
children identified as Aboriginal live in poverty, compared to 
19 per cent of Saskatchewan children. So how can the members 
opposite say no one’s left behind? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports the principles 
and the objectives behind the Kelowna accord. Those objectives 
are to aid in lifting Aboriginal populations out of poverty, 
provide better health care and educational opportunities and 
housing for communities. The federal government has to do 
more, but the NDP provincial government should and has not 
taken a leadership role in helping our Aboriginal people out. 
 
Due to the situation in Saskatchewan, we can’t wait for the 
federal government to find answers. We must sit down with 
Aboriginal peoples and put all our cards on the table in order to 
have honest and fair discussion. This in turn will mean giving 
and taking on both sides. No stone must be left unturned. We 
must put aside old hatreds and close old wounds. Now is when 
we have come to the point where we must walk the walk and 
not just talk the talk. 
 
Saskatchewan can take its place in the sun, but only if we work 
together. Neither side can do it on their own. The time has 
come. With our resources as a cornerstone, we can build a 
province second to none. The choice is ours — work together or 
stay a wee province. History will mark us with what we achieve 
in our consultations. Our generation has been given the task. 
Success or failure is ours to choose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — There being no further speakers, I will put the 
questions. There are two questions before us. There’s first of all 
the main motion as moved by the member for Meadow Lake 
and seconded by the member for Cumberland; and to that main 
motion there’s an amendment put by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena and seconded by the member for 
Southeast. We will first consider the amendment. And the 
amendment reads as follows: 
 

That all of the words after “first ministers’ meeting in 
Kelowna” be deleted and the following be added: 
 
that this Assembly will work proactively with 
Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal people to encourage the 
federal government to fulfill its responsibilities to 
Aboriginal people living both on- and off-reserve; and 
further 
 
that this Assembly recognize the need for true and equal 
partnerships of the three levels of government in the areas 
of housing, economy, health, and social services to 
improve the socio-economic status of Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan; and further 
 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to share a 
greater percentage of the costs associated with the 
investments required to improve the social and economic 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

conditions, as well as support structures for Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan; and that it begin to work on 
achieving the targets identified at the First Nations 
meeting in Kelowna by developing new policy and 
program arrangements. 

 
We will now take the vote on the amendment. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The amendment has been 
carried. The question before us then is the main motion as 
amended. Will the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion as amended? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the House to move a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 
and seconded by the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena, I 
move: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 
the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 
the federal Minister of Indian Affairs and northern 
development, and federal interlocutor for Métis and 
non-status Indians and the leaders of the federal opposition 
parties. 

 
I so move. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 
the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 
the federal Minister of Indian Affairs and northern 
development, and federal interlocutor for Métis and 
non-status Indians and the leaders of the federal opposition 
parties. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 39 — The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
take my place today to make a few comments regarding Bill 
No. 39, the Act to amend the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority, 2005. 
 
And before I speak to that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make a few 
comments about the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, 
especially some of the work that’s being done in my area, in my 
constituency which is just around Shell Lake. I know a couple 
of people that are on the Watershed Authority from Shell Lake 
and they do a wonderful job, as is the same in probably most 
parts of the province where they have a Watershed Authority. 
 
In regards to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, a Bill was introduced last 
year in 2005 and it was called Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority amendment Act, 2005. And in regards to that, this 
Bill was brought forth called The Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority Act, 2006. And I believe that it was introduced to 
allow for more enforcement powers. I don’t know if it’s 
enforcement powers by the Watershed Authority, but 
enforcement powers by the government. 
 
In regards to the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, 2005 the 
enforcement powers that were included in this Act enabled the 
authority to (a) register notices of complaints against drainage 
works on the titles to the lands on which the works are located. 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m wondering in regards to 
that in an explanation, does this allow a caveat or a lien to be 
put forward on the land title on the registered land? Deputy 
Madam Speaker, if that is allowed, that goes against the quarter 
section of land, and therefore that has to be cleared before it can 
have a sale. 
 
In the second part (b) under this authority, it states, registered 
orders with respect to remediation, work, required on land titles. 
Again I ask, does this mean that there will be a caveat or a lien 
put on this quarter section or land that is in question? 
 
This is the same, Madam Deputy Speaker, for (c). And (c) says, 
in the case of non-compliance with an order to undertake the 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

remedial work order and register with the Court of Queen’s 
Bench a certificate of the authority’s cost which, once 
registered, has the same force as if it were a judgment of the 
court for the recovery of that debt. Well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, again I bring to light that . . . is this a caveat or is this a 
lien? 
 
Anybody that has been following this in regard to the watershed 
authority Act, I’m sure is a result of the issues that was raised 
and the problems that arose in the southeast part of 
Saskatchewan — and especially in the RM [rural municipality] 
of Churchbridge. As we know there was a court case — and I 
still believe this court case is ongoing — in regards to the issues 
of the RM of Churchbridge and the water authority. And I 
believe this is why this Bill came to play. It gives the power of 
the government in power, the NDP, more power to conquer and 
control. 
 
I’m sure, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] for that area, the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats would love to speak to this, and I’m sure he 
will take his place later on to enlighten the Assembly of what’s 
transpiring there. 
 
But in regards to the comments I want to make, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, regarding this Act, is the fact that it’s tough enough for 
the farmers in all parts of Saskatchewan to deal with what’s out 
there as far as agriculture problems. And especially after the last 
couple of years where we have a significant amount of rain and 
snow, there’s going to be water puddles all over. The way this 
Bill reads is a fact that no farmer can do anything to that land to 
drain some of those sloughs so that he can seed the land. And 
the Act that came into play now with the Bill 2006 will show 
that the farmers have less control on the land that they own, less 
control on the land that they pay taxes every year to. 
 
In the latter part of this Act, where it says section 83.1 is 
intended to make clear the orders made persecute of section 69 
of The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act prior to May 27, 
2005, may be enforced with these new measures made available 
in the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, 2005. That means, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that I believe that the measures that’s 
pronounced in this Act were retroactive back to before 2005. 
Now I’m no lawyer and therefore I cannot make assumptions in 
regards to that, but that’s what I believe happens when this 
takes place. To the farmers in Saskatchewan that are dealing 
with this — and like I say, there are many — I’m sure many of 
them have questions in regarding this. 
 
One of the other problems that I know farmers have had in 
regards to the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority and the 
government is the . . . [inaudible] . . . of the ocean and fisheries 
and their presence in Saskatchewan. You know, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I understood that when it came to ocean and fisheries 
that was to deal with oceans, yet to remember that there’s no 
oceans in Saskatchewan. 
 
In a case in my home community of Spiritwood, there’s a case 
right now that the RM [rural municipality] is looking at where 
they applied for some money to build a road. And that was 
granted by the government. Then all of a sudden, through the 
works of ocean and fisheries, with ocean and fisheries they 
came into play that they can’t finish this road for the simple 

reason ocean and fisheries have come into play and said that 
there is a culvert or a bridge out of place. And that ocean and 
fisheries said the creek that runs through this; there may be 
some fish. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know this creek, and I know 
very well there is no fish. And it’s understandable because if 
there was fish you’d see fishermen fishing it, and there are no 
fishermen fishing the creek. But this is the power that oceans 
and fisheries have — on not only Canada but on Saskatchewan 
— in regards to the control of the land. 
 
[16:15] 
 
There again I also want to bring forth that Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority is now taking more control on the land 
that the farmers own. So it brings a question to many of the 
farmers in the area, why is this being allowed? Why is the NDP 
government wanting more control on land that we as farmers 
pay taxes on? 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, in regards to this Bill, The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 . . . the 
amendment to the Act, I mean, I’m sure there’s many other of 
my colleagues would like to speak to this — not that we don’t 
agree with what the Watershed Authority is doing in most areas. 
In regards to this Bill here, there’s some unanswered questions 
that need to be answered, and therefore, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 40 — The 
Income Trust Liability Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to enter the debate on The Income Trust 
Liability Act. The minister had spoken to this a few days ago 
and outlined that the intent of the Bill was to provide protection 
from liability for investors in Saskatchewan income trusts. So in 
other words this Bill will legislate that beneficiaries of 
Saskatchewan income trusts will not be held responsible for any 
act, default, obligation, or liability of the trustees. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister acknowledged that there 
has not been a history of unit holders of Saskatchewan income 
trusts being held liable for debts or obligations. But without 
protection, the possibility that it could happen is still there and, 
you know, it does need to be addressed. I believe the income 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

trusts are becoming an increasingly popular avenue for 
investors, and consequently the risk will rise as there are more 
and more of the income trusts. And indeed a situation may arise 
where the trust properties are not sufficient to cover a liability. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister also stated that similar 
legislation has been passed in other provinces. And it’s 
important to acknowledge that we in this province need to be 
competitive with other provinces when it comes to attracting 
dollars from investors. If this NDP government doesn’t wake up 
and recognize that, soon we’re going to have so many people 
left behind that our Premier won’t even be able to count them 
all. 
 
Sadly, Madam Deputy Speaker, this legislation is just one small 
step in the right direction that this government needs to take in 
order to level the playing field to attract investment. 
Considering the massive out-migration — and we brought that 
up in question period today — and the job losses that our 
province is experiencing, the government needs to wake up and 
see that we need to look at a number of fronts in which we need 
to be competitive, not just in the area of protecting beneficiaries 
of income trusts. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we are not competitive in our tax 
regime, in the corporate capital tax, small business tax, 
provincial sales tax. We’re not competitive in a number of the 
regulations that we have here in the province. We’re not 
competitive in royalty structures. We’re not competitive in 
labour laws. We’re not competitive in the availability and the 
maintenance of our primary highways, and all of those are 
significant to economic growth within our province. 
 
The list could go on and on and on where we’re not competitive 
within this province. So it’s . . . We’re pleased to see that this 
particular piece of legislation seems to be addressing at least 
one small area to make us competitive, but the official 
opposition wants to take some time to speak with some officials 
or some authorities on it and get some opinions on that. We also 
want to take time to compare it with the other provinces and 
their pieces of legislation to ensure that it covers this issue 
adequately. So with that, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Humboldt has 
moved to adjourn the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 41 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today and take part in the discussion on The 

Partnership Act. At initial glance, we know that the Bill appears 
to be mostly housekeeping with just adding definitions to the 
Act that defines firm, the firm’s name, Indian bands, and 
persons, the definitions that are used in the business world. 
 
One of the issues that is brought up in the House in this Bill is 
the fact that the age of . . . that an individual must be 18 years of 
age to be a partner in a partnership now. And so this raises the 
question about how this was brought to the government’s 
attention — if there had been cases where individuals were 
below the age of majority, and it caused some kind of a 
problem, and has there been any repercussions. 
 
As we move forward in this province to grow our economy and 
ensure that people have a chance to be part of a growing 
province and the opportunities to start business, not just be part 
of someone else’s business, we have to have all of our Acts and 
regulations in line and ready to go. 
 
It’s interesting that only now do we have the definitions 
changed so that an Indian band can be part of a partnership Act, 
even though we hear the word partner so very often from this 
government and joint agreement, joint partnerships with First 
Nations people. 
 
I’m wondering why this Bill wasn’t changed a little while ago if 
it’s something that was needed to ensure that we can have 
businesses go in with First Nations people. It’s been a number 
of years since we’ve heard this government use the term. So has 
it been used out of context? Has there been some concerns? 
Why is it just . . . Why is this amendment being brought 
forward now? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there is many things that have to 
change in this province before we can get the economy going. 
One of them will be the changes of things like this partnership 
Act, and the other one will be a change in government. I look 
forward to both of them. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Do you have a motion for this 
debate? 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move adjournment of this Bill at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 42 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 42 — The 
Respiratory Therapists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it gives me pleasure 
to rise to participate in the debate on this significant Bill. And I 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

say that and I don’t intend that to be taken lightly. This is a Bill 
that is an indication that the respiratory therapists have in effect 
come of age and are joining a number of other professions that 
have become self-regulating. 
 
That includes groups such as lawyers through the Law Society, 
realtors through the real estate association, doctors through the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, accountants through their 
institute, dentists, and even veterinarians. 
 
Earlier this week, Madam Deputy Speaker, we heard the hon. 
member for Arm River speak at some length about the 
veterinarians’ Bill, the changes to their self-regulating system. 
One of the significant things that was in that Bill and also in the 
respiratory therapists’ Bill was provisions that would allow for 
prosecution for unauthorized practice, clearly something that 
would be important to veterinarians. And I presume the same 
could be said of all of the self-regulating and self-governing 
professions. I want to commend the member for Arm 
River-Watrous for his comments in that area because it’s 
something that’s incredibly important. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I practised law in this province since 
1978. And every year or two since I’ve been admitted to the 
bar, there has been circumstances where people have been 
prosecuted, or the Law Society has to deal with people who 
have engaged in unlawful or unlicensed practice. These would 
be people that would be preparing wills, doing estates, and a 
variety of other transactions for which they weren’t licensed, 
weren’t competent, weren’t insured. 
 
And I’m sure in dealing with Bill 42, the respiratory therapists, 
we would expect the same from their self-regulating agency, 
that they would take every step to ensure that there is not 
unlicensed or unregulated practice. In fact they go further and 
are part of the large comprehensive scheme of our regulation of 
our health system. And they would be practising in hospitals 
and in health institutions where it would be absolutely 
imperative that all steps be taken to ensure that those engaging 
in that type of practice are licensed, insured, and properly 
qualified, and have been examined and met all of the 
professional requirements. 
 
No doubt, with respiratory therapists, there is a need for a 
self-regulating body. And they are the ones that clearly have the 
expertise in this area, and it’s a sign of their maturation and the 
fact that they are ready to do this, that they have come forward 
and asked the legislature to pass this type of legislation on their 
behalf. 
 
Clearly this is something that the members would in general 
terms want to support and would want to see put forward for 
discussion and debate. We would of course want to ensure that 
all of the appropriate and proper steps are taken to ensure that 
the Bill has received due discussion, due deliberation, and that 
it has progressed in a fashion that it should. Whenever there is 
issues of self-regulation there is always the potential for public 
concern that the legislation is merely self-serving and will not 
be in the best interests of the public. I have every confidence, 
Ms. Deputy Speaker, that the concerns and the reasons for this 
Bill being put forward were in the best interests of the public 
and in the best interests of public safety. 
 

As we go through consideration of this Bill, when it reaches the 
committee stage, we will want to have questions answered that 
would deal with the type of professional competence and how 
the competence is measured, the type of examination and the 
licensing procedure, and all of the steps that their agency will 
take to try and determine that those that practice in this 
profession are competent, qualified, competent, insured, and the 
rest of the steps that will be necessary to ensure that the public 
is adequately, completely, and properly protected. 
 
We have a health system and in spite of the concerns that we 
have with the delays that take place and what things are funded 
and what things are not, we have some of the best and most 
qualified and competent health care professionals anywhere in 
this country and anywhere in the world for that matter, Ms. 
Deputy Speaker. And this group of professionals fit well within 
that scheme, and they are to be praised for their competence, 
their professionalism, and their commitment to serving the 
public. And I think all members of the House would join with 
me in thanking them for their competence, for their hard work 
in the services that they deliver. 
 
I also want to commend them for moving forward with this 
important step to become a self-regulating body. We have got a 
number of questions that we’re going to be asking in 
committee. We will want to know where the Bill was initiated 
from. We understand it was from the association. We will want 
to know what’s taking place with respiratory therapists in other 
jurisdictions, in other provinces, and in particular the Western 
provinces. 
 
I know that the members opposite frequently deal with 
Manitoba legislation. I think we’d like to look a little further 
afield and we’d like to look at what’s taking place in British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario, not to mention the far Eastern 
provinces. And when we look at the areas of the Maritimes, we 
know that they have similar issues, similar legislation. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So I think dealing with and having a careful look and careful 
scrutiny with what’s happening in all provinces is something 
that we want to deal with, and make a careful detailed analysis 
to make sure that the interests of the public and of the 
professionals involved are adequately protected and well 
served. 
 
We frequently, Madam Deputy Speaker, want to consider 
what’s taking place in American jurisdictions. Not just for 
America envy as I’m sure the members opposite may well want 
to accuse us of, but we know that we have a growing shortage 
of health care professionals and we know that they’re leaving to 
go to Alberta, and we also know that a number of them are 
leaving to go to the US. 
 
So when we deal with this Bill, one of the things that will be 
significant in my mind is the reasons why people would or 
might be leaving the province and I’ll certainly be asking, in 
committee, questions. What is in our regulatory scheme for 
respiratory therapists and other professionals that would cause 
them or may incite them to want to leave our jurisdiction? Is it a 
matter of compensation? Is it a matter of professional training 
that’s available for continuing education? Or is it a matter of 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

other things that they’re troubled with in the province — the tax 
system? 
 
Maybe they just don’t like the current brand of government. I 
know there’s many people in this House and in this province 
that aren’t happy with the government. And maybe that’s just 
something that respiratory therapists feel as well. They just 
don’t like the NDP government and are looking at that as a 
reason to move. And I’m not a respiratory therapist. I’m a 
lawyer and I don’t like this government and I think I’m 
probably fairly typical. And if respiratory therapists are in a 
similar position, Madam Deputy Speaker, they may well feel 
the same way, that that may be a reason for them to want to 
leave the province. 
 
And I’d like to offer them some hope that as we go forward in 
this province, we will do our best to try and remove that 
impediment and that reason for them to be uncomfortable with 
this province. So we’ll certainly be looking to the government 
— the NDP government — to either resign or call an election. 
And we can move forward and see if we can’t give the 
respiratory therapists a good reason to want to stay in the 
province, you know, as they move forward with their licensing. 
 
They clearly can’t put something like that in the legislation, but 
I’m sure it’s a factor that they would be considering as they 
make their career choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that you’ve come back because some 
of the reasons that . . . and points that I’m raising are very 
important, not just to the Deputy Speaker, but to yourself as 
well. 
 
And one of the significant things that self-regulatory bodies 
have is they fulfill a broader mandate other than mere regulating 
their own profession. They serve an advocacy role on behalf of 
their profession as well. 
 
Many people in the province aren’t aware of what a respiratory 
therapist does, what kind of role they fulfill. And they will as 
part of their professional association give some significant help 
to the public by providing public education and making the 
public informed about the role and the duties that they serve, 
and will want to serve an advocacy role on behalf of the 
profession, and will also want to serve notice to the public that 
there are things that they need to ensure that they are able to 
fulfill their role, whether they need things by way of funding, 
equipment expertise, training, facilities, etc. And that will be 
part of the advocacy role that this institution is going to fulfill. 
 
And I frankly, Mr. Speaker, look forward to hearing from them 
and hope that they are one of the more outspoken groups within 
the medical profession that will come forward with issues and 
matters that need to be addressed. 
 
I’m sure that they will also put forward the position that, you 
know, they have the expertise to deal with their own licensing 
position, their own testing and examining position. And that’s 
why we are able as a province to licence and allow for things 
like the respiratory therapists to become self-regulating because 
they do have that internal expertise. 
 
So that’s something that’s of some significant import to the 

people that are in that . . . and also to the public, that we know 
that those that are most able to deal with this, and have the 
expertise and have the knowledge, are the ones that will be 
charged with the licensing and self-regulating process. 
 
Another and more serious thing that they have to deal with will 
be discipline, Mr. Speaker, of their own members. And I know 
as a lawyer I regularly read the reports that come out of the Law 
Society about the disciplinary steps that the Law Society has to 
take to deal with their own members. And during the last year 
or two the Law Society has had to deal with the issues and 
accusations that the system they had of complaints was seen by 
some members of the public as an old-boys’ league, to use that 
term. And what the Law Society did to try and address that is 
they ensured that on the complaints panel was a civilian or a 
non-bencher or a non-lawyer member which went a long ways 
to ensuring that there’s somebody on there that could relate to a 
complainant as a regular citizen and not merely a member of the 
profession that was being criticized or against whom the 
complaint was made. 
 
And with the respiratory therapists, Mr. Speaker, I would want 
to encourage them as they develop a discipline process to 
consider having a civilian or a lay member on that committee to 
ensure that there is a higher level of comfort with the public and 
to ensure that members of the public don’t feel threatened that 
they’re dealing with people that are highly professional and 
don’t understand the public’s concerns. 
 
A lot of issues that come forward to these disciplinary tribunals 
are issues of communication — not so much professional 
competence but where the professionals become so embroiled 
in their own profession that they’re not able to adequately 
communicate with their patients, with their clients. So I’m sure 
respiratory therapists and lawyers have that in common, that 
you became so caught up in your profession that you’re not able 
to adequately or comfortably deal with all of the members of 
the public that come forward with their concerns. And so I 
would want to give them that encouragement. 
 
And it’s imperative to maintain confidence in the integrity of 
the system. That we ensure that the public’s complaints are seen 
and heard and that there’s an understanding and awareness on 
the part of the public that, if they make a complaint, that they 
are genuinely listened to. Oftentimes the complaints arise 
because members of the profession don’t communicate 
adequately with those people, and by having a process in place 
we can go a long ways to do it. 
 
More seriously though, this is the same process that will take 
away somebody’s licence to practise. It’s the same process that 
allows the disbarment of a lawyer by striking the lawyer from 
the rolls. It’s the same process that would prevent a doctor from 
practising any further, a dentist, an accountant, or a 
veterinarian, or any one of the other many self-regulating 
professions. That is a very serious consequence for a 
professional to lose their ability to earn a livelihood. 
 
And it’s not something that would ordinarily be taken lightly or 
something that would be taken without the utmost seriousness 
in the process and having a process in place that’s fair, open, 
accountable, transparent, and ensuring that the principles of 
natural justice would apply, Mr. Speaker. In these cases we 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

would want to ensure that the process that would be used would 
comply fully with the principles of natural justice, and I just 
want to review those briefly for the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That would include a right that immediately upon receipt of the 
complaint that the complaint would be forwarded to the 
respiratory therapist so that they would be aware that a 
complaint was made and give them the right to address the 
complaint in a timely and prompt matter. They would also have 
the right to have notice of the hearing, that they would have the 
opportunity to make a full answer in response to the complaint. 
They would, if they chose to, have the right to be represented 
by counsel. 
 
Now I know some people criticize lawyers and say that lawyers 
shouldn’t be involved in things other than court, but where you 
deal with something as serious as somebody’s right to earn a 
livelihood, to deal with their career, their profession, their right 
to have a lawyer, instruct counsel, would be of the absolute, 
utmost importance. 
 
They also want the right to cross-examine the person that’s 
making a complaint. And that may well have to be done in a 
caring and sensitive manner. They would also want to have the 
right to call witnesses, perhaps expert witnesses that would be 
other respiratory therapists to say how a procedure should be 
performed or how things should be done. They would want to 
know that that process that deals with that complaint is done in 
a timely manner and would be done in a manner that respects 
their professionalism and their integrity. 
 
I think it’s important for people to be aware that where you 
have a complaint against a professional, it’s not merely a 
complaint that’s to be dealt away, bargained, or settled. It’s a 
complaint against that person’s competence, their 
professionalism, and is often seen as a direct attack on their 
integrity. So the process has to respect not only that sensitivity 
but also the sensitivity of the person making the complaint. 
 
Oftentimes the people that make complaints, Mr. Speaker, are 
people that are disadvantaged, people that are poverty stricken, 
that do not have the opportunity to be represented by counsel. 
Oftentimes they’re new Canadians that have a language barrier 
and many of them would receive the able assistance of the Open 
Door Society or another agency to ensure that they have a 
comfort level that’s there. 
 
They may well want to be represented by a counsellor or have 
somebody with them — a family member — somebody to 
make sure that as they go through that process of advancing a 
complaint that they’re not intimidated or troubled by what they 
would see, what they may well perceive as this professional 
body against whom they have to deal with it. This is something 
that when you have a complaints process, it’s not merely a 
matter of going on an attack mode. 
 
Also, a number of professional bodies are now using alternative 
methods of dealing with alternative dispute resolution where 
there’s mediation and other methods of resolving complaints. 
And respiratory therapists, through their association, would be 
. . . I would certainly invite them to consider that as an option 
that they may want to consider when they deal with these 
complaints. 

Not all complaints have to be dealt with on a winner or a loser 
situation where things have to be drawn out to the very end. 
These complaints can often be dealt with by an exchange of 
information, a sharing of information, and other methods other 
than going through a full-fledged hearing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly something that all professional 
agencies — and in particular, a new agency like the respiratory 
therapists — should consider as methods of mediation and 
alternate dispute resolution. So I think that’s something that 
they need to address and deal with. 
 
Other things that a new agency is going to have to deal with is 
maintaining a roll or a register of those that are entitled to 
practise in that profession. And I can add — once again, going 
back to personal experience — the signing of the rolls for a new 
lawyer is something of very much significance. The Law 
Society maintains a roll that is done on a parchment type of 
paper and new lawyers are actually expected to sign it with a 
quill pen that is provided by the Law Society — a marvellous 
piece of tradition. Now I know that respiratory therapists may 
not have that sense of tradition or history, but nonetheless this is 
an important thing. 
 
As they go on through their career they will certainly want to 
have some kind of formality to that process. And it’s certainly 
going to be incumbent on their association to ensure that 
records are kept in a formal, proper, meaningful manner. When 
you have a Bill like the respiratory therapists’ Bill, you would 
want to ensure that they would understand — and I fully expect 
that they will — the need to maintain a proper roll, a proper 
registry, an accounting of the people that have joined the 
profession, left the profession, and as well as other records that 
are necessary to maintain that type of association. That would 
include individual files for the members that would include how 
they applied for membership, what documentation was 
provided with them by way of professional credentials or 
qualifications, examination marks, as well as a history of 
disciplinary complaints. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I know that with the Law Society, each member’s file contains 
a history going right back to when the member was first 
admitted. I had the opportunity some years ago to represent a 
lawyer in a disciplinary hearing. The lawyer was actually 
admitted to the bar in the 1950s. So this is somebody that had 
practised for well in excess of 40 years, and I was amazed at the 
depth and breadth of correspondence that the Law Society held 
on his file for that particular member. It varied from routine 
inquiries to letters of complaint, for comments on unpaid bills, 
and a myriad of things that were there. 
 
Nowadays with issues of privacy and issues of public 
transparency and accountability, we expect them to develop a 
protocol for what things will go into a therapist’s file, what 
things would not go into a therapist’s file. And they may well 
have to develop a code or a guidebook. And speaking of codes, 
Mr. Speaker, they will have to develop a code of professional 
conduct, a code of ethics. As lawyers have a code of 
professional conduct, so as well must respiratory therapists and 
many of the other professions that are now regulated in our 
province. 



March 28, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

Moving on to a slightly different topic that this association is 
going to have to fulfill will be the need to maintain proper 
accounting records dealing with the fees paid by the members, 
the expenditures. All these types of agencies will be expected to 
provide full accounting records for their members, no doubt on 
an annual basis as they go through this. The accounting records 
will, I’m sure, have to be an audited financial statement to 
ensure that things are done in the most competent, professional 
manner. 
 
And then the respiratory therapists will be relying on yet 
another self-regulating body, the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants which I can advise you, Mr. Speaker, has its own 
very stringent code, deals with complaints, and also deals with 
removing people’s professional licences and professional 
certificates. Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the things that 
they have to deal with. They will as well have to deal with 
developing bylaws for their association, the usual forms that 
they have to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I read this Bill, one of the things that I 
noticed was not in this Bill was the authority for them to own 
real estate. Earlier this year we dealt with the real estate 
association. And the real estate association — and I think one of 
the ultimate ironies since I’ve been a member — is they wanted 
a legislative authority so that they could purchase or own their 
own real estate. And, Mr. Speaker, I was surprised that a real 
estate association licensed through this Legislative Assembly 
was not entitled to own real estate, the very persons that license, 
govern and control it. So I’m glad that we were able to give real 
estate agents the ability to hold real estate. 
 
And so I would’ve thought that new Bills may well have that 
provision in there so that respiratory therapists, so that their 
association could purchase real estate. Absent that in the Bill, 
they are not able to do that so they will, Mr. Speaker, have to 
occupy rented premises rather than owned premises, which may 
in the short run not be a problem. But wanting the respiratory 
therapists to have all of the options open to them that would be 
open to realtors, would be open to other people, it’s something 
that we may well see back here on a another date where we’re 
looking for an amendment to allow them to purchase property 
for themselves. So we’re looking to see that this comes forward 
for them. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, that this self-regulation process for 
respiratory therapists has been something that’s been a long 
time in the making. Our communication with their association 
now indicates that this is something they’ve been lobbying and 
working towards for some 11 years. So I think all members of 
the legislature would want to commend them for working that 
hard, that long to ensure that it’s finally brought to this point. 
Because this is something that’s of that much significance to 
them, I want to make sure that all members give this Bill the 
consideration that it’s due and that it’s taken seriously and not 
something that’s sloughed off. If there are things in this Bill that 
aren’t workable we will want to raise those things and try and 
deal with it by way of amendment rather than by way of 
rejecting the Bill and not having it. 
 
We know that when they’ve worked that hard for that long, I’m 
sure that the members on the government side will want to 
ensure that this Bill gets passed. And we will want to ensure 

that it gets passed but, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that if 
there are things that need to be changed to protect the therapists 
themselves, to protect the public, to protect the role of the 
health professionals in our province, we will want to ensure that 
we give this Bill all of the maximum and absolute consideration 
that is necessary to ensure that when this Bill ultimately gets 
passed in its final form, that it is something that the respiratory 
therapists can feel that their legislature did a good job for them, 
for their individual members, and for members of the public. 
 
So I want to ensure that the members here take that 
responsibility very seriously and that they’re going to give this 
Bill very careful and very due consideration. This group of 
professionals provides a very important role in our health care 
system. 
 
There are a number of other health care agencies or groups in 
the province — the nurses, the doctors, the anesthetists — 
within our health care. We recognize them, we commend them. 
 
Respiratory therapists are something that we don’t hear of very 
often. And I would like to suggest that maybe they want to 
come forward in the future and ask us to participate in a public 
education program so more of us can understand what they do, 
what their role is within the medical. Perhaps we could have a 
respiratory therapists’ day proclaimed by the legislature at some 
point; where we would all have a brochure pass, where we 
would get an understanding of what their role is and the 
appreciation and respect that any health care professional — 
and in particular, because we’re talking about Bill 42, 
respiratory therapists — what we need to do to ensure that their 
profession is properly and formally recognized. 
 
We place our life in the hands of health care professionals on a 
regular basis and want to ensure that any health care 
professional is adequately recognized. We often talk about 
EMTs, emergency medical technologists, and the hard work 
they do and how they frequently will save lives by reviving 
people. And we also hear about the hard work that doctors do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the work that is done by 
respiratory therapists would have similar importance. But I feel 
that with a public education program, more of us can know 
about it, more of us can get an understanding. 
 
Last summer, Mr. Speaker, I attended an event outside city hall 
where there was a piping in of the police officers that came. 
And they had an honour guard piping them in and the lead piper 
was a gentleman named Donald McDonald, who was a retired 
police officer who had cardiac arrest at that. They were able to 
revive him with an automatic defibrillator device that they 
brought from the police station. And I was extremely pleased to 
see that there was a great flurry of activity when he collapsed 
right on the middle of the street. And I was glad that there was 
medical technologists, people like the respiratory therapists, that 
were present, that were able to identify what the problem was, 
identify where the help could come from, from the police 
station with the equipment, and I was glad that they were able 
to do that. 
 
And within five or six minutes, before the ambulance actually 
got there, Mr. Speaker, Mr. McDonald was sitting upright, 
breathing, and walked to the ambulance under his own steam. 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2006 

I’m pleased to report that he had triple bypass a few days later 
and has now recovered completely. I ran into him at a social 
function not long ago, and was very pleased to see. 
 
And would also like to add, that he is now Saskatoon’s Citizen 
of the Year, a competition sponsored by CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.]. And, Mr. Speaker, with that . . . on 
that note, I would like to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 42 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:56.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................829 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................829 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................829 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................830 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 One-Year Anniversary of Swift Current’s Southwest TV News 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 Outdoor Hockey League’s First Annual Tournament 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 Weyburn Hosts Saskatchewan Youth Parliament 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 Junior Achievement Awards Banquet Held in Regina 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................832 
 Eastend Arts Council Hosts the Wallace Stegner House Dinner 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................832 
 Powwow Celebrates Traditions in Song and Dance 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................832 
 Junior Achievement Awards Banquet Held in Saskatoon 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................833 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Population Growth 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................833 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................833 
 Meadow Lake Pulp Mill 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................834 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................835 
 Funding for Avastin 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................835 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................836 
 Crop Insurance Premiums 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................837 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................837 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................837 
 



 

 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Advancing the Biodiesel Industry in Saskatchewan 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................838 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................839 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................839 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................839 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................844 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................849 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Kelowna Accord 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................844 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................847 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................849 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Hagel (Transmittal Motion) .....................................................................................................................................................853 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................853 
 Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................854 
 Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................855 
 Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................855 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


