






















































Hansard: April 06, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 36A  THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 995 
 April 6, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of individuals in this province concerned 
about the government’s decision not to fund the cancer-fighting 
drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding the issue around Avastin and the whole 
scenario of entering into two-tier health care here in the 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from many people in the 
Balgonie area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions opposed to the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] two 
tiered health care. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the government’s refusal to fund 
Avastin. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

I present this on behalf of people from the city of Saskatoon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of people who would be unable to pay for the drug 
Avastin personally: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Bjorkdale, 
Zenon Park, Tisdale, Weekes, and Melfort. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to fund Avastin. And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by 
people who are concerned that forcing patients to pay for this 
drug is an example of two tiered health care. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition, all from 
the city of Saskatoon, and I am pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with this 
government’s particular brand of two-tier health care as it 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

pertains to cancer relief. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Limerick, Watrous, Saskatoon, and Humboldt. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
concerning the funding of Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly will be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon, and I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition regarding the funding of the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan who are very upset with this 
government’s refusal to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of 
Saskatoon, and I’m proud to be able to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I too have a 

petition of citizens that are concerned about a cancer drug only 
being available to those that can afford to pay for it. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the great city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In spite of my 
cold, I’m pleased to rise on behalf of my colleagues to present a 
petition in regards to the cancer drug Avastin. Signatures on this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the cities of Saskatoon, 
Regina and the communities of Tisdale, Sylvania. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are deeply concerned about the implementation of a 
two-tier health system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Balgonie. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to present 
a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the 
government not fully funding the cancer drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, Asquith, and 
Langham. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

families across Saskatchewan concerned that Saskatchewan is 
the only province besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that does 
not have a children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, live on Kutz Crescent, 
Wright Crescent, and Kaplan Green in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens in Saskatchewan that 
are concerned with the NDP’s two tiered health system. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, 
Battleford, and one that’s already left for Calgary. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise to present a petition. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Yorkton, and P.A. [Prince Albert]. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan concerned 
with the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. 
And I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues with citizens that are appalled at the NDP’s two 
tiered health system: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and 
a privilege today to rise on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan who would like the funding of the drug Avastin. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
I so present on behalf of the citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of concerned citizens who are concerned that forcing 
patients to pay for the cancer drug Avastin is a tailor-made 
example of two tiered health care. 
 
And the prayers reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Saskatoon and Warman. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 5, 7, 64, 67, 639, 644, and 
645. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair for the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
26, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act with amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request that the 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill be 
waived. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
that consideration for Committee of the Whole of this Bill be 
waived. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this 
amendment be read the first time? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
now be read for the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Government House Leader that this Bill No. 26 be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 

Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day 41 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskWater: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2002 and 2003 such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 

And I ask that same question, Mr. Speaker, for the years ’01-02 
and 2000-2001. While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskWater: does management of the 
department have any knowledge of any actual or suspected 
fraud or illegal activity within the department during the 
year 2002-03? If so, what is the nature of this activity? 

 
[13:45] 
 
And I ask that same question for the years ’01-02, and 2000 and 
2001. I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskWater: did management of the 
department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2002-2003? 
 

And I ask that same question for the years ’01-02 and 
2000-2001. I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskWater: how did management of the 
department monitor any established programs and controls 
to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year ’02-03? 

 
And I ask that same question for the years ’01-02 and 
2000-2001. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskWater: what did management of 
the department find as a result of its monitoring of any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
detect fraud in the year ’02-03? 
 

And I also ask that same question for the years ’01-02 and 
2000-2001. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: in the calendar 
year 2006, how many of the 150 rural communities that do 
not have high-speed Internet will be getting high-speed 
Internet and which ones, if any? 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: is 
management of the department aware of any allegations of 
fraud or other illegal activity within the department or its 
agencies in the year 2002-2003 such as information 
received from employees, former employees, customers, 
clients, suppliers or others? And question no. 2, if so, what 
is the nature of the activity? 
 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: what 
did management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2002-2003? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: how 
did management of the department monitor any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help develop or prevent and detect fraud in the year 
2002-2003? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: did 
management of the department have established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or 
detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a similar set of questions for the year 
2000-2001 and for the year 2001-2002. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, today is Tartan Day, a day of 
appreciation for the Scottish descendants here in Saskatchewan 
and across the country. Today not only celebrating the signing 
of the Declaration of Arbroath, but the many contributions that 
Scots have made to our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Scotland has lent its colours to the people of this 
province and to the history of Saskatchewan. Walter Scott, 
Saskatchewan’s first premier and W.R. Motherwell, our first 
minister of Agriculture for example were both of old Scotia. 
 
Our province was also home to another great Scottish 
descendant, a man recognized throughout Canada for his 
invaluable contributions to our way of life, Thomas Clement 
Douglas of Saskatchewan was born a son of Falkirk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members had the opportunity to 
hear the Sons of Scotland Benevolent Association this morning. 
The association represents one of the largest Scottish 
organizations in Canada. They came this morning to share some 
piping and drumming in celebration of Tartan Day. Mr. 
Speaker, the focus of the Sons of Scotland is the preservation of 
Scottish traditions, history, music, and literature. And as we saw 
this morning, Scottish culture is alive and well in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I invite all members to join with me in extending thanks to the 
Sons of Scotland Benevolent Association for performing here 
today and in congratulating the many Scottish groups in our 
province on their day, Tartan Day. Slainte M’hath. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I think I got a little ahead of myself there. I 
would ask members to revert back to introductions of guests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
notice we have some guests with us today, and I wanted to, I 
wanted to introduce a few of the guests who are with us today 
in the Assembly. First I want to say thank you to all those who 
are joining us today in the Assembly in the various galleries 
throughout the building and who are watching us on TV. 
 
I want to start today by welcoming members of my family who 
are coming today to watch me present the provincial budget a 
little later. And if I could just ask them to stand as I introduce 
them to members of the Assembly. I’d like to start by 
introducing my father, David Thomson, and his wife, Pat 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

Sonntag. My mother, Patricia Leson, and her husband, my 
stepfather, Ed Leson. My grandmother, Nora Patterson, from 
Spruce Home. My brother, Matthew. My sister, Lisa. 
 
And the guy at the end isn’t a member of my family. I’ll 
introduce him in a minute. But these are the members of my 
family, and I’m very pleased they’ve joined me here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are seated 
three very important guests with us today that I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly. They’re members of the business 
tax review commission. Joining us today are Jack Vicq. Jack, 
do you want to stand? Thank you. Cheryl Shepherd and Charlie 
Baldock. If I could ask all members to welcome these three 
very important individuals to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I received a whole lot of 
advice in helping to pull together this budget. This may be a 
surprise to some members. I certainly welcomed the many 
opportunities for discussion that I had around the province, the 
advice that I had from the business tax review committee. I also 
received advice from other people in our community. 
 
Although they’re not joining us in the Assembly today, I 
understand seated in one of the galleries in the building today is 
Bonnie Morton and Peter Gilmer with the Regina Anti-Poverty 
Ministry. Their advice was very important to me as I put 
together this budget. I’d ask members to join me in thanking 
them and welcoming them to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Finally, as an old student union 
president, I take great pleasure today in having some of the new 
student union presidents here. I wish they had maybe not 
followed all of my tactics in lobbying the government, but I am, 
nevertheless, very happy to have with us today Gavin Gardiner, 
who’s seated on the floor of the Assembly from the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] Students’ Union. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — And Victor Thomas from the 
University of Regina Students’ Union. Victor, up in the east 
gallery. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me just say 
on behalf of all of us to all of those who have joined us here 
today: thank you very much for joining us, thank you for your 
advice, thank you for your continued commitment to 
Saskatchewan, and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Ministers’ Comments 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this looks like yesterday was about the fourth day in a 
row the NDP government has been caught not being completely 
accurate. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Agriculture revealed that he spoke to 
the federal Minister of Agriculture, and after being pressed by 
reporters finally had to admit to this, Mr. Speaker. And I have a 
quote from our Minister of Agriculture: 
 

We did talk about me referencing Mr. Strahl’s buck up 
comments when I spoke to him last week, . . . [but] I won’t 
tell you exactly what he said to me. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it sounds like the Agriculture minister 
received a bit of a tongue-lashing, and I would have given 
anything to be a fly on the wall and heard that conversation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new for this NDP government. 
Let’s not forget that it was only a few days ago that the Deputy 
Premier was put in his place for comments such as that. And, 
Mr. Speaker, now we have the Ag minister having to live up to 
his less-than-accurate quotes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen so many falsities this session from the 
NDP government, it’s starting to become commonplace. They 
hoot and holler about credibility, but when it comes down to it, 
they’re the ones whose credibility is routinely questioned. Mr. 
Speaker, they are the ones being caught explaining their 
misleading statements. And they are the ones, Mr. Speaker, who 
will be sitting on this side of the House after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the Ag minister can 
take it upon himself to stop antagonizing the federal Minister of 
Agriculture and build a positive, mature relationship. The 
farmers of Saskatchewan deserve no less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Dealership Wins Awards and Accolades 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today to congratulate Nick and 
Cathy Allen, the proud owners of Redline Harley-Davidson in 
Saskatoon on receiving the Deeley Harley-Davidson Retailer of 
the Year Award and the Deeley Harley-Davidson CEO [chief 
executive officer] Gold Award. 
 
This award is presented only to those retailers who exhibit the 
very best in business practice and who demonstrate excellence 
in performance, people, and facilities. This is the third time in 
four years that Redline has received the Dealer of the Year 
Award, demonstrating their strong commitment to customer 
service. And this is the fourth year in a row that Redline 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

received the CEO Gold Award. Such an accomplishment has 
never been demonstrated by any other dealership in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Nick and Cathy are lifetime residents of 
Saskatchewan. They first opened Redline Harley-Davidson in 
1988. In 1997, they moved into the old Firestone building on 
the corner of 23rd Street and 1st Avenue. Their continued hard 
work and dedication to downtown Saskatoon shows them to be 
true business leaders. 
 
Their love for the legendary machines is evident. In their own 
words: “People form a common bond. You’re going to see a 
construction worker alongside a lawyer and nothing else 
matters but the riding.” 
 
So I ask all members in the Assembly today to join me in 
congratulating Nick, Cathy, and all the good folks at Redline 
Harley-Davidson. Best wishes for continued success. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Losing People in the Middle of a Boom 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today 
to deliver a message to the Premier and his government from 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are renowned for their 
strong sense of pride and tenacity. But they are tired of this 
government’s attempts to lower the expectations of this 
province’s potential, and sadly, Mr. Speaker, they are voting 
with their feet. When they hear things like the Premier call 
himself the wee Premier from the wee province, when they hear 
the member from Regina Wascana Plains say that 
Saskatchewan will never grow, or when there is less means 
more for the rest of us from the member from P.A. Northcote, 
Mr. Speaker, they are robbed of their pride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple emailed John Gormley and here is what 
they had to say and I quote: 
 

My wife and I are both medical professionals with over 19 
years of postsecondary education, all done here in 
Saskatchewan. We are young, [we] have a young family, 
and [we] enjoy our province. Why, then, are we leaving 
and many like us despite our “hot” economy? 
 
Simple, there is no plan for this province . . . 
 
We have just as many resources in our land, [our] water, 
and [our] people, but [they] avoid their massive potential 
. . . 
 
By the way, a 1 or 2% tax break is not going to cut it. 
Until we see this vision and utilization of our potential, we 
will continue to vote with our feet and the government 
should not be surprised as the population continues to 
decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why are we still losing people in the middle of a 
boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Booming Economy 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, what better time than a budget 
day to talk about some of the really good, economic news 
stories that have been coming out of Saskatchewan lately. 
 
Let’s see, Mr. Speaker, on the investment side, we have the 
recently announced $2.3 billion expansion to the Husky Oil 
Upgrader in Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Stats Canada reports that new 
capital spending intentions will increase well over 6 per cent — 
half a billion dollars. And for the first time, new capital 
spending will surpass the $8.3 billion mark. Private sector 
investment will account for almost 80 per cent of the total $6.6 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year manufacturing shipments totalled over 
$10 billion. This represents an 8 per cent increase over the year 
before. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Research Council’s hydrogen 
and ethanol dual-fuelled trucks were featured by Globe 2006, a 
biennial conference on business and the environment — this 
technology developed right here in Saskatchewan that is going 
to help pioneer the next generation of fuel cell vehicles in 
transportation industry. 
 
And then there’s the resource sector — from the announcement 
from Oilsands Quest about oil sands right here in Saskatchewan 
to the increase in drilling numbers to the 66 per cent increase in 
revenue from the sale of mineral rights. 
 
It’s good news, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s good news. And 
in spite of the unrelenting negativity of those members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is booming. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Out-Migration of Talent 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m deeply troubled by the continued out-migration of 
very talented Saskatchewan people. I recently learned that 
Andrew Will, CEO of the Cypress Hills Health Authority, is 
leaving his post to go to Alberta. 
 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

Ben Weber, chairperson of the Sunrise Health Authority, is also 
packing up his family and moving to Alberta. Mr. Weber is the 
former mayor of Yorkton. And this is what Mr. Weber had to 
say yesterday in the Yorkton paper, and I quote: 
 

This is becoming a very competitive world. People in my 
position are very mobile . . . 
 
We can drift anywhere from BC to Newfoundland at the 
drop of a hat . . 
 
Where I’m going, the property tax is much less and 
certainly the services are as good or better. 

 
As good or better, Mr. Speaker. How can that be? Less property 
tax, but services that are as good or better? Well I think the 
answer is obvious, Mr. Speaker. All of the Western provinces 
do things differently, and Saskatchewan is being left behind — 
left behind by CEOs, left behind by nurses, by volunteers, left 
behind by the very people that have been instrumental in 
building our communities. 
 
I’m very concerned, Mr. Speaker, as many others are in 
Saskatchewan because of all these people leaving. Who’s going 
to look after our seniors? Who’s going to pay for social 
programs and health and education? Mr. Speaker, when we lose 
people during a boom, the long-term future of our province 
does not look very bright. It’s time to tear up the Regina 
Manifesto and move into the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Regina’s Economy 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
extremely pleased to attend the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority luncheon earlier this week. 
 
Mario Lefebvre, an economist with the Conference Board of 
Canada, had some very positive things to say about Regina’s 
economy and also endorsed the careful and considered steps 
that Saskatchewan is taking to address issues associated with 
the economy and population. 
 
He talked about the sustained economic growth and increased 
economic activity in Regina and noted that the city was in the 
top five in terms of GDP [gross domestic product] among 
Canada’s 20 major metropolitan centres in 2005. 
 
He had quite a bit to say about Saskatchewan’s population 
problem and spoke very positively of the actions that this 
government is taking to address it. And, Mr. Speaker, he spoke 
at length about the problem of being located to the province 
with the hottest economy and fastest growing population in 
Canada and how, despite that, Regina has posted strong 
economic growth for the past eight years and will see growth 
for the next four. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lefebvre’s were very positive for 
Regina’s economy and Saskatchewan as a whole, quote: 

“You don’t get eight solid years of economic growth out 
of luck,” or by fluke . . . [is how he put it.] 

 
Mr. Lefebvre noted that there is work to do in the province, but 
he also noted that we are doing it. At no point, Mr. Speaker, did 
he suggest tearing down everything Saskatchewan has 
accomplished over the last 60 years and starting over. Why 
would he, Mr. Speaker? The notion is completely absurd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Plans for Population and Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a few moments we’re 
going to hear the sixth budget since this current Premier took 
office. And in every budget in some manner, some form, the 
Premier, the government has promised to attract young people, 
to retain young people for the province of Saskatchewan. And 
in every budget, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for our province 
this NDP government has failed to do that. 
 
Every single year since the Premier took office, there have been 
people moving out of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 
the past five years under this current Premier, under the NDP’s 
policies, a total of 16,000 young people between the ages of 15 
and 29 have left the province. At the beginning of this session 
we asked the Premier a simple question: does he have a goal for 
population growth? 
 
At the time he wouldn’t answer the question. Apparently he 
doesn’t have such a goal. Just moments ahead of this budget 
that he says is about prosperity and opportunity, we ask him 
again today: what is his goal for population growth for the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, point number one, I will be 
very proud to stand in this legislature with the Minister of 
Finance to deliver this budget. It will be the sixth budget since 
I’ve become Premier. It will be, Mr. Speaker, to note, the 13th 
balanced budget in a row, Mr. Speaker. That’s a Canadian 
record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the next point the 
Leader of the Opposition makes is about out-migration over 
these past number of years. He indicated, I believe, that an 
out-migration figure of about 16,000 people has existed over 
five years, he says. Well I want to remind that member, that 
Leader of the Opposition, when he worked in the government of 
Grant Devine, in one year, Mr. Speaker, the year 1989 — in one 
year — we lost 16,909. One year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see the challenge that is before us: the 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

challenge to provide opportunities for Saskatchewan young 
people, the challenge of building a quality of life, the challenge 
of opening our borders, the challenge of engaging our 
Aboriginal young people. Mr. Speaker, this government sees 
the challenge, and this government has a plan. And if the 
member will just sit tight, he’s going to hear it in just a few 
moments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, no wonder this NDP 
government, and specifically this NDP government’s economic 
plan, is such a wreck. They’re trying to drive while looking out 
the back window, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we hear from this 
government, from this Premier, all the time. 
 
Here is his record. The population loss of young people alone 
since he took office, ages 15 to 29 . . . 16,000 people, the size of 
Yorkton, have left. They’ve already voted on this Premier’s 
economic record. They voted with their feet unfortunately, and 
they left the province. He’s gone on to post the worse 
out-migration population record in the Dominion of Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the question, and so the question to the Premier is this, 
the question is this: what is his goal? Surely the Premier of the 
province must have a goal for population growth. Does he have 
it, and if he does, will he stand up and share it with the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the people in Saskatchewan 
wonder why it is on a daily basis we’re subject to the negativity 
of the Leader of the Opposition and the Sask Party. He stands in 
his place today, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it, he stands in 
his place today and calls the Saskatchewan economy — what 
did he call it? — a wreck. A wreck, Mr. Speaker, a wreck. 
When the Royal Bank of Canada says we’re going to lead 
economic growth in the country again with great GDP growth, 
the Royal Bank of Canada who is generating headlines in our 
province saying, “Boom times ahead . . . ” 
 
He calls an economy that has GDP growth leading the nation, 
an economy that is producing a record number of jobs, a record 
number of housing starts, record levels of manufacturing 
shipments, record activity in the energy and the mining sector, 
Mr. Speaker, record activity in research and development, 
record activity in the quality of life, Mr. Speaker — he calls that 
a wreck. Is it any wonder he’s just not credible? That opposition 
is just not credible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I believe I said it 

right the first time, but I want to thank the Premier for giving 
the opportunity to repeat it. Let’s be very clear. What is a 
wreck, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, is that 
government’s economic strategy and that government’s 
economic record. That’s what’s a wreck. 
 
This Premier is presiding over his economic plan that is losing 
out to Manitoba, never mind Alberta or British Columbia. 
Manitoba, with — what? — the marginal percentage of 
resources that we have, is outperforming his economy, his 
current economic plan in jobs and in population. 
 
We ask the Premier a very simple question. We know that some 
of his members say that it’s statistically impossible for this 
province to grow from a population standpoint at even the 
national average which is 1 per cent. Is that the Premier’s 
position? Does he believe it’s impossible to achieve even the 
national average? And if he believes something else, why in the 
world wouldn’t he stand in his place today, moments ahead of a 
budget, and say, here is the goal we have for growing our 
population? Why won’t he do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the question 
that the Leader of the Opposition needs to ask is what in the 
world happened to his plan. Remember they ran in the last 
election, they had this thing, I believe it was called Grow 
Saskatchewan or something — Grow Saskatchewan. And they 
were going to get 100,000 people a year, 100,000 people a year. 
Well as soon as the people of Saskatchewan rejected that plan, 
they came up with another one. I think it was here last year. It 
was 100 good ideas. Mr. Speaker, where has that plan gone? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I ask members for order, please. 
One at a time. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague just 
says, we have a plan du jour, or no plan du jour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will see in today’s budget a solid vision and a 
solid plan for the people and the future of Saskatchewan. We 
will grow investment in this province. We will grow 
opportunities for our young people right here at home. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be investing in the education of those young 
people. We will be investing in the training of those young 
people. We will give them new tools to start in the trades. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we are reaching out to ensure that we build in this 
province an unbreakable social fabric. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Fiscal Policies 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sorry that the Premier missed our plan but fortunately for 
him today it’s here today in the form of the Vicq report. 
 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the NDP . . . 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, none of them have read it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 
none of them have read our report or the Vicq report, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has a long tradition — yes, they 
do — of kicking Saskatchewan taxpayers on budget day. But 
this is the first time, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance 
actually went out and bought steel-toed boots to kick 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 2003 election campaign this Premier 
promised to reduce taxes. Then just four months later, Mr. 
Speaker, what did he do? He broke that promise and hiked the 
PST [provincial sales tax] — $150 million tax grab, $500 
million over three years. Mr. Speaker, the NDP now has over 
$1 billion more in revenue than they did last year. But they 
refuse to give Saskatchewan taxpayers a break by reducing the 
PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Finance still kicking 
Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard some whoppers 
in this House but nothing, nothing like what I’ve just heard 
from the Finance critic of the Saskatchewan Party who stood in 
his place and said, quote, the Saskatchewan Party plan is the 
Vicq commission or the Vicq commission is the Saskatchewan 
Party plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, let me tell 
you the reality, Mr. Speaker. We hosted last year, to open our 
centennial, Saskatchewan’s first economic summit where we 
brought together business leaders, small-business people, 
working people, trade unionists, Aboriginal people, young 
people, the entire cross-section of the province of 
Saskatchewan. We sat down to look at the future of our 
province and the economic changes that we needed to make. 
 
From that, Mr. Speaker, from that arose the Vicq commission 
and from the Vicq commission has come much of what you will 
see in the budget today. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
There was only one group of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan who boycotted Saskatchewan’s economic 
summit. Guess which group? For politics, the Saskatchewan 
Party boycotted. They’ve had nothing to do with the budget 
you’ll see today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is sounding 
like the Sask Party leader lite. Mr. Speaker, what we need in 
this province is the Sask Party, not the Sask Party lite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago when 
this government was broke, the NDP broke the Premier’s 
election promise and hiked the PST. Now this government is 
sitting on a mountain of money, a mountain of new oil revenue. 
And are they giving Saskatchewan taxpayers a break by 
reversing the PST increase? We don’t know, Mr. Speaker. The 
Finance minister says no yesterday. We don’t know but we’ll 
find out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister continues to put the boots to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers by refusing to roll back this massive 
tax grab. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has about 1 billion new dollars 
to spend. That’s about $4,000 for every family of four in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. How much of that $4,000 for every 
family will the Minister of Finance be giving back to 
Saskatchewan families today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is 
going to take his place very shortly and speak to this entire 
legislature and to the province of Saskatchewan. In the 
meantime, I just want to say this. When that Finance critic or 
that leader goes off to speak to their business functions in 
Calgary, their fundraising functions in Calgary, I just wish 
they’d tell the whole story. I just wish they’d tell the whole 
story in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will know that for the 
average family of four in Saskatchewan earning an income of 
$50,000, they will pay in provincial sales taxes $1,074 on 
average — 1,074. And they will pay no sales taxes in Calgary. 
But if they would just tell the whole story, that same family in 
Calgary will be paying a health care premium of $1,056, Mr. 
Speaker — 1,056. 
 
Meanwhile the family living in Saskatoon is paying $3,200 less 
on their mortgage. They’re paying $1,100 less on their home 
heating bill and they’re paying $1,200 less on their auto 
insurance and they’re guaranteed the lowest package of utilities 
in the country. Tell the whole story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday a colleague — my colleague, the MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] for Biggar — raised the issue about 
Bobbie Haynes, a mother in his constituency who is worried 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

about her daughter. Bobbie’s daughter is a young nurse here in 
Regina who, only after five months on the job, is feeling 
burnt-out. She is really thinking about getting out of the nursing 
profession and, according to her mother, so are many of her 
nursing colleagues looking at burnout and looking at other 
careers. Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad state of affairs when our young 
nurses are getting burnt-out within the first year of work. 
 
Can this Minister of Health tell the Assembly today that the 
budget will address the real concern in health care recruitment 
and retention of our nursing professionals? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
am looking forward to the delivery of the budget in this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan have been 
looking at the pressures and challenges faced in the health care 
system. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very interested and very excited 
about the possibilities of some new dollars in the health care 
field later today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m expecting that the budget will provide the 
department and the people of Saskatchewan with additional 
dollars to implement sections of the workforce action plan — 
the report that we brought down just four months ago, Mr. 
Speaker — a plan that will improve Saskatchewan’s 
self-sufficiency and training, create employment opportunities 
for newly trained professionals, improve our ability to recruit 
needed professionals, build a more representative workforce, 
provide continuing education and professional development, 
and better align the planning needs to match service and health 
needs with supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this could be a very exciting afternoon for the 
health care field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we will be looking for some 
exact targets from this government because this spring the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has called on this government to 
hire or recruit 600 new nurses to address the most important 
issues of patient safety and so that nurses can operate and 
practise to their professional standards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Health doesn’t think Saskatchewan needs 600 
new nurses, but he doesn’t seem to want to set a target. He’s 
scared to set a target because, in his own words, he probably 
can’t meet it. What an attitude, Mr. Speaker. He can’t set a 
target because he won’t meet it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are asking this government for a 
comprehensive plan that includes targets. Will this budget 
address the issue on how many nurses we need to retain and 
recruit in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to have the question today because I’m very 
pleased that when the budget is coming down, the Department 
of Health will have a multi-faceted approach to dealing with 
recruitment and retention of professionals who work within the 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, specifically to nurses, we know that during the 
course of the next 12 months we will graduate some 233 nurses, 
some of them with bursaries. Mr. Speaker, just this week I have 
been informed . . . Mr. Speaker, I’d like to provide some good 
news to the members opposite. Just this week, Mr. Speaker, the 
chief of nursing in the province of Saskatchewan surveyed 80 
graduates who will come from the nursing education program, 
registered nurses to be graduating in April, Mr. Speaker, this 
month. Of those 80, Mr. Speaker, of those surveyed, 90 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, will be working in Saskatchewan. They have 
jobs. They will be working in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Funding for Avastin 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health should 
be very familiar with these two names: Terry Rak and Bob 
Loeppky. These are two men in Saskatchewan who have 
colorectal cancer and are being denied funding of the drug 
Avastin to extend their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a recent letter sent to the Premier, Marj Rak, 
Terry’s wife, wrote, and I quote: 
 

We have been betrayed by your government with . . . 
[your] refusal to fund the essential . . . [and] highly 
recommended drug [Avastin]. 
 

She goes on to quote: 
 

We know our province has a . . . [extra] billion dollar 
surplus. What is a surplus for if not for improving the 
quality of life for the citizens . . . [in our] province? 

 
Mr. Speaker, with a extra billion dollars worth of revenue, will 
the minister stand in his place and reverse his decision to force 
this province into two-tier health care? Will he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the members opposite and those who were listening to our 
announcement a couple of weeks ago will understand that the 
decision that this government made was a very difficult one. 
The need to provide balanced, responsible care, Mr. Speaker — 
very important to this government and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the number of new 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

cancer drugs being brought into the workplace. We support 
very much the expansion of the common drug review amongst 
all provinces in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, we support the 
development of a national pharmaceutical strategy that will help 
all provinces deal with this. Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget no 
province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, provides universal access to 
the drug Avastin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Funding for Hospital Construction 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of people in several Saskatchewan communities, one of 
which is Humboldt, who are being held hostage by the NDP 
government when it comes to new health care facilities. 
 
The NDP government has announced these community 
facilities and hospitals on a number of occasions — and they’re 
enjoying a photo op every time — but the delays have resulted 
in skyrocketing costs. Initially the good people of Humboldt for 
example were asked to come up with $8 million and they did. 
And now the government has given them only 40 days to 
commit to an additional $5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us what will happen to the 
Humboldt hospital if the community isn’t able to come up with 
the money? But he probably won’t answer that question. So I’ll 
help him out because he told the media the other day that what 
would happen is that the project would be delayed even longer 
or it would be downsized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister commit today to more than just a 
reannouncement of hospital and health care facilities? Will he 
provide the people of Humboldt — and the other areas where 
they’ve made these promises year after year — with some 
breathing room by readjusting the cost sharing agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members’ opposite credibility in this regard with regards to 
reading newspaper clippings and trying to interpret my 
comments, Mr. Speaker . . . The important thing that we’re 
talking about here today, Mr. Speaker, is the commitment of 
this government to health care facilities across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every year we commit significant capital 
dollars in conjunction with communities in this province to 
provide capital to enable facilities to be built. Since 1994 
communities have worked with this government to provide 
facilities in a 65/35 split on capital, Mr. Speaker. That has not 
changed at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. We are committed to 
working with the people of Humboldt, with the Saskatoon 
Health Region who are advancing this project forward and, Mr. 
Speaker, we expect that this project will go forward in the way 
in which the people of Humboldt will be pleased. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, myself and every farmer in this province in 
Saskatchewan is looking forward to hearing what’s in the 
budget this afternoon, remembering that there’s been many cuts 
over the last few years — in fact under that Premier’s 
leadership — many cuts made to farm programs in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s review a few of those cuts, Mr. Speaker. There’s been 
closing of 22 rural service centres. There’s the cancellation of 
spot loss hail. There’s the increased crop insurance premiums 
and at the same time cutting coverage, Mr. Speaker. We had 
asked to extend the deadline for crop insurance premiums to be 
paid this year when farmers couldn’t afford it, and when that 
didn’t happen they lost their crop insurance coverage. We’ve 
had late funding for the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program, Mr. Speaker, on an ongoing basis. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this government has $1 billion in this budget to 
deal with these problems. 
 
Can farmers look forward today for some relief for the first time 
in 14 years from this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d first like to note that any additional funds that came in 
through our revenues over the past year have been spent 
probably six times already in question period by the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are limited resources with which to work. 
And with those resources I think this government has done a 
tremendous job in meeting the needs, Mr. Speaker. Last year in 
agriculture alone, Mr. Speaker, in agriculture alone, $700 
million, Mr. Speaker, to support the farmers of this province — 
$700 per capita from the citizens of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the last two years over $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have come to the table. We have tried, Mr. Speaker, with 
the resources that we have in this province, to meet every need 
that there is. But, Mr. Speaker, what we need, like the other 
people around this world, is support from a national 
government. The US [United States] and the EU [European 
Union] support their farmers, Mr. Speaker. We need the same 
levels of support here. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask the Agriculture minister to make a 
commitment today in question period that, number one, they 
will fully fund the CAIS program and not put part in now and 
part in later and leave farmers hanging when they go to their 
banks for their operating loans this spring. They need to know 
that the CAIS fund is fully funded by that government, Mr. 
Speaker, something that hasn’t happened in the past three years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard for the last two weeks that 
minister insulting the federal Minister of Agriculture to the 
point that we’re lucky if we get any disaster relief in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a sad 
situation for that government to be in because you know who 
pays the price — the farmers of Saskatchewan. And not just the 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, but every business person out in rural 
Saskatchewan also is going to pay that price. And every family 
that lives in rural Saskatchewan is hurt when the farming 
community is not doing well out there. 
 
Something that minister should do when he goes to Ottawa on 
Monday is apologize to that minister and tell that minister that 
will never happen again before he asks for help from that 
minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I’d just like to note that the federal 
minister and I actually do have quite a good relationship. And I 
would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, it is far better than 
what the member opposite’s imagination would lead us to 
believe. 
 
But I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in the year ’04 
we fully funded CAIS for ’03. We gave an initial payment; full 
funding announced by the end of the year. In the year ’05, Mr. 
Speaker, we fully funded ’04 CAIS — initial payment at the 
beginning, full funding by the end of the year. 
 
But guess what else we did? Guess what else we did, Mr. 
Speaker? We fully funded the ’05 year in the same year, Mr. 
Speaker. We have moved the agenda ahead so that we could 
give relief to the farmers, take away the stress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been there. We’ll continue to be there. 
And we will fund the programs the people need. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government, I’ll table to 
responses to written questions no. 704 to 734 inclusive. 

The Speaker: — Responses to questions 704 to 734 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my pleasure to submit the estimates and the supplementary 
estimates accompanied by a message from His Honour the 
Administrator. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for the 
message from the Administrator. The message is as follows: 
 

The Administrator transmits estimates of certain sums 
required for the service of the province for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2007, and supplementary estimates of 
certain sums required for the service of the province for 
the 12 months ending March 31, 2006, and recommends 
the same to the Legislative Assembly. [Signed by the] 
Hon. Mr. Justice S. J. Cameron, Administrator for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Please be seated. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Government Relations, the member for Regina 
Douglas Park: 
 

That His Honour, the Administrator’s message, the 
estimates, and supplementary estimates be referred to the 
Committee of Finance. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina South, seconded by the Minister of 
Government Relations, the member for Regina Douglas Park: 
 

That His Honour, the Administrator’s message, the 
estimates, and supplementary estimates be referred to the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and an honour to deliver the budget 
in this historic Assembly today. This is the first budget of 
Saskatchewan’s second century. And as I begin today, I want to 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

start by thanking my colleague, the Minister of Government 
Relations, the member for Regina Douglas Park, for his work 
and leadership in helping develop this budget. 
 
I am also particularly pleased to be joined in this Assembly 
today by Ed Tchorzewski, whose work as the minister of 
Finance in the early days of this government helped to ensure 
that Saskatchewan’s financial credibility was restored and that 
the tough decisions were taken early in order to allow this 
province to prosper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that will 
build on the strong foundations laid down by those who have 
come before me and those across this province of ours who 
have contributed so much to building a better future for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
It is a budget that will build a better future by securing the 
prosperity that we enjoy today for a generation to come. It will 
build a better future by reinvesting in our social programs to 
ensure that no one is left behind on the path to opportunity. And 
it will build a better future by ensuring that Saskatchewan 
remains the best place in Canada to live, work, and raise a 
family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the budget I am 
delivering today is the 13th consecutive balanced budget of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is a budget that will be our largest 
ever at $7.7 billion. It will provide 8.4 per cent increase in 
program spending and will commit more than $7.1 billion to 
program support. 
 
This budget will contribute more than half a billion dollars to 
service the debt built up by the previous administration. It will 
establish $102 million surplus that will be used for debt 
reduction. I would note that we have been able to pay off nearly 
$450 million worth of debt in the past three years alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the 
first province in Canada to balance its books in the 1990s, and 
we are proud to have continued that tradition in every 
subsequent year. Government debt is now at its lowest point in 
15 years. In fact today Saskatchewan has the third lowest 
debt-to-GDP ratio in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget is balanced 
not only on its bottom line but it is balanced in its priorities — 
priorities that invest in tax cuts in economic growth, social 
program spending, and debt reduction. We have been able to do 
this through the continued dedication of Saskatchewan people 
who share our prairie values of common sense financial 

management, of balanced taxation, and the desire to have an 
unbreakable social fabric that wraps around those most in need. 
 
Today’s budget is being delivered, as we enter our second 
century, at a time of significant opportunity and prosperity. Our 
economy is performing well. This year we expect to see 
economic growth of approximately 2.5 per cent. This builds on 
the economic success of Saskatchewan business that last year 
recorded the second highest growth in Canada for retail sales 
and manufacturing shipments. 
 
Last year we saw Saskatchewan businesses and consumers push 
wholesale trade, business permits and exports, international 
exports, to double digit increases. This growth reflects the fact 
that Saskatchewan businesses and consumers are confident that 
we are building a better future and that we’re seeing the benefit 
of being Canada’s third largest producer of natural gas, second 
largest producer of oil, and the single largest producer of potash 
and uranium in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the resources of 
our oil and gas fields, of our family farms and forests, of our 
mines are key to our continued prosperity. When our province 
first began, our economy was relatively labour intensive. A 
century later, we have an economy that today is relatively 
capital intensive. This change reflects a more mature economy 
and in so doing, it changes the dynamic of our labour force. 
 
We believe however that this capital can be employed not only 
to create growth but to create jobs for young people and 
working families right across this province. It’s worth noting 
that in the last five years alone, we have seen a 23 per cent 
increase in employment in the oil and gas industry. While the 
boom itself is not a secret, what is not well-known in this 
province is that Saskatchewan is emerging as a national 
economic leader and increasingly is receiving recognition as 
such from outside the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is quickly 
gaining the much deserved reputation as Canada’s science city. 
It’s an important economic engine in our province. It’s home to 
much of Canada’s agricultural biotechnology research, and it is 
home to the synchrotron. We’ve seen Saskatoon grow with the 
advanced, technology-clustered Innovation Place and 
significant new private sector investments in manufacturing 
processing facilities throughout the Saskatoon region. 
 
In Regina we’ve seen our economy transformed from its 
traditional role as a seat of government to its emergence as a 
national centre for culture, for environmental research, for 
information and petroleum technology, and film and video 
production. 
 
And indeed across Saskatchewan the strength of our 
manufacturing and processing facilities, mills, and factories, our 
forests and our farms continue to provide thousands of jobs and 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have accomplished much as a people and as a 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

province. In 2002 Saskatchewan became a have province. 
Today’s budget will put Saskatchewan on the path to being a 
permanent have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — To do this, Mr. Speaker, we will 
implement the most ambitious program of business tax cuts in 
Saskatchewan history. These tax cuts will build on our previous 
measures to reduce oil and gas royalties, to encourage new 
investment in the mining sector, and to cut personal income 
taxes. These business tax cuts will help build a better future by 
making our economy more competitive and by encouraging 
business to invest more and to create new jobs right here at 
home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we will implement the 
changes recommended by the business tax review committee by 
phasing out the general corporate capital tax by July 2008, by 
cutting the general corporate income tax by three points this 
year and lowering it to 12 per cent by July 2008. 
 
We will cut the resource surcharge rates for our oil, gas, potash, 
coal, and uranium in each of the next three years, and as of 
tonight, all new investment tax credits for manufacturing and 
processing will be fully refundable. 
 
I am also pleased to announce that all new capital investments 
will be completely exempt from the general corporate capital 
tax as of July 1 of this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, these changes represent 
an investment of over $200 million in our economy during this 
term, and they go further than the recommendations made by 
the business tax review committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recognize that small-business owners 
create a large number of jobs here in Saskatchewan and that 
they too should enjoy the benefits of a prosperity that they have 
helped to create. As such, I’m announcing that we will raise the 
ceiling for small businesses by increasing the threshold to 
qualify for the small-business tax rate from 300,000 to 500,000 
by July 2008. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this will provide the 
highest threshold in Canada, and we believe that these measures 
will build a better future for Saskatchewan people by helping 
business invest and grow and to create new jobs for young 
people right here at home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, while this budget makes 
historic changes to our approach for dealing with business taxes 
and will encourage new industries, new growth, and new jobs, 
we will continue to work with and support our traditional 
industries that continue to struggle. 

As indicated earlier we anticipate a 2.5 per cent growth in the 
GDP this year alone. While this is a solid rate of growth, it 
reflects the fact that our forestry sector is under pressure. The 
resources, jobs, and opportunities attached to our forests that 
rightfully belong to the people of Saskatchewan are needing to 
be protected. 
 
We remain confident that there is a better future for our forest 
sector that can be secured in areas like expanded OSB [oriented 
strand board] production, engineered wood products, 
dimensional lumber production, and other value-added 
industries in a reinvigorated pulp and paper sector. To this end, 
the changes in the capital taxes and the work of the new 
Forestry Secretariat are key to building a better future for the 
forestry industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget also 
recognizes the ongoing pressure that farmers and other 
agricultural producers feel as they continue to deal with the 
impact of low commodity prices. As such, this budget provides 
over $100 million in support for crop insurance and an 
additional 98.8 million for the base payment under CAIS. Mr. 
Speaker, while we remain concerned about the structure of 
CAIS, as in previous years we will look to providing additional 
top-up support in the third quarter as the 2006 final numbers 
become available. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this budget provides 
funding to ensure that we exceed the $1 billion payment over 
five years for the business risk management chapter committed 
under the APF [agricultural policy framework]. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides 
very real and tangible support for farm families through a $67 
million reduction in property taxes on agricultural land as 
announced by the Premier earlier this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to be of the 
belief that agriculture is an important part of building the new 
economy through value-added products and initiatives like new 
approaches to organic agriculture, expanded meat processing 
opportunities afforded by the expansion of Maple Leaf Foods in 
Saskatoon, and new opportunities in grain-based ethanol 
production at facilities like those in Weyburn and Lloydminster 
that will benefit from the $17.7 million in price support for 
ethanol contained in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these investments show that we recognize that 
cutting business taxes is only one part of what we need to do to 
help transform Saskatchewan’s economy and to secure our 
prosperity. We know that we must also invest in people to 
ensure that working families and young people can participate 
fully in the economic benefits of this province. 
 
To this end I’m announcing today a series of initiatives that will 
support Saskatchewan people in participating more fully in our 
growing economy. Specifically this budget will provide a 
record $1.5 billion in support for education and skills training. 
 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This represents significant new funds 
to ensure that teacher’s salary costs are fully funded, that 
literacy skills are enhanced in our population, and that the 
differential funding for the basic per-pupil rates in our schools 
is fully eliminated in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year more than 65,000 students will access 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education and skills training 
programs. During this term of office we will have increased the 
number of training opportunities by nearly 20 per cent and well 
exceed our commitment to fund 5,400 new training spaces. In 
so doing, this budget provides $196 million for the training 
system and almost $300 million for our universities. Mr. 
Speaker, we believe in the value of education, and we are 
committed to expanding access and assuring that cost is not a 
significant factor in determining whether one pursues 
post-secondary education and then joins the workforce. 
 
It is particularly important to help youth and students from 
farms and rural communities, northern communities, and 
students outside the major centres to attend our universities, 
colleges, and technical institutes. That is why our government 
will commit almost $100 million to student financial assistance 
this year, of which nearly 70 million will be in the form of 
non-repayable, income-support grants, scholarships, and 
bursaries. Approximately 22 million of this is targeted 
specifically for First Nations and Métis students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also increases the graduate tax credit 
to $850 this year thereby helping students to get their career 
started here at home. It helps them by sheltering more than 
$7,700 in income from taxation in the first year after 
graduation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also very pleased today to announce that we 
will extend the tuition freeze on all undergraduate programs at 
our universities until the year 2008. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. While I would like to advise all 
of our guests that our members do love the applause, you really 
have to be elected to be able to participate in the discussions 
here. So I ask them to restrain yourselves. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as a former student union 
president, I can assure these young people their time will come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we work to support students from across 
Saskatchewan get a high-quality education in order to start their 
careers, we recognize that for too many years First Nations and 
Métis youth have been left out of the halls of higher education. 
As a result they have been denied the ability to take their 
rightful places in our communities and in our labour force. This 
must change. 
 
As such, we have introduced new measures to encourage the 
participation of these young Aboriginal people in higher 

education through programs like the five-year, $20 million 
Gradworks program, Aboriginal bursary programs, mathematics 
and science enrichment programs, and student achievement 
programs. We will also provide in this budget for the first time, 
funding for First Nations students to attend the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in so doing we can 
recognize the important role the young Aboriginal people will 
play in helping secure the prosperity of this province for a 
generation to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a province founded by Aboriginal and 
immigrant people. As we start our second century, it’s fitting 
that this budget provides more than $6 million to establish an 
ambitious new program to open up Saskatchewan again by 
attracting 5,000 new immigrants a year to live, work, and raise 
their families here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, labour force and economic development require 
other investments as well. We recognize that today many 
employees make costly investments on their own to participate 
in our labour force. That is why I am pleased to announce, as a 
result of the work by the member for Regina Northeast, that we 
are introducing a new tax credit for tradespeople who, as 
employees, are required to provide their own tools to work in 
our growing industries. 
 
This new tax credit will have two components: an entry credit 
for tradespeople who are just starting out as employees, and an 
annual maintenance credit that recognizes the ongoing cost of 
supplying and replacing tools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, while provisions 
currently exist to allow self-employed tradespeople to write off 
the cost of tools, this measure is the first time that people 
employed in the trades will be recognized and provided with 
comparable benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prosperity that we enjoy today is allowing us 
to build a better future by creating a better climate for 
investment and job growth. It allows us to build a better future 
by investing in our labour force. It allows us to build a better 
future by investing in the social programs that have been 
established and supported by our government for generations. 
 
Today across Canada there is a grassroots campaign to make 
poverty history. This government will do its part to assist in this 
bold goal, to ensure that no one is left behind on the path to 
opportunity. We know that this will require new ideas, new 
thinking, and new investments. That is why I am announcing 
today that this budget will make the single largest increases to 
social assistance payments in a generation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we will increase 
payments to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan recipients living 
in long-term care facilities by $240 a year. Social assistance 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

plan recipients living independently will see an increase of $480 
a year. Transition employment allowance recipients living 
independently will receive $600 a year in increased support, 
and will share in an additional 1.5 million of support for 
increased utility allowances. And individuals receiving the 
provincial training allowance will see their benefits increase by 
$720 a year for a 12-month program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Furthermore, in the next year this 
government will undertake a comprehensive review of the static 
caseload on our social assistance rolls. We will do this to help 
us determine if these programs are in fact the best way to meet 
the needs of those who are dependent upon assistance because 
of disability, and if these programs best respect and meet the 
needs of these citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has done much to advance and 
support the needs of the most vulnerable in our communities. It 
was this government that pioneered the National Child Benefit 
and helped forge new child care agreements with the national 
government. 
 
It was this government that created JobStart/Future Skills, 
KidsFirst, and the Building Independence initiative to help 
people break the cycle of poverty. Through Building 
Independence — through this program alone — we have helped 
12,000 individuals and families, including 17,000 children, 
move from being in poverty to being full participants in our 
communities. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we can and we will do more. To this end 
our government on behalf of citizens across Saskatchewan will 
undertake the following initiatives: we will commit $4.9 million 
for new child care and pre-kindergarten support that will 
continue despite the decision of the new federal government to 
break faith with us on these agreements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this new funding will be 
used specifically to deepen the subsidies available to 
low-income families, to move forward our plan to create 1,600 
new child care spaces during this term of office, and to expand 
pre-kindergarten programs for children in our most vulnerable 
neighbourhoods and communities. 
 
We will invest nearly $2 million in this budget to support 
literacy initiatives that will help people of all ages gain access 
to the skills they need to participate more fully in our 
communities and in our labour force. 
 
$17.1 million is committed to enhance wages for those who 
work in our community-based organizations so that those who 
assist in helping the most vulnerable in our communities are not 
forced into poverty themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of this budget, 
670 new families will gain access to the KidsFirst program this 
year to help ensure that parents have the supports that they need 

to see their children get a healthy start in life. 
 
This budget supports the HomeFirst program that will provide 
$200 million over five years to ensure that 17,000 individuals 
and families benefit from better rental housing, home 
ownership, home maintenance, and home repair. For many 
families this support will give them for the first time the ability 
to enjoy the stability and the security that comes from home 
ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has pioneered many programs to 
help people move from welfare to work, and we remain 
committed to building a better future for those who work at 
minimum wage. Our government will continue to support a 
minimum wage policy that reflects the strength of a growing 
economy that can afford to ensure that no one is left behind. 
 
During this term of office the minimum wage will have 
increased by $1.30 an hour or by 20 per cent. Together with our 
social supports in health care, these measures are among the 
most comprehensive in Canada today in ensuring that no one is 
left behind on the path to opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, social programs and the 
benefits of government spending are enjoyed today by 
Saskatchewan people through universally accessible initiatives 
like medicare. As we begin Saskatchewan’s second century, it 
is fitting that the single biggest investments in this budget will 
go to support the single most important contribution 
Saskatchewan has made to Canada. 
 
Today I am pleased to announce that medicare and its related 
programs will receive nearly $300 million more. This represents 
a nearly 10 per cent increase in provincial funding. As such, the 
budget will provide a record $3.2 billion in support of our 
health care system this year alone. This funding will provide 
comprehensive, universal, publicly accessible, publicly funded 
access for more than 5.5 million visits to doctors and 
specialists, nearly 94,000 surgeries, and more than 106,000 
advanced diagnostic procedures. Furthermore it allows us to 
employ the services of more than 37,000 doctors, specialists, 
and nurses; health care professionals; and support care workers. 
And for the first time, Mr. Speaker, this budget provides the 
funding to cover midwifery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in the coming weeks, my 
colleague, the Minister of Health, will make a number of 
announcements on how this new investment in our health care 
system will help further our plan to ensure Saskatchewan has 
the best quality health care in Canada. 
 
Today I’m pleased to announce that this record health care 
budget includes a nearly 10 per cent increase in funding to our 
regional health authorities, half a million dollars for a new renal 
dialysis site in southeastern Saskatchewan, a quarter million 
dollars to begin planning for a diabetes centre on the Muskeg 
Lake Cree Nation. 
 
This budget also provides a 17 per cent increase to the cancer 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

agency, $1 million in new money to improve mental health 
services for children, and $18.2 million to support the work of 
my colleague, the Minister of Healthy Living Services, in the 
provision of the Premier’s Project Hope by funding treatment, 
detox beds, outreach services, drug programs, and secure care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides 
22 million to ensure that our hospitals have state-of-the-art 
technology and equipment available to them. 
 
This budget provides the single largest investment in health care 
in our province’s history. This budget also provides the single 
largest contribution to capital in the province’s history. This 
year we will spend well over $1 billion through this budget and 
our Crown corporations to maintain, renew, and build our 
provincial infrastructure. This will include new investments to 
support health care facilities, schools, laboratories, universities, 
highway and transportation corridors, telecommunication 
services, and other economic infrastructure. 
 
This year alone we will spend more than $340 million to build, 
maintain, and upgrade our highways and transportation 
networks. Funding in this budget will ensure the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada East and Yellowhead West will be complete by 
2007 and that Highway 11 twinning expansion will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also breaks new ground with an $8.6 
million investment in our northern roads program. This will 
include funding for the first time to ensure that paving projects 
and all-weather roads don’t end at the edge of the reserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we have decided that we 
can no longer wait for Ottawa to meet the needs of First Nations 
communities in this regard. 
 
I am also pleased to tell the Assembly that this budget contains 
a significant increase in funding for communities all across 
Saskatchewan. It includes more than $111 million this year for 
unconditional revenue sharing and other grants as well as 
almost 70 million in capital funding for projects in our urban, 
rural, and northern communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the continued economic growth and prosperity of 
our province depends on strategic investments in capital and in 
infrastructure. That prosperity depends in part on ensuring 
access to an affordable, secure, and stable supply of electricity. 
We believe that now is the time to begin to renew and rebalance 
our energy production profile through the use of renewable 
energy sources and green power. That is why the infrastructure 
program of this government commits $17.6 million to help 
build the largest wind generation project in Canada at the 
centennial wind power facility southeast of Swift Current. 
 
This is part of a quarter billion dollar investment that will see us 
generating 5 per cent of our electrical needs from this 
zero-emission source and will make Saskatchewan the largest 
wind power producer in Canada. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, our infrastructure 
program also recognizes that we have a 300-year supply of coal 
that provides one of the most stable and affordable means of 
power production in the world today. In order to help reduce the 
environmental footprint of this power source and thereby 
improve its sustainability, our infrastructure program will 
provide up to $10 million this year, to be matched by the federal 
government, to begin planning for a new clean coal plant that 
will seek to achieve near zero emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the development of our economic infrastructure is 
not dependent upon government investment alone. As I present 
this budget, I am pleased to note the announcement by Husky 
Energy that they will undertake the engineering work for a $2.3 
billion expansion of the upgrader at Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I am also pleased to note that the private sector is prepared to 
co-fund a $10 million study into the development of a new 
polygeneration plant at Belle Plaine. This $3 billion plant would 
be one of the first of its kind in the world and would use the 
waste product from the tar sands as a feedstock for generating 
electricity, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and steam in support of 
enhanced oil recovery, potash mining, and fertilizer production. 
 
If proven viable, these industry-driven projects will have the 
potential to not only be the largest megaprojects in 
Saskatchewan history — creating thousands of new jobs — but 
they have the opportunity to further transform our economy by 
further establishing Saskatchewan as a world leader in the new 
generation of energy production and expertise. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me say that today I have 
presented to this Assembly a budgetary policy that is balanced 
in its priorities and balanced on the bottom line. It is a budget 
that pays our bills and reduces our debt. It invests record 
amounts in infrastructure and secures our economic prosperity 
while protecting our social programs. 
 
This budget builds a better future right here. It builds a better 
future by investing a record amount in the education and 
training of our youth, a record amount in our medicare 
programs, and unprecedented new investments in those social 
programs that help ensure no one is left behind on the path to 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget builds a better future by providing new 
tax cuts to support farmers, businesses, and tradespeople, and 
creates a new investment climate to create jobs right here. This 
budget builds a better future for our youth, for students, for 
seniors, for business people, for farmers, for our communities, 
and for our families right here. This budget builds a better 
future right here, a future that ensures Saskatchewan is and will 
be the best place in Canada to live, work, and raise a family for 
generations to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That, Mr. Speaker, is why I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment: 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

That the Assembly approve in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Assembly will come to order. It has been 
moved by the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina 
South, and seconded by the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Employment, the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
begin today by thanking the many people who through their 
confidence and trust in me allow me to do the job which I love. 
 
To my family: to my wife, Trish; my son, Carter; and my 
daughter, Paige. Paige is six years old and goes to kindergarten 
at Maria Montessori School in Saskatoon. Carter is eight years 
old and in grade 3 at Cardinal Leger French immersion, again in 
Saskatoon. And Trish continues her television career in 
broadcasting, as well as putting hundreds of hours of charitable 
work in and taking in the majority of the parenting 
responsibilities. Thank you for your love and your support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — To my colleagues in the opposition and 
to the Leader of the Opposition, thank you for your confidence 
in me. As the Leader of the Opposition, you are providing 
Saskatchewan residents with hope and a vision for the future 
that will make Saskatchewan youth want to stay in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, to the wonderful people of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs who work so hard at making 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan a better place, thank you for 
allowing me to be your voice in the Legislative Assembly. 
While I regret that there is no elementary school for Silver 
Springs in the budget today, I will continue to work hard to 
make sure that there is one soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very special guests with us today 
that I would like to recognize. Seated today in the legislature in 
the gallery are Jack Vicq, Chair of the Saskatchewan business 
tax review committee. Joining him are fellow committee 
members — yes, please stand — Charlie Baldock and Cheryl 
Shepherd. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I want to thank them on behalf of the 
official opposition and on behalf of people across Saskatchewan 
for the work that they’ve done to provide a road map for the 
people of Saskatchewan and for this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank them for allowing me to present 
the Saskatchewan Party plan to their committee. It was the only 
one presented by a political party. I enjoyed making that first 
presentation in Yorkton. I enjoyed following them around all 
over Saskatchewan. And no, I wasn’t stalking you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an opposition we believe it’s important to hold 
the government to account. Yes, but it’s also important to 
present a positive and constructive alternative vision for this 
province, and that’s what the Saskatchewan Party is doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — In fact the Saskatchewan Party made the 
very first presentation to the Vicq commission, and it was 
encouraging, Mr. Speaker, to hear many of the presentations 
that followed echoing the key recommendations that the 
Saskatchewan Party made. In our presentation, Mr. Speaker, to 
the Vicq commission, we urged the government to eliminate the 
corporate capital tax, reduce corporate taxes from 17 per cent to 
11.5 per cent, and make the manufacturing and processing 
investment tax credit refundable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today I am pleased to report that not only did the Vicq 
commission agree with many of the recommendations we put 
forward, now so does the NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — In fact by adopting the recommendations 
put forward by the Saskatchewan Party and the Vicq committee 
in this budget, the Finance minister and the NDP government 
have clearly indicated that the Leader of the Opposition and the 
Saskatchewan Party were right all along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — We’ve argued that high business taxes in 
this province are a barrier to growth. Mr. Speaker, last year the 
Leader of the Opposition put forward an economic vision for 
our province entitled The Promise of Saskatchewan: A New 
Vision for Saskatchewan’s Economy. It contains our plan, Mr. 
Speaker, our plan to create long-term and stable economic 
prosperity for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we were flattered that the Minister of 
Finance took a page from our economic vision statement by 
reducing corporate taxes, it’s too bad that he stopped reading at 
page 12 of a 35-page document. Had he continued to the end, 
Mr. Speaker, he would have realized that reducing business 
taxes is only one part of an overall economic growth strategy 
that we need in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2006 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What this government hasn’t included in 
its budget are the components we need to create jobs and to 
sustain economic growth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nowhere in this budget is there a commitment to create a 
competitive labour environment. Nowhere in this budget is 
there a plan to limit government intervention into the economy. 
Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, is there a long-term strategic plan to 
improve infrastructure, including own-source revenue sharing 
for municipalities, Mr. Speaker — nowhere. And, Mr. Speaker, 
nowhere is there an innovation agenda. Nowhere is there a 
commitment to greater economic co-operation with other 
provinces, Mr. Speaker, as we in Saskatchewan should be 
taking our place as leaders in the new West, Mr. Speaker. 
Nowhere is there a commitment to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this government has failed to put forward 
a plan to grow Saskatchewan’s economy in this budget and 
because this budget will fail to stop the out-migration of our 
young people, it is little wonder that this government has been 
forced, Mr. Speaker — this government has been forced — to 
cut its own job forecast in this budget. Yes, Mr. Speaker. Yes, 
Mr. Speaker, from 4,800 new jobs forecast in last year’s budget 
to 3,200 new jobs forecast in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It’s little wonder, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government admits that Saskatchewan will be left behind, left 
behind other provinces when it comes to job growth and when it 
comes to keeping young people in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people throughout Saskatchewan had high hopes 
for this budget. They believe that an NDP government that was 
sitting on a mountain of money would finally take action to 
address critical areas — such as agriculture, such as health care 
— while providing much needed tax relief for working families 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year’s $1 billion surplus represents over 
$1,000 for every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan — $1 
billion that this government didn’t count on, $1 billion in 
windfall revenue. Mr. Speaker, that’s a potential windfall of 
$4,000 for every family of four in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do those families do today under this NDP 
budget? When those families sit down tonight to watch the 
news or to read the newspaper tomorrow — whether they’re in 
Weyburn or Meadow Lake or Yorkton or Saskatoon Silver 
Springs — will they feel that they’re getting their monies worth, 
Mr. Speaker? I suggest not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, instead of giving back, the 
Finance minister has used his new steel toed boots to give the 
boot to farm families, to cancer patients, communities looking 
for a commitment for fair funding for their health care facilities, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, where is the commitment to 
Saskatchewan farm families who are now faced with a $12 
million reduction in crop insurance, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[15:15] 

Where is the plan to address the nursing shortage in our 
province? Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No plan. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes. Where is the plan for Avastin and 
the assistance so desperately needed by cancer patients like Bob 
Loeppky and Terry Rak? Where is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where is the children’s hospital for Saskatoon and for 
Saskatchewan? Families across Saskatchewan were hoping for 
a children’s hospital in this budget. They had the resources to 
do it. Mr. Speaker, where is it? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, where is the reduction in the PST that this 
government raised after breaking their election promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan — a $150 million gouge, $500 million 
over the last three years? Where is the tax break for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker? Where is the tax relief for 
working families? Low- and moderate-income families still pay 
the highest taxes in the country, right here in NDP 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where in this budget is a plan? Where is a plan to 
get back those 4,400 jobs that this government chased out of the 
province last year? Mr. Speaker, and most importantly, where is 
the plan in this budget to get back the 3,700-plus people that left 
Saskatchewan in the last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, there is no plan. The 
16,000 people — young people between the ages of 25 and 29 
— they’ve left the province in the last five years, and that’s a 
shame, Mr. Speaker. It’d make you wonder whether the NDP 
even has confidence in their own budget today. 
 
A confident government would set clear population targets, 
clear goals for population growth, Mr. Speaker. A confident 
government would set a clear goal for bringing young people 
back to Saskatchewan today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — A confident government would have set 
a much more ambitious goal for growth instead of lowering the 
bar, Mr. Speaker, by reducing its own job-creation targets. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s clear this NDP government doesn’t have 
confidence in itself. Why should the people of Saskatchewan 
have confidence in them, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government whose 
words are constantly betrayed by its record. They say no one 
will be left behind, Mr. Speaker, on the path to opportunity. Yet 
every day in this province, Mr. Speaker, parents are being left 
behind. Grandparents are left behind, Mr. Speaker. Friends and 
family and communities are left behind, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Saskatchewan young people whose path to opportunity has 
taken them outside of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people deserve better. 
 



April 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, deserves 
better. And if the NDP government lacks the confidence and the 
will to stem the flow of people out of Saskatchewan, then there 
is no way, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party can 
support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — No way, Mr. Speaker. No way, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say and my 
colleagues will have more to say in the days ahead. 
 
For now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the many guests for 
coming to the legislature today. I look forward to conversations 
in the rotunda with them. And, Mr. Speaker, I move now that 
this debate be now adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs that debate on this motion be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be 
resumed on Friday, April 7, 2006. 

 
I move that seconded by the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the Minister of Government Relations: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be 
resumed on Friday, April 7, 2006. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:20.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................997 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................997 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................997 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................997 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................997 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................997 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................997 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................999 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................999 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................999 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tartan Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................999 
 Ministers’ Comments 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Saskatoon Dealership Wins Awards and Accolades 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Losing People in the Middle of a Boom 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1001 
 Saskatchewan Booming Economy 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1001 
 Out-Migration of Talent 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1001 
 Regina’s Economy 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1002 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Population and Economic Growth 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1002 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1002 
 Fiscal Policies 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1004 



 

 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
 Funding for Avastin 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
 Funding for Hospital Construction 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1007 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1007 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1013 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1015 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


