


















































Hansard: May 19, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 64A  FRIDAY, MAY 19, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1771 
 May 19, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
with me this morning a number of petitions regarding 
conditions of Highway No. 3. And I present the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
folks of the communities of Livelong, Goodsoil, Turtleford, 
Edam, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the last several 
weeks, I’ve been presenting a petition on behalf of people living 
in the proximity of Highway 18 that runs from Claydon to 
Robsart. At the time of the highway’s conversion to gravel, 
there was the expectation it would be returned to pavement. 
And the prayer is consistent with that expectation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
stand today and present this petition, a petition regarding 
Avastin and the issue around funding Avastin. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many, many people from 

the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on autism from the autism 
organizations of Saskatchewan. There are nine 
recommendations they are calling on the government to 
support, including having respite and family support accessible 
based on need, support regional autism service providers and 
provincial autism organizations that are providing support to 
families and individuals with ASD [autism spectrum disorder]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re asking that the government follow through 
on these recommendations. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens of the province concerned with the government’s 
decision to not provide any funding or copayment even for the 
drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to give cancer patients timely access to 
medical treatments. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today represented are from the 
communities of Hafford, Mayfair, Spiritwood, and Rabbit Lake. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to fund Avastin. Mr. Speaker, the people who have 
signed this petition are concerned that forcing patients to pay 
for this drug is an example of two tiered health care. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Yellow Grass, Lang, Weyburn, and McTaggart. 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Muskoday, Dalmeny, Saskatoon, and Calgary, 
Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to present a petition 
to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from 
McTaggart, Weyburn, Langham, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a number of petitions that I’d like to present this morning and 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to these petitions come from the 
great city of Weyburn and surrounding communities, and I’m 
pleased to be able to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will come as no 
surprise that I have a number of petitions today of citizens 
concerned of the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And to demonstrate how well-travelled this highway is, Mr. 
Speaker, the signatures are from Saskatoon, Meacham, Watson, 
Humboldt, Bruno, Spalding, Englefeld, Prud’homme, 
Kelvington, LeRoy, Sturgis, Viscount, Muenster, Rose Valley, 
Shell Lake, Annaheim, Warman, Naicam, Kamsack, and 
Simpson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about this government’s lack of funding for the cancer drug 
Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Weyburn. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will read a fairly 
lengthy prayer concerning a petition regarding autism spectrum 
disorders: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendations made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Saskatchewan Minister of Health, the Hon. John 
Nilson. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and Asquith. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of residents across 
Saskatchewan that are concerned that Saskatchewan is the only 
province besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that does not have 
a dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures live in the constituencies of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, Sutherland, Martensville, and Saskatoon Nutana. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a number of petitions today from people from around 
the province that are very concerned about the NDP’s [New 
Democratic Party] two tiered health system. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, this is signed by good 
citizens from all across Saskatchewan. 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a number of petitions in 
regards to the government’s handling of the crop insurance 
premiums and the increase to the crop insurance premiums to 
Saskatchewan farmers. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2006 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Mayfair, 
Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, and Hafford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition from citizens concerned with the lack 
of funding for the new cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous and Colonsay. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
and a honour today to rise to present a petition on autism 
spectrum disorder. The petition of the undersigned citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan humbly . . . [inaudible] . . . and 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendations made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Minister of Health. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a great 
number of petitions regarding autism spectrum disorder. This is 
the last in a long series of petitions that we’ve presented this 
session on this particular matter. I will read a portion of the 
prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the 
recommendations made February 2005 to the 
Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services on 
autism. And those recommendations include coordination 
among the departments of Health, Learning, and 
Community Resources with input from stakeholders to 
formulate a provincial comprehensive autism spectrum 
disorder treatment program; to provide adequate, effective, 
and early treatment based on intensive behavioural 
intervention and include speech, communication, 
occupational and physical therapy, and medical attention 
for ASD-related conditions; and to ensure ASD adult 
services and supports are accessible and based on need 
rather than on IQ or physical disability; and to encourage 
and support autism-related research. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am pleased 
today to rise to present the last petition of this session from 
citizens who are from the Zenon Park area who are concerned 
with the unsafe and deplorable condition of the south access 
road that leads out to Highway No. 23 from Zenon Park, Mr. 
Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain the south access to Zenon Park so it can 
return to being a safe and economical route for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, literally hundreds of people from Zenon Park, 
Tisdale, Arborfield, Carrot River and others. And I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions received at the 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

last sitting day have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) 
are hereby read and received as follows: 
 

Petition concerning south access to Zenon Park, that’s 
sessional paper 760; 

 
And additions to previously tabled petitions being addendums 
to sessional paper nos. 7, 27, 67, 638, 639, 669, 742, and 757. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 
certain estimates and to present its sixth report. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the sixth report on the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview and seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
[10:15] 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and present its fifth report. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure now be 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Northeast, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the Chair 
of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
that it has considered certain estimates and present its sixth 
report. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres, seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Any further reports by 
standing and special committees? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you and good morning, Mr. 
Speaker. It is my great pleasure to introduce guests to the 
Assembly. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, representatives of the 
Kinsmen Telemiracle Foundation. Because some of them are a 
bit hiding behind the clock, I’ll ask if they might stand as I 
mention their names so that everyone can see them, starting 
with two of my constituents, Brad and Tammy Blackwell. Also 
we have with us Joan Steckhan, who is the Kinsmen Foundation 
executive director. We have Lori Cosh and Heather McInnis, 
Heidi Forsythe, Mike Gage, and Bob Lesperance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the delegation from the Kinsmen Telemiracle 
Foundation are here with us today to witness the passing of Bill 
204, the recognition Act for Telemiracle week here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’ve had a great deal of pleasure 
working with them preparing this legislation, and we look 
forward to seeing this Bill passed later in the day. We would 
like all members of the legislature to welcome them here this 
morning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

like to join with the member in welcoming the individuals from 
Kinsmen Telemiracle Foundation. I had the great privilege and 
honour of nominating Urban Donlevy and Bob McGrath for the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. Unfortunately I was 
storm-stayed in Saskatoon, but the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains filled in more than admirably. But I will be speaking in 
favour of the Bill later this day. 
 
And I just wanted to join with the hon. member in welcoming 
the members from Kinsmen as well here today. So I would ask 
all members to thank them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
Assembly, a gentleman seated in your gallery, Ken Bakken 
from Balgonie, Saskatchewan — if you would stand and would 
give us a wave. 
 
Ken is the coach of the Mandy Selzer rink. I had phoned Ken 
probably only hours after he got back from Korea — I think he 
wasn’t too happy about that first phone call — because I was 
saying, why don’t you come to the legislature, bring the rink to 
the legislature and we can introduce you. 
 
Well it’s been 10 weeks and it’s pretty tough to get the four 
girls or the five girls back together. And we couldn’t quite 
accomplish it because some are in . . . one, I believe, is in 
Saskatoon and one is down in Carlyle. But I did want to at least 
have Ken come to the Assembly so I could introduce him and 
thank him for the great work that he had done. 
 
You know, this doesn’t happen overnight. He wasn’t the coach 
just for the nationals and he wasn’t the coach just for the 
provincials or the worlds. Ken has been working with this team 
for six years, working with these girls for six years, and has 
taken them to . . . You know, I mean he wasn’t the one out there 
throwing the rocks but he was probably a strong part of the glue 
that held this rink together over the six years. I don’t know 
whether Mandy’s nodding or disagreeing, but anyway I just 
wanted to thank him for all the work that he’s done. 
 
I’m going to do a bit of a member’s statement on the rink and 
say a little bit more about their accomplishments, but I’d like all 
members to welcome Ken Bakken to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the Assembly my daughter, 
Heather, up in the gallery — Heather Haase — with her 
husband, Jodi. They’re poised to change all of our lives 
drastically in the very, very near future by making me a 
grandmother. I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure to introduce six visitors to your gallery. 
They’ve travelled from many, many places and many, many 
miles to be here. Mr. Speaker, please forgive me if I have a 
fairly long introduction because these are very special people 
that have joined us, and I think we need to take the time to 
introduce them well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are six people that are doing a 
walk for suicide awareness. And we often refer to them as the 
suicide awareness walkers. First of all I want to recognize Mr. 
Vincent Watts of Port Alberni, BC [British Columbia]. Vincent 
has been organizing this walk and has been one of the 
gentlemen that has worked very, very hard to spread the 
awareness and go to all the provinces to tell young people about 
the problems and challenges associated with suicide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this walk has taken place every year for the past 
four years with 2006 — this year — being the final walk. 
Suicide affects all races, and each of the four years is 
significant, as Vincent explains, in that they walk each of the 
years for the four races. The first walk in 2003 was for the red 
race. The second walk in 2004 was for the yellow race. The 
third walk in 2005 was for the black race. And this the fourth 
and final year is for the white race. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this final year completes the circle. And Vincent 
has explained to me some of the many pictures and some of the 
many stories and some of the help that they got along this 
journey. The walk started in Sydney, Nova Scotia on March 14, 
2006 and will end at the provincial legislature in Victoria, BC 
on June 21, 2006, which by the way is National Aboriginal 
Day. Vincent organized this walk with many other walkers, and 
the total of this walk is 6,426 kilometres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with Vincent today is Thomas Watts, who is 21 
years old, and this is his third year walking. Vince is his father. 
And Thomas lives on Vancouver Island and is a member of the 
Nuuchahnulth First Nation. He missed last year’s walk because 
he was expecting a baby. And of course he’s the father of a 
baby boy, Isaiah Thomas Knott, who celebrated his first 
birthday on May 16, 2006, a mere three days ago while his 
daddy was on the walk, walking for future generations. 
 
Joining Thomas and Vincent, of course, is Tyler Joseph, who’s 
21 years old. And this is Tyler’s first time walking. His 
ancestral name is Kitsemsia, which means carry it with honour. 
He lives in Vancouver, BC and is from the Squamish First 
Nations. 
 
Also with the group is Edward Meldrum, who is 25 years old, 
and this is also his first time with the walk. Ed hails from the 
Chilcotin First Nations in the Williams Lake area, Caribou 
central interior part of BC. 
 
Also with the walk is Reno Trimble. He is 21 years old. He’s a 
veteran walker and gone through eight pairs of shoes on his 
final and fourth year. Reno is from Psimshian First Nation and 
resides in Vancouver, BC. 
 
And last but certainly not least is Chasity Meuse, who is a 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

29-year-old Mi’kmaw from the Indian Brook First Nations, 
Nova Scotia. She joined the walk on April 1 in Montreal. And 
Chasity took an unpaid leave of absence from her job as a 
community educator who works with at-risk youth at the 
Phoenix Prevention Program in Halifax, Nova Scotia. She joins 
the walkers and she’s also a very, very proud mother of 
six-year-old Justin, who is currently with his grandparents and 
is also a very, very good singer. 
 
Joining the walkers, of course, is my secretary, Donna 
Standingready. And we should know that Donna offered her 
home last night and tonight to billet the walkers. And on 
Saturday, after they’ve taken the generous help from Donna, 
they plan on leaving to Alberta where they’ll take seven days to 
hit Alberta. But they have an overnight stop in Saskatoon. 
 
I should note as well, Mr. Speaker, that we had the pleasure and 
the honour of hosting this group that talked about youth and 
suicide and some advice for many of us in government. We had 
breakfast with them this morning. And I think the Premier’s 
going to make that effort of stopping to say hello to the group 
for a few minutes. 
 
And I ask all members of the Assembly to give a big round of 
applause to these very special guests and these fine people of 
spreading the awareness of suicide throughout the country. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure today to introduce 
a person who’s seated with our Law Clerk, Ken Ring. This 
person is Chrystal Vanhouwe, who has spent the week at the 
Legislative Assembly with the Law Clerk and Parliamentary 
Counsel. 
 
She’s actually an articling student on loan from with the city of 
Regina legal department. Chrystal is learning about the role and 
function of the Legislative Assembly and how laws are debated 
and made. And she’s also seeing how the Law Clerk and 
Parliamentary Counsel assists members in duties and 
legislatures. She’s assisted in the preparation of some of the 
materials for the Standing Committee on the Economy as they 
were reviewing the regulations. 
 
I found out also that Chrystal happens to be granddaughter of a 
former minister of the Crown and a former MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon River Heights, Carol 
Teichrob. Would members please welcome Chrystal Vanhouwe 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members may also notice that Ben Block is 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery today, instead of being seated in 
the Sergeant-at-Arms chair. Ben is a person here who is very 
recognizable, has been a permanent fixture with the legislature 
and has seen many MLAs come and go. 
 
Ben came here after he retired from the Regina Police Service 
and he’s been the watchful eye as sessional security officer in 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly for the past 25 years. 
And he has many fond memories of the legislature but he feels 

maybe it is time to move on. In appreciation of Ben Block’s 
dedication and service to the Legislative Assembly, I would ask 
all members to recognize Ben as he takes his second retirement 
after 25 years here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Saskatchewan Team Wins Silver at World Junior 
Curling Championships 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
honour and privilege that I rise today and talk about the world 
champion junior curling silver medallists. Mr. Speaker, the 
Mandy Selzer rink represented our province and nation 
extremely well. Her rink is made up of her cousin, Erin Selzer; 
Kristen Mitchell, who some people say is the fourth Selzer; and 
her twin sister, Megan Selzer. They also had an alternate when 
they went to the worlds, Penny Roy from Moose Jaw, and of 
course, who I mentioned earlier, Ken Bakken as their coach. 
 
They competed in the provincials here in Regina at the Callie 
Club and won out of that competition to represent 
Saskatchewan at the nationals in Thunder Bay, Ontario. They 
went through the nationals with a eight and three record, 
finishing first in the round robin, and of course obviously 
finishing first in the nationals. That’s quite significant. When 
you look at the other number of rinks that we sent to national 
competitions this year, Mr. Speaker, this is the only rink that 
finished and brought home a national title to our great province. 
 
[10:30] 
 
From there they were off to the world championships in Jeonju, 
Korea. Mr. Speaker, they had a bit of a challenging time in 
Korea as they came down with some health problems, food 
poisoning. And so I know Mandy herself spent 24 hours in the 
hospital in Jeonju before going on to compete in the semi-final 
and finals where they lost to a very strong rink from Russia in a 
score of 5 to 4. It’s significant because this rink, a couple of 
members from the Russian rink, had also competed earlier in 
the Olympics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re talking about the best curlers in the world that our rink 
from Balgonie, that Mandy Selzer’s rink competed against and 
did extremely well. So I just want to thank their rink and coach 
on behalf of not only the people from Balgonie and Indian Head 
and Milestone, but all of the province. You made us very, very 
proud. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Canada Northwest Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
Conference 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canada Northwest Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

Conference is currently being held in Regina. Saskatchewan is 
pleased to host this biannual event, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
acknowledge all the organizations involved in its planning and 
delivering: the Saskatchewan Prevention Institute, the FASD 
Support Network of Saskatchewan, the Public Health Agency 
of Canada, provincial addiction services, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres, the Métis Addictions 
Council of Saskatchewan, and the Regina Community FASD 
[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] Network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been a part of this partnership 
since the beginning in 1998, working together with other 
members on approaches to prevention, intervention, care, and 
support of individuals affected by FASD. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is committed to recognizing and 
addressing the unique needs of people with cognitive 
disabilities including FASD. To that end we’ve implemented 
the cognitive disabilities strategy. And this year we’re investing 
over $4 million to increase access to supports, assessment, and 
diagnosis, and to develop and implement prevention and 
education initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are part of the Canada Northwest FASD 
Partnership and are investing in these programs and 
partnerships because we are committed to building a better 
future for our children, our families, and our communities. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next week one of the 
largest community events in Canada. The Cathedral Village 
Arts Festival will get under way in the heart of Regina. 
 
This is the 15th annual Cathedral Village Arts Festival, Mr. 
Speaker, a six-day extravaganza of arts and culture and the 
Cathedral area’s vibrant spirit of community. From next 
Monday to Saturday, the Cathedral area will be alive with 
music, theatre, dance, film, visual arts, literary arts, and 
handcrafts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the highlights of the festival is the street fair that runs 
for six and a half blocks along 13th Avenue with some 260 craft 
and food booths and over 25,000 people expected to attend. It’s 
the largest sale of its kind in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the festival will host 90 events, a 30 per 
cent increase from last year. And there’ll be something going on 
every night of the week. There’ll be local musicians, traditional 
buskers, First Nations dancing and story-telling, orchestras, 
theatre performances, poetry, and much, much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes a tight-knit community to organize and 
host the Cathedral Village Arts Festival. This community truly 
does have the virtues of a village — diverse neighbourhoods, 
small-business people, artists, musicians, and school children. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this festival’s always a great success and much 
credit goes to festival Chair, Marilyn Turnley, and many, many 
volunteers on the festival committee and beyond. And thanks 
also to the festival’s many supporters and sponsors. I encourage 
everyone to go on down to the Cathedral village next week for a 
good time and great entertainment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Attributing Blame 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
course of this session, we have seen many examples of people 
being left behind by this NDP government. But instead of 
taking responsibility and fixing the problem, they pull out the 
NDP blame thrower and fire away at the first target they can 
find. We in the Saskatchewan Party are used to the NDP 
blaming us for their problems, but this session they came up 
with new and more creative targets to blame. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Highways was blaming winter and 
the Crow rate for the crumbling highways. It was the fault of 
the rural municipalities that they weren’t paying to fix for the 
roads. 
 
The Minister of Health concocted some bizarre logic to blame 
Bill Boyd for the problems in health care. As well, he was 
blaming the health districts, the federal government, and even 
the patients. 
 
The Minister of Finance blamed the school boards for teacher 
cuts and property taxes. And he was blaming the oil industry for 
creating the property tax increase in 61 of the old divisions. 
 
The bottom line is, it’s never the NDP’s fault — always 
someone else. This NDP government is the worst possible 
example of irresponsible government of any government 
practising responsible government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the times that the NDP have 
once again tried to weasel out of their responsibility to the 
people of Saskatchewan. But just as the immortal Homer 
Simpson once said: 
 

Weaseling out of things is important to learn. It’s what 
separates us from the animals . . . except the weasel. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Cumberland House. 
 

High Performance Athletic Camp for Aboriginal Teens 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, over the coming weekend 
two of my constituents will be taking part in the first ever high 
performance athletic camp for Aboriginal teens to be held in 
Montreal. Keewatin Trottier and Damien Morin, both members 
of the La Ronge Indian band, will be attending the event at 
McGill University. 
 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

It will include 24 exceptional Aboriginal teen athletes from 
across Canada and Keewatin and Damien were chosen to take 
part in the event because of their athletic, academic, and 
leadership abilities. The purpose of the camp is to introduce 
Aboriginal athletes to the lifestyle of elite sport and to introduce 
them to university athletic and academics. Keewatin and 
Damien will take part in seminars and workshops on sports 
nutrition, sports psychology, and time management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event is being organized by former Olympian 
Waneek Horn-Miller who has done a lot of work with 
Saskatchewan Aboriginal youth and athletes. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to acknowledge Jake Eberts, Robert Lantos, and 
Nike for the charitable donation that make the program 
possible. I would also like to congratulate Keewatin Trottier 
and Damien Morin and wish them all the best in Montreal. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Leaving No One Behind 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we know how much that NDP government is fond of living in 
the past, so today I’d like to encourage the Premier and 
members opposite to sit back and think of the start of session 
and the commitment the Premier made in his Throne Speech 
that nobody would be left behind by his government. 
 
Last night during the Premier’s estimates, the Premier himself 
admitted that his commitment to leave nobody behind wasn’t 
actually in fact a commitment. It wasn’t even a goal. Last night 
he admitted in fact it was a dream. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan are tired of NDP fantasies. 
 
Let’s take a look at the people left behind by this NDP 
government during this session. Certainly the farmers of this 
province were left behind. Nurses were left behind. Terry Rak 
was left behind after this cold-hearted NDP government refused 
to fund Avastin. Baby Paige was left behind by an NDP health 
care system and a minister that says he’s not responsible for 
wait lists in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact the only people that haven’t been left 
behind are the members of the NDP government, well except 
maybe for the member from Sask Rivers. Half a million dollar 
advertising campaign for the Finance minister’s leadership run, 
now the member from Regina Rosemont, a new salary increase 
to lead a review of the music industry — Mr. Speaker, it’s 
pretty obvious it’s the people of Saskatchewan that are left 
behind by this tired, old, worn out, NDP socialist government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Good News for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as everyone knows good 

news for Saskatchewan is bad news for the Saskatchewan Party. 
And this province’s 2006 budget is a very, very good budget for 
Saskatchewan people. It’s balanced. It’ll secure the prosperity 
we enjoy today for a generation to come. It reinvests in our 
social programs, and it contributes more than half a billion 
dollars to service the debt. It’s a good budget for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
But the opposition won’t vote for it, and they certainly don’t 
want to talk about it. No, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to talk 
about the $3.2 billion for health care to help support the 5.5 
million visits to doctors and specialists, almost 94,000 
surgeries, and over 100,000 advanced diagnostic procedures. 
They’d rather keep telling young people there’s no future in 
Saskatchewan for them rather than talk about the budget they’re 
funding for university seats, training spaces, and providing 
almost $100 million in student assistance. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they’d rather praise the federal government’s broken deal on 
child care spaces than talk about our budget increasing child 
care subsidies in this province by over three and one-half 
million dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good news for Saskatchewan is bad news for the 
Saskatchewan Party and clearly the Saskatchewan Party is bad 
news for Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Review of Infant’s Medical Treatment 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, April 29 both of 
Saskatchewan’s daily newspapers prominently featured the 
same story. In Regina on the front page the headline read, and I 
quote, “Still no answers in Baby Paige case.” Mr. Speaker, that 
headline is as true today as it was on April 29. Could the 
Minister of Health please tell us why we still have no answers 
on the baby Paige case? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
review process on baby Paige that I committed to, Mr. Speaker, 
is in progress. This week the department and the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority had a very good and productive 
meeting with the family. They have taken a look at various bits 
of information that have come forward and discussed matters. 
Mr. Speaker, the review is continuing to include the folks from 
Stollery Hospital in Edmonton where baby Paige was taken to. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this review is still in process. And our 
commitment to provide a report to the people of Saskatchewan 
remains in place, and we will be releasing information as soon 
as we are in a position to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to hear that 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

finally someone is listening to Paige’s parents. But a lot of time 
has passed. When Paige’s mother raised concerns about her 
daughter’s condition, she was dismissed. An official in the 
bureaucracy called her an hysterical mother. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Michelle Hansen has never been an 
hysterical woman. She was fighting for her daughter’s life, and 
no one would listen to her. Initially when she was concerned, no 
one would listen. And as time passed and Paige’s condition 
worsened and she became desperate, still no one would listen. 
 
It’s time for everyone to start to listen to how this all happened. 
And furthermore we need to know what’s going to be done to 
make sure it doesn’t ever happen again. Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister please release today the information that he has 
gathered in this matter? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I indicate to the public members of Saskatchewan that 
indeed the review is ongoing. It is proceeding exactly as we had 
asked for it to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to a public comment from baby Paige’s 
mother the other day on the radio. I listened very carefully to a 
very caring and brave mother who has endured some very 
anxious and difficult moments in her life. And, Mr. Speaker I 
was very, very pleased to learn that according to . . . and this is 
just from the radio reports, Mr. Speaker, that she had indicated 
at that time that the health system had not yet interviewed her. 
But she said that that was the least of her worries, Mr. Speaker. 
She was looking for good quality care for baby Paige, which is 
being provided. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, she is now pleased to meet with the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Health Care Issues 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government continually says it supports publicly funded, 
publicly administered health care system, Mr. Speaker, where 
the ability to pay does not dictate the service that you get, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all that has changed under this NDP 
government. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency recommended 
that the government cover the drug Avastin. The Colorectal 
Cancer Association of Canada said that it’s a standard of care 
for this type of cancer treatment, Mr. Speaker. But it’s a first 
time in Saskatchewan under an NDP government that you need 
your credit card before you need your health card, Mr. Speaker 
— that’s under this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bob Loeppky and Terry Rak are being left behind. 
They have to pull out their credit card before they pull out their 
hospitalization card. And that’s a sad day in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government do the right thing, change its 
mind, and fund the drug Avastin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I repeat what I had said previously, Mr. Speaker. The 
decision not to fund Avastin was a difficult one for this 
government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in making that decision to deny coverage, 
insurance coverage for the drug Avastin, Mr. Speaker, we 
committed to do two things: number one, continue to review the 
program; number two, work on the national level to ensure that 
we are reviewing new cancer drugs on a national level and 
working on a national pharmaceutical strategy; and number 
three, Mr. Speaker, to do the right thing and make the system 
available to those who could provide the drug for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that option is not available anywhere else in 
Canada where the drug is denied. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
compassionate move by this government. It’s the right thing to 
do under the circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Cancer patients 
from around this province are being left behind by this NDP 
government. Emily Morley from Meath Park was told that 
she’d have to wait three months for her first visit to an 
oncologist. After we raised her case in the House, she was able 
to get that visit within a week. But unfortunately the news 
wasn’t good. She may only have three months to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s unbelievable that she wouldn’t have even 
had her first visit before perhaps the issue of cancer may have 
taken her life. Mr. Speaker, that’s appalling. 
 
The national average to see an oncologist for the first time is 
four to five weeks. But in Saskatchewan, it’s 12 weeks — four 
times the national average, Mr. Speaker — under this NDP 
government. How can he justify his health care budget when 
you’re making people wait four times the national average for a 
first visit to an oncologist? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again this issue has been discussed in this legislature and 
around this province. Mr. Speaker, today the members opposite 
will have an opportunity to again review their commitment to 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency in voting on appropriations, a 
budget that provided 17 per cent more money to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to assist it meet its waiting times. 
 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, we are very pleased with the 
commitment that this government has made to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. I will continue to meet with and 
work with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency over the course of 
the next few months, Mr. Speaker, to address some of the issues 
that affect not only the agency but its ability to deliver services 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are committed 
to cancer patients in this province, and we will continue to do 
the right thing for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have been in this 
Assembly for this spring session for a little over 10 weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. And week after week we get case after case of people 
coming to this Assembly because they haven’t received the care 
they should be receiving. Whether it’s Emily Morley, whether 
it’s Valerie Paterson, whether it’s baby Paige, whether it’s Lana 
Van Elsakker, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Dr. Tammy McNab 
that’s leaving this province because she cannot put up with the 
lack of recruitment of doctors from this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker, we could stay here for two months, and it would be 
case after case after case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When will he take serious his job and start realizing there is a 
problem in our health care system and start addressing it 
properly, Mr. Speaker, through recruitment of health care 
professionals? When will he start taking his job serious and 
listen to what SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] has to say 
about 600 nurses being short in this province, Mr. Speaker? 
Take serious the job. Start doing his job recruiting and retaining 
our health care professionals so people of Saskatchewan get the 
health care they deserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I want the member opposite and all members of the Sask Party 
to know that I took this job seriously the minute after the 
Premier appointed me to this position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, thank, 
thank goodness that the members opposite weren’t sitting in this 
chair over the last few years. Mr. Speaker, in 1995 they were 
going to drop the health care budget by 5 per cent. In 1999, Mr. 
Speaker, they were going to freeze it. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
2003, the then leader of the opposition from Rosetown-Elrose 
said the Saskatchewan Party’s plan in 2003, for this session, 
was to hire 240 nurses. Mr. Speaker, this government has 
already exceeded that commitment — not the 600 — 240 they 
said they were going to hire. We’ve exceeded that already, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re very proud of that. 
 
We’ve got more work to do. We will take it seriously, and we 
will continue to do that work. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support For Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
session the NDP government introduced a $7 billion budget, of 
that approximately $1 billion windfall from gas and oil. And 
then they go on to talk about no one being left behind. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s approximately 50,000 farmers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. If you include family members to 
that number, there’s probably roughly 200,000 Saskatchewan 
rural residents that are being left behind by this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this NDP government with a $1 billion 
windfall ignore and neglect all those rural people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
obviously the member opposite really does not have an 
understanding of how this government has supported farmers in 
this province over the past few years and is again supporting 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across this province, number one issue for 
farmers, as we travelled the province, was property tax. What 
did we do, Mr. Speaker? Sixty-seven million dollars of relief 
for property tax for farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — What else have we done? We have 
continued to fully fund the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program. Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved the agenda 
ahead six months. Mr. Speaker, and in the third quarter, I have 
no doubt that we will announce that we will be fully funding it 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be people left behind in this province. I 
am sorry I have to admit it for this government. Mr. Speaker, 
the people that are going to be left behind are the Sask Party. 
That’s it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if this is 
news to that minister or if that minister can’t even read their 
own budget. They are not fully funding the CAIS program and 
when it comes to education tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. One at a 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

time. The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the minister’s information, they are not fully funding the CAIS 
program. And when it comes to education tax, 63 out of 81 of 
the old divisions out there are having to raise the education tax 
in the property of . . . in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we go on. There’s other cuts — $12 million cut to 
the crop insurance program, coverage down after continual 
increases to premium and coverage cuts before. They kicked 
500 farmers out of the crop insurance program because they 
couldn’t afford to pay the premium. They wouldn’t even extend 
the three-month deadline to let farmers try and accumulate the 
money to pay their Bill. Mr. Speaker, when will that minister 
and that government actually help farmers in this province and 
do something for rural Saskatchewan for once? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
all we get from the other side on this front are distortions and 
twists of the fact. In fact farmers will see a reduction, in fact, in 
property taxes, Mr. Speaker. In fact farmers will see support 
from this government on the business risk management 
programs as they have in the past, Mr. Speaker. Farmers will 
see this government continuing to push for changes in the CAIS 
program. Farmers will see this government supporting the crop 
insurance program and making sure that that program will 
provide continuing support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you what the problem is. What 
the problem is in this province is that we have two GDPs [gross 
domestic product], Mr. Speaker. One is going up. It’s been 
going up for years, over 3 per cent growth in GDP this year, 
Mr. Speaker. But the second GDP that’s going down 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the second GDP which has caused 
all the problems in this province — the gloom and doom party 
on the other side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that government 
keeps treating rural Saskatchewan like it is, it’s not the GDP 
that’s going down, it’s the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, last year when they had a 
windfall of money, they put $430 million into the Ag budget. 
This year when they got another $1 billion surplus gas and oil 
money, they cut that budget to 264 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
unconscionable at a time when farmers are going under. Farm 
families are doing everything to try and put this crop in, in spite 
of that NDP government. Now the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker, has come out with some new recalculations for the 
CAIS program, and part of that recalculation will be cost shared 
with the provinces. 

Will that minister and that Premier do the right thing and 
promise today to honour the provincial commitment to that 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have done the 
right thing in agriculture from the beginning of our tenure here, 
Mr. Speaker. We have fully funded every inch of every program 
that has been put before us — every year, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we have exceeded — we have exceeded — what 
was expected of us, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to 
provide the best level of support of any province in this country, 
far beyond what our neighbours are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Minister of Ag 
and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there is no question when we look across the country that this 
government has been there, this province has been there, the 
taxpayers of this province have been there to a greater extent by 
far than in any other province, two, three times the provincial 
per capita average, five times the federal per capita average. 
People on the other side apologize for the federal government. 
When that federal government comes to the table as we are to 
the same levels, then they’ll have room to criticize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Government’s Performance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a pleasure to 
hear the Agriculture minister talk about how this NDP 
government is supporting grain farmers more than the 
governments of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, for example, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a ridiculous argument we hear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too long ago that this NDP government 
used to at least set some goals. The previous leader of the party 
would set some very specific goals and for a while this Premier 
did. They had a goal to create 30,000 new jobs in five years; 
they didn’t even achieve half the number. They did have a goal 
for 200 new police officers, a promise they made; they broke 
that promise. They didn’t make the goal. In the last election, 
they set a goal to cut taxes. They increased the PST [provincial 
sales tax], Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they’re missing their goals. They’re not performing. Did 
they take steps then, Mr. Speaker, to improve their 
performance? No. They stopped setting goals. That was their 
response to that. Last night we found out they have no goals for 
population growth, job creation, nurse recruitment, or to reduce 
the waiting lists at post-secondary institutions. 
 
Why in the world should the people of this province put up for 
even one more day with a government that has no goals for 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

anything in any area of government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this session that will likely 
conclude later this day has made it abundantly clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan the difference between this 
government, New Democratic Party caucus, and that 
opposition, Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The difference is, Mr. Speaker, just this. We began this session 
with a dynamic, visionary Throne Speech setting goals for the 
people of the province. We deliver in this spring session a 
budget, a budget that brings to reality those visions and goals. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a caucus and this is a government, this is a 
team that delivers for Saskatchewan families. We set our vision 
and we set our goal. 
 
What this budget will deliver for Saskatchewan families is 
support for Saskatchewan young people to build their futures 
here. It develops support for families in terms of child care. It 
delivers a green and a prosperous and a growing economy. It 
sharpens our competitive edge. It works with First Nations and 
Aboriginal peoples. 
 
The difference, Mr. Speaker, the difference is that group of 
angry men and women who come into this Chamber, no ideas, 
no plans. They came last session, that leader with a hundred 
new ideas. He comes this session with a hundred new positions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what we began the session with 
were platitudes, were statements by the Premier, were 
sentiments. We heard every day the Premier used the words 
about who’s going to be left behind or not left behind on the 
pathway to opportunity. I mean, his promise was that no one 
would be left behind on the pathway to opportunity. We hear it 
over and over again. 
 
But it strikes us pretty hollow on this side of the House. It 
strikes pretty hollow, Mr. Speaker, as well for the taxpayers, the 
property taxpayers of this province, 63 out of 81 former school 
divisions left behind; nurses in the province, by their own 
account, left behind by this government. Teachers, 150 fewer in 
this province, are being left behind. Those people who deserve 
good highways in the province, highways that support 
economic development in the oil and gas sector, left behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will we get more than rhetoric and 
platitudes from this government? When, from this Premier, can 
we expect some leadership, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, $3.2 billion for the 
Department of Health is no platitude, Mr. Speaker. $620 million 
over four years in business tax reductions, that’s no platitude, 
Mr. Speaker. One point five billion, record levels of funding for 
education in our province, that’s no platitude, Mr. Speaker. $67 
million for the relief of property tax on our farm families, that’s 
no platitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And neither is it rhetoric. Neither is it the kind of rhetoric that 
comes from that Leader of the Opposition or from that party, 
the misinformation . . . [inaudible] . . . takes taxpayers’ dollars. 
They fund misinformation on commercials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government, this is a team of men and 
women who deliver for Saskatchewan people. We set bold 
vision. We set bold dreams. We seek a better future for our 
province, for our young people right here and we deliver, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the difference is, they complain. And when it’s push comes 
to shove, they will stand in this legislature and vote against the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the surest 
sign, the surest sign that a government has reached its 
best-before date, that a government has grown stale and old, the 
surest sign of that is, when confronted with real problems that 
face the people of the province, they point to systems and 
processes and giant budget numbers — $3.3 billion. That’s 
what the Premier talks about. 
 
You know what we’re talking about on this side of the House in 
this session? We talked about Paige Hansen and her family. We 
talked about Terry Rak and Bob Loeppky who deserve, Mr. 
Speaker, the respect and fairness from this government they 
wanted. We talked about Emily Morley. We were talking about 
teachers and about nurses, about farmers who are at their wits’ 
end facing property tax hikes from this government. That’s why 
it’s out of touch. 
 
And I ask the Premier again. I ask him for some answers on 
behalf of these people for leadership. Will he give us more than 
simply platitudes and sentiments, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when issues are raised with 
this government, when we see a problem, when we feel a 
concern, Mr. Speaker, this government acts. And we deliver on 
finding solutions. What we do not do, Mr. Speaker, is stand in 
the legislature angry and annoyed . . . and not even one sense, 
not even one new position or idea of a creative solution to any 
of the challenges. That is not the record of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan know it. 
 
Now I’m hearing from the opposition members I should call an 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

election. Well some of these hours, some of these days I’m 
going to be visiting Weyburn. And we’ll see about an election, 
Mr. Speaker. And I tell you the question that’ll be asked in that 
election. Where is the former member of Weyburn, Ms. Brenda 
Bakken Lackey? Where is that member? And how is it, how is 
it that a member who did have ideas, who promoted her ideas, 
who was a spirited member of this legislature and that caucus, 
why was she muzzled? Why was she muzzled so she could not 
represent her constituents? Why did she say that party puts 
politics over principle every time? That’s the question that’ll be 
asked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier says he’ll soon be visiting the city of Weyburn. And we 
look forward to that as do the five or . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The members will allow 
the question to be put. The Chair recognizes . . . Order. Order. 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier says he’s going to go to 
Weyburn. Let us hope that he is greeted by more than the 
throng of five or six that were going to come to his leader’s 
dinner that he had to cancel down in the city of Weyburn. Do 
you know why he had to cancel that, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you 
why. Because the people of Weyburn are fed up with his 
government cashing the oil and gas royalty cheques from their 
area of the province, Mr. Speaker, without reinvesting in things 
like Highway 5. 
 
They don’t mind sharing the royalties with the province, but 
they would like the government to invest in Highway 35, Mr. 
Speaker. They would like this government to ensure that they 
don’t pay the lion’s share of the costs of education by paying 
ever-increasing school taxes. That’s what they would like from 
this Premier in exchange for their great contribution to this 
province. They’d like an agriculture budget that’s sensitive to 
the needs of southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
So instead of just going down to Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, and 
meeting with his four or five key supporters he still has, will he 
instead this day call the by-election for Weyburn-Big Muddy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in this legislature 
today, as this session concludes, proud of a government that 
will govern for the whole people of Saskatchewan and the 
whole province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I stand in this legislature today proud of a government that has 
brought forth the kind of visionary Throne Speech that talks 
about a dream of a province where no one is being left behind 
on the pathway to opportunity, that dreams, envisions of a 
province of a green and a prosperous economy, a province, Mr. 
Speaker, with diverse and growing communities, a province, 

Mr. Speaker, that builds for a future for our young people right 
here. 
 
I am proud of a team of men and women who have delivered a 
budget, a budget that provides new benefits for the most 
vulnerable in our communities, a budget that provides 
thousands of new training spaces for our university and 
technical students, a budget that improves considerably the 
competitive advantage of this province in investment and job 
creation, a budget that stands to protect our environment, a 
budget that breaks the boundaries in working with First Nations 
and Aboriginal peoples in this province. 
 
I am proud of a government that delivers for the whole people 
and the whole province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
am pleased to table written responses to written questions 1,152 
to 1,162 inclusive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,152 to 1,162 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to go to private members’ public Bill, Bill No. 204 for second 
reading of The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act and then 
to revert to government orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to proceed to second reading of Bill 204 and then to revert 
to government orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with real 
pleasure that I speak to Bill 204 and later move second reading 
of a Bill that would recognize Telemiracle Week in 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many times we have lauded the volunteer efforts 
of the people of Saskatchewan. I think Saskatchewan stands out 
amongst certainly all of North American jurisdictions and 
perhaps globally as the volunteer capital of the entire world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many efforts that are so worthy of our 
recognition, whether it be the works of churches, service clubs, 
community groups, societies, and associations that promote 
health and fight diseases and social ills. But, Mr. Speaker, there 
is one effort that I believe stands taller and prouder than any 
effort that I have certainly seen anywhere in the world, and that 
is the effort over the last 30 years of the Kinsmen Telemiracle 
Foundation who have raised millions and millions of dollars 
right here in Saskatchewan for work right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statistics are astounding. Telemiracle was 
founded in 1977 and in the last 30 years has raised over $68 
million, and these dollars are distributed by the Kinsmen 
Foundation to over 50 funding applications on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the Kinsmen Foundation, how did this get 
started? And they told me that their history goes something like 
this. Back in about 1977 a man by the name of Peter Kilburn in 
Saskatoon, a Kinsmen member, was the founder of the 
foundation. Originally it was called the Kinsmen Foundation for 
the Handicapped. However today it is known as the Kinsmen 
Telemiracle Foundation. 
 
Peter quickly realized that there were many who needed help 
through this foundation but the funds were not adequate. They 
needed to do more. So he approached his fellow Kinsmen, Mr. 
Urban Donlevy, and together the idea of Telemiracle was 
incubated and of course history tells us that it was the right 
move at the right time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kinsmen Foundation has three major client 
groups to whom funding is provided. The first group are to 
individuals, who form the largest client group, and a lot of this 
funding goes to medical travel, for special needs equipment. It 
provides travel, meals, accommodations to fund Saskatchewan 
residents that are required to travel away from home. The 
foundation also provides scooters, ultralight wheelchairs, 
modification for wheelchairs, access to vehicles and homes. 
The list is really quite astounding. And that’s just the first client 
group. 
 
The second client group is a classification of group homes and 
community organizations that are provided with funding for 
special needs and equipment, like handivans. 
 
And the third group, Mr. Speaker, are institutions that provide 
service to a wide range of Saskatchewan residents. For example 
the Kinsmen Foundation recently made a significant 
contribution to the breast cancer centre of care and also to the 
Nephrology Centre of Excellence. And that is part of the 
Saskatchewan transplant program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have all watched the Telemiracle event as it 
unfolds on our television on the weekend in March that 
Telemiracle occurs. And we have seen, you know, there’s 

names that are synonymous with Telemiracle. One of those 
names is Bob McGrath who has been a part of the Telemiracle 
celebration and fundraising effort here in the province of 
Saskatchewan for 29 out of those 30 years. In recognition of his 
commitment he was made an honorary Kinsmen and was 
recently presented with the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal by 
Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Dr. 
Haverstock. 
 
We’ve seen other celebrities commit themselves to this 
fundraising effort, including Gloria Loring, Beverley Mahood, 
and Adam Gregory. And most recently, Mr. Speaker, Brad 
Johner, a Saskatchewan resident, has joined the Telemiracle 
effort for the last eight years. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to a national cast, the Telemiracle also 
allows for Saskatchewan talent to go on stage and strut their 
stuff. And I think just about every community, if not every 
community in the province of Saskatchewan, has been proud to 
see people that we know, that we have grown up with, go on the 
stage and perform, and perform admirably for the Telemiracle 
cause. 
 
This doesn’t happen by accident. This isn’t easy to put on. This 
is not easy to organize. It takes the efforts of hundreds and 
hundreds of people. In fact over 1,000 Kinsmen and Kinette 
volunteers from across the province join in the effort on an 
annual basis to make Telemiracle happen. It takes over 200 TV 
production volunteers to make Telemiracle happen. It takes the 
co-operation of other groups throughout the province and of 
course the donors — the people who sit in their living rooms 
watching their television that call in when they keep saying, 
ring those phones, ring those phones, ring those phones. 
 
And I just, you know, I’ve seen it I guess a hundred times. But I 
love watching, you know, the volunteers sitting there waiting 
for that phone to ring. And they just know it’s going to ring, 
Mr. Speaker. Every time we see that whole bank of phones, one 
after the other, being answered when the challenge goes out to 
Saskatchewan people to get involved in a good project in their 
province to raise money for an excellent cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total amount of dollars raised in Telemiracle 
30, the last Telemiracle, was I think over $3.5 million in just a 
20-hour period here in a province of less than 1 million people. 
It is truly amazing. 
 
There are many, many testimonies to the work that Telemiracle 
has done because of all this effort by all of these volunteers. 
And I want to share one example with you about the practical 
way that Telemiracle helps people. And this is one letter of 
thanks that was received by the Kinsmen Telemiracle 
Foundation. And I quote: 
 

I am writing to thank you for your continued support this 
year for my Mom. I never thought that I would be writing 
a letter like this, but we too were faced with an illness this 
year that has turned our lives upside down. It is thanks to 
your organization that we have been able to continue 
travelling for doctor appointments and surgeries that 
would have financially taken a toll on us. 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

And then, Mr. Speaker, she goes on to explain the hardships 
they have faced. And I quote again: 
 

On the brighter side, Telemiracle has been there for us 
every step of the way. The continued support has certainly 
eased some of the stress. Also, my Mom received one of 
the greatest gifts from Telemiracle as well . . . a scooter. 
That little scooter has made a lot of miles this summer! It 
(the scooter) has put the smile back on my Mom’s face 
and given back some of the independence that she lost 
when her leg was amputated. 
 
So on behalf of my Mom and myself, I would like to thank 
the Kinsmen Telemiracle Foundation for being there for us 
this year. It is because of the generosity of so many people 
that families like ours are able to cope when someone we 
love becomes ill. You are truly amazing! 

 
Mr. Speaker, applications for needs like this are approved by 
the Kinsmen Foundation Board of Directors which are made up 
of Kinsmen and Kinettes from around Saskatchewan. These 
individuals volunteer their time. They have nine meetings per 
year to make these miracles happen. The Kinsmen Foundation 
sees itself as the last option for applicants. So when someone 
has no other financial support to address their need, the 
Kinsmen Telemiracle Foundation will consider their 
application. 
 
Over the last 30 years, Kinsmen Telemiracle has grown from 
being the provincial project of our service organization — this 
is the Kinsmen Telemiracle organization — to being part of the 
heart and soul of this province. Telemiracle is truly 
Saskatchewan’s charity and is owned by the hearts and minds 
of the people of Saskatchewan. It is their fundraiser, and it is 
part of their sense that their donation helps their neighbours in 
acquiring independence, quality of life, and focuses on respect 
for people of all abilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I want to express some thanks. First 
of all I want to thank two of my constituents, Brad and Tammy 
Blackwell, for bringing the germ of the idea of having a 
Telemiracle week to my attention. They are my constituents 
from the community of Dinsmore. They are in the gallery 
today, and actually Brad is the upcoming chairman of 
Telemiracle 31. So he’s got a big event that’s going to happen 
in March 2007. And I know, Brad, that everyone in this 
Assembly wishes you well in that responsibility. And I also 
know that his wife, Tammy, has been very involved with 
Telemiracle as well, and they are working together on this 
project. 
 
I also want to thank Joan Steckhan, who is the executive 
director of the Telemiracle Foundation. Joan has been excellent 
to work with, and she has provided me with much of the 
information that I have been able to share with the Assembly 
today. 
 
I also want to express my thanks to the Law Clerk who helped 
draft the Bill and made sure that it was acceptable so members 
on all sides of the House could eagerly embrace the Bill that we 
are introducing and reading today. 
 
I want to thank the House leaders, both my House Leader and 

the Government House Leader, for agreeing to bring this piece 
of legislation to the floor of the legislature and allowing it to 
pass quickly. It’s not every day that a private member’s Bill 
does go through the House. It takes co-operation from all 
members of this House, and I can’t think of a better cause for 
which we should all come together than to celebrate the 
wonderful work done by the Kinsmen Foundation through their 
annual event, Telemiracle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland who I believe is going to speak on behalf of the 
government side of the House. 
 
And therefore it is my great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in light of 
the work of Telemiracle over the last 30 years, to place it in our 
memories on an ongoing basis, to see an Act that would every 
year during the week that Telemiracle occurs be officially 
recognized by the province of Saskatchewan. It’s our way of 
saying, way to go, guys; way to go, gals. We’re behind you 100 
per cent. We want Telemiracle to be an enduring institution in 
Saskatchewan that continues to meet the needs of men and 
women, girls and boys throughout our history. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of appreciation, and also 
I feel very humbled, to be able to move second reading of Bill 
204, a Bill that is An Act to recognize Telemiracle in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill 204, The Recognition of Telemiracle 
Week Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my great honour to participate in the debate in support of this 
very worthwhile Bill. 
 
I am going to tell a very brief story. In the spring of 1977 — it 
was the first year of Telemiracle — I was 13 years old. My 
parents were supporters and members of the Kinsmen. And our 
class in school decided to participate and raise money for this 
worthwhile cause. In fact our class of 13-year-olds, we decided 
that we were going to collect pennies and lay them end to end 
and collect enough pennies to stretch the length of the entire 
school. 
 
Now when you’re 13 years old, that sounds like a really good 
idea, until about the third day when you’ve basically taken all 
the pennies out of a town of 350 people and every noon hour 
you’re laying these pennies out on the floor and then you have 
to pick them all up again. So by about the third day, we figured 
out that if you put them on masking tape, you can roll this out 
and roll it back up. But, Mr. Speaker, we actually had to 
encourage people to bring pennies from other communities, it 
seemed like. And for that spring, it was pretty hard to find a 
penny in Loon Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we were thrilled when Telemiracle came 
down and was being broadcast that weekend. I recall watching 
many, many, many hours of the Telemiracle, negotiating with 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

my parents to stay up later than I normally would be allowed to. 
And I was very excited and got enthusiastic and I phoned in. I 
pledged a certain amount of money. I can’t remember how 
much it was. But I was a paper boy at that time. And I probably 
decided to give a week’s, a week’s earnings. And I remember 
challenging all other paper carriers in Saskatchewan to donate 
as much as I did. And then of course you’re always watching 
the screen to see if your name goes by and whether or not 
they’re going to issue that challenge. 
 
So it was very thrilling for me when this spring this past year, I 
was able to nominate Urban Donlevy and Bob McGrath for the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I 
wasn’t able to come down. It was terrible weather and I actually 
tried coming down and got about 3 miles and had to head back 
. . . 5 kilometres, sorry. And so, Mr. Speaker, I put in an 
emergency call to the Legislative Secretary on voluntary 
secretary initiative, our member from Regina Wascana Plains. 
And she and the Lieutenant Governor were able to attend 
Telemiracle and present the Centennial Medal to Bob McGrath. 
And she did a fantastic job and I was watching from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Telemiracle has raised in the 30 years since then 
$68 million — that’s three decades of miracles. And they’ve 
helped thousands of families and people throughout 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we owe a deep debt of gratitude to 
the many men and women from the Kinsmen Telemiracle 
Foundation from across Saskatchewan, all of the people that 
donate every year, that fundraise every year, that push beds 
from Saskatoon to Regina every year, or Regina to Saskatoon 
every year in fundraising to help other people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year Telemiracle 30 raised $3,491,538. And 
those are dollars that are going to help many people in 
Saskatchewan. These are generous donations from the people of 
Saskatchewan. And with this Bill we will be recognizing those 
generous donations and the hard work and commitment of all 
the people that organized this event and continue to organize 
this event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of heart goes into Telemiracle, and we know 
Saskatchewan is made up of heart. And we’re very proud to be 
part of this Bill which is going to be honouring the Kinsmen 
Telemiracle Foundation and Telemiracle from here on out. And 
we wish them many, many years of good luck and continued 
good fortune in raising funds to help families. And I know all 
members on the government side will be enthusiastically 
supporting this Bill. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
best wishes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Rosetown-Elrose that Bill 
204, The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question.` 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 204, An Act 
to recognize Telemiracle in Saskatchewan, be referred to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that this Bill 204 be referred to the Committee 
of the Whole. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee of the Whole. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to consider 
the Bill now. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to consider 
the Bill at this time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. We’ll go into 
Committee of the Whole so that this Bill can be considered. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
 
The Chair: — The item before committee is Bill No. 204, An 
Act to recognize Telemiracle in Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore, Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts 
as follows: Bill No. 204, An Act to recognize Telemiracle in 
Saskatchewan. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Chair, I’ll move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — Report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Sorry. I’ll ask that the committee report 
the Bill without amendment. That too. 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That we would report Bill No. 204, An Act to recognize 
Telemiracle in Saskatchewan, without amendment. 

 
Favour of the Assembly? All those in favour, say aye? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And now I’ll move that the committee rise 
and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has asked the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[11:30] 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the committee to report item no. 3, Bill No. 204, without 
amendment and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, with leave. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill No. 204, The Recognition of 
Telemiracle Week Act be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair so the Assembly can 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — The first estimate to be considered before the 
committee is Agriculture and Food found on page 33 of your 
book. Subvote 1, central management and services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. Carried. Subvote (AG05) in the amount 
of $6,033,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote no. 3, farm stability and 
adaptation, (AG08) in the sum of $98,776,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (AG06) in the amount of 
$13,261,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (AG07) in the amount of 
$20,857,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (AG12) in the amount of 
$3,542,000. Oh the amount to be voted . . . excuse, committee. 
The statutory amount is $3,337,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. Carried. Subvote (AG04) in the amount 
of $3,587,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (AG03) in the amount of 
$7,327,000. 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (AG09) in the amount of 
$4,244,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (AG10) in the amount of 
$100,875,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Amortization of capital assets. Any 
questions from the committee? If not, call the vote on $144,000 
. . . And now for committee resolution no. 2 for Agriculture and 
Food in the amount of $264,587,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 1 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
The Chair: — The next item before the committee is on page 
162 of the Estimates book. Page 162 in your booklet, vote 146 
in the amount of $400,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sums for 
Agriculture and Food, $400,000. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. That now concludes the estimates for 
the Department of Agriculture and next we will move to the 
estimates for the Department of the Environment. 
 
[Vote 146 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — Turn to page 55 of the Estimates book. Central 
management and services, subvote (ER01). 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Environmental protection and water 
management, subvote (ER11) in the amount of $25,002,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote, forest services (ER09) in the 

amount of $14,382,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote, fire management and forest 
protection, (ER10) in the amount of $93,716,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Subvote (ER15), resource stewardship in the 
amount of $7,985,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Subvote (ER04), parks. The amount to be voted 
is $14,580,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (ER08), compliance and field 
services in the amount of $15,253,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (ER14), planning and risk 
analysis, $7,768,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (ER07), Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund in the amount of $3,372,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Amortization of capital assets in the 
amount of $5,545,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. The resolution for the department: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sums for the 
Environment, $200,822,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 26 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
The Chair: — The next estimates before the committee will be 
that of Executive Council, found on page 61 of the Estimates 
book. Subvote central management and services (EX01) in the 
amount of $4,051,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

The Chair: — Carried. Premier’s office (EX07) in the amount 
of $532,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Cabinet secretariat and cabinet planning 
unit (EX04) in the amount of $1,390,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX03), chief of 
communications office $1,844,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. House business and research (EX08) in 
the amount of $402,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Members of the Executive Council 
(EX06) in the amount of $690,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Statutory. Amortization of capital 
assets. Any questions? Seeing none: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sums for 
Executive Council, $8,219,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 10 agreed to.] 
 
[11:45] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Executive Council 
Vote 10 

 
The Chair: — And the next vote for Executive Council is in 
your Supplementary Estimates booklet, page 3, subvote . . . 
Executive Council, vote 10 for $290,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007 . . . 
 

Oops. Thank you for your kind guidance through committee. 
It’s: 
 

for the 12 months ending March 31, 2006, the following 
sums for Executive Council, $290,000. 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 10 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — We’ll be ready for quite a few votes in the 
Department of Health, starting on page 81 in the Estimates 
booklet. Central management and services (HE01), in the 
amount of $14,981,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (HE04), provincial health 
services in the amount of $143,717,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (HE03), regional health 
services in the amount of 2 billion . . . $2,172,733,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (HE06), medical services and 
medical education programs in the amount of $579,995,000. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote drug plan and extended 
benefits, (HE08) in the amount of $257,863,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote early childhood development, 
(HE10) in the amount of $9,013,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote provincial laboratory 
infrastructure project, (HE05) in the amount of $11,096,000. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Any questions of amortization of 
capital assets in the amount of $806,000? Seeing none, go to the 
resolution. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sums for 
Health, $3,189,398,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 32 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — In your Supplementary Estimates booklet, page 
4, Health vote 32, regional health services (HE03) in the 
amount of $3,000,000. Is that agreed? Agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums for 
Health, $3,000,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 32 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — Our next estimates before the committee would 
be the Department of Learning, main estimates, page 113, 
subvote no. (LR01) central management and services in the 
amount of $11,684,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote pre-K to 12 education, (LR03) 
in the amount of $600,257,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Early learning and child care, (LR08) in 
the amount of $30,113,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (LR10) curriculum and 
e-learning in the amount of $4,498,000. Is that agreed? I’m 
sorry. Again, less the statutory amount to be voted on is 
$4,473,000. Agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. Literacy, subvote (LR17) in the amount 
of $2,520,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (LR15) provincial library in 

the amount of $9,365,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (LR09) education property tax 
relief in the amount of $107,850,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Teachers’ pensions and benefits, 
(LR04) in the amount to be voted, $25,378,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Any question on amortization of capital 
assets? Seeing none, we will move to the resolution. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sums: for 
Learning, $791,640,000. Is that agreed? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 5 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Learning 
Vote 5 

 
The Chair: — In the Supplementary Estimates booklet, 
Learning, vote 5 on page no. 6 in the amount of $10,851,000. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — And that was vote (LR03). Carried. 
 
A motion for supplementaries, would be: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums for 
Learning, $10,851,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 5 agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — We have reached the final votes of estimates and 
supplementary estimates before the committee. And we will 
now move to the appropriation resolutions. Before the 
committee would be resolutions for final appropriations. And I 
would invite the minister to introduce the first resolution. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

move: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $77,618,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the minister. Is that 
agreed? It has been moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $77,618,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I would invite the minister to introduce 
the next resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 
move: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $5,766,986,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $5,766,986,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I would invite the Minister to introduce 
the third and final resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 
move: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 2008, the sum of $117,818,000 be granted out 
of the General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Chair: — Moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 2008, the sum of $117,818,000 be granted out 
of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I will now invite the Minister of 
Finance to ask the committee to rise and report the resolutions. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 
do move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that 
the committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for 
leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — Is the motion agreed to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed? Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions. It has instructed me to report the 
same and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the resolutions be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

The Speaker: — Later this day. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
By leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 66, The 
Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 66, The Appropriation Act, 
2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
By leave of the Assembly and under rule 57(2), I move the Bill 
be now read a second and third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 66, The Appropriation Act, 
2006 (No. 2) be now read a second and third time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Would they call in the members for a standing 
vote on the Bill, Bill 66? 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:05 until 12:10.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly has 
been moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 66, The 
Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a second and third 
time. Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 

[Yeas — 29] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Wartman Forbes Prebble 
Crofford Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Taylor Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Addley 
Morin Borgerson  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 25] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kirsch 
Brkich Merriman Morgan 
Kerpan   
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
29; those opposed, 25. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I wish to . . . Order please. I 
wish to advise the Assembly that Her Honour is here for Royal 
Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 12:15 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several Bills which, 
in the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour and to 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 32 - The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 
sur les victimes d’actes criminels 

Bill No. 37 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 
Amendment Act, 2006 

Bill No. 36 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/ Loi corrective 
(indemnisation et assurance au profit des 
administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (n° 2) 

Bill No. 31 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 

Bill No. 41 - The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 35 - The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 

de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 
1995 

Bill No. 47 - The Business Names Registration 
Amendment Act, 2006 

Bill No. 40 - The Income Trust Liability Act 
Bill No. 49 - The Police and Peace Officers' Memorial Day 

Act 
Bill No. 60 - The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
Bill No. 61 - The Evidence Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 39 - The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 53 - The Economic and Co-operative 

Development Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 64 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 63 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 46 - The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 59 - The Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 

2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
Bill No. 44 - The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
Bill No. 42 - The Respiratory Therapists Act 
Bill No. 43 - The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 

2006 
Bill No. 54 - The Cancer Agency Act 
Bill No. 51 - The Regional Health Services Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 62 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 45 - The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 52 - The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 55 - The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
Bill No. 56 - The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
Bill No. 57 - The Residential Tenancies Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant 
modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 
Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 

Bill No. 30 - The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2006 

Bill No. 50 - The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment 
Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 
1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
(médiation) 

Bill No. 38 - The Settlement of International Investment 
Disputes Act/Loi sur le règlement des 
différends internationaux relatifs aux 
investissements 

Bill No. 12 - The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 
2005 

Bill No. 48 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 28 - The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 204 - The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly accorded the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 66 - The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
 
to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly respectfully requests your presence for a historical 
photograph. 
 
Her Honour: — I would be pleased. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:22.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in a moment I would like to 
move a motion of adjournment which will be seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, but before proceeding to that I would 
beg the indulgence of the House to very briefly express some 
appreciations. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, to you and your office, the staff of 
your office, for your rulings and your guidance and the support 
provided to all members of the Assembly in a non-partial way. 
Secondly, to the Clerks of the Assembly who always serve us 
well and always make us and our Assembly look the best when 
compared with all the others and the rest of the nation. And they 
have been efficient as always. 
 
The Sergeant-at-Arms and the security personnel who provide 
us not only security but look good doing it and we appreciate 
that. To the Pages, who are always effervescent in the 
performance of their duties and who we’ve come to become 
quite fond of over the course of the term. To the Hansard 
personnel who ensure that the democratic principle of 
knowledge of the public to what goes on here is accurately 
recorded and who work tireless hours. 
 
The Opposition House Leader and to his staff, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to acknowledge that it has been for me, during the course 
of this session, an honour to work together with the Opposition 
House Leader who I consider a gentleman with whom a 
handshake seals an agreement. And I want to also acknowledge 
the good work of his staff working together with the 
Government House Leader’s office as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say to the House that I will look 
forward to working together with the Opposition House Leader 
over the course of the summer as we consider ways that we will 
continue to modernize and make more efficient the operation of 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2006 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in that context, I want to express appreciation to the 
Standing Committee Chairs and the Vice-Chairs and the work 
that they have done to demonstrate the effectiveness of the new 
system of committees that we have used throughout this session 
and will continue to use. 
 
To the government and opposition caucus offices, for the staffs 
who support us, as well as to the interns who are located within 
them and will be a part — an important part — of the future 
parliamentary democracy in our province. 
 
Also, I want to express thanks to the staff who serve the 
ministers of the Crown as we prepare to do our duties, as we 
come to this Chamber to bring them for consideration and 
ultimately in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
To the cafeteria staff who feed us well and sometimes too well, 
Mr. Speaker. We appreciate that, as well as the good work of 
the staff for Property Management who keep this building in 
good order and humming. 
 
Also to members of the legislative press gallery, who ensure 
that the carryings-on and the doings of this Assembly are 
reported to the public and who ensure that democracy is alive 
and well as a result of that. 
 
Second last, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend our best wishes of 
the government members to the hon. member from Martensville 
who unfortunately has been to the House all too infrequently. 
We’ve been pleased that we’ve seen him on occasion and our 
thoughts and our prayers are with him and we wish him a 
speedy and healthy recovery. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to express appreciation to all 
of our families. All of us recognize that when we come to this 
Chamber that the greatest sacrifice for virtually all members, if 
not all members, is the time that is lost with those who are most 
special to us. And we deeply appreciate the support that they 
give us not only during the session, but in an ongoing kind of 
way. 
 
I also want to express thanks to broadcast services, who ensure 
that this signal is carried to all the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With that said, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by 
the House Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this day 
today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by 
Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government, and that 
Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 
notice if possible of such date and time. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 

day today it shall stand adjourned until the date and the 
time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government, and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven clear days notice if possible of such date and time. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Opposition House Leader, the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise with the Government House Leader and express some 
gratitudes at the end of the session. First of all, I would like to 
thank all members of this Assembly for their co-operation and 
determination to make democracy work. At times I know 
people get an impression that everyone is not similarly 
dedicated to the principles of democracy and the freedom of 
expression that this place allows for and encourages. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would certainly like to thank every member for their 
participation in that process. 
 
I would like to in particularly thank the members of my caucus 
for their co-operation and support in making sure that the 
challenges that have been placed before us were met and done 
so in a timely, efficient way, and in particular the opposition 
leader who entrusted me with this responsibility. 
 
I would also like to join the Government House Leader in 
recognizing and expressing our best thoughts and prayers and 
wishes for the member from Martensville. Members know that 
he is a veteran member of our Assembly and is very much 
missed in his absence from this Assembly. And we certainly 
wish him and his family the very best. 
 
The Government House Leader has been very cordial and very 
professional in our dealings. And I look forward to the 
continued good work that has been begun by those that have 
gone before us in terms of the renewal and rejuvenation of the 
rules of our Assembly, that we will have further progress to 
report when we meet in the fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t join the Government 
House Leader in thanking all of those people from the 
legislature to our caucuses that he mentioned in detail, and 
thank them as well from the official opposition for their support 
in making our jobs not only bearable, but very interesting and 
always very professional. 
 
And finally I would like to end as well by spending and paying 
special tribute to our families. Mr. Speaker, each member 
knows no matter if they live in the city of Regina or very 
remote from it that this office and this position and the work 
that we all do as members of this legislature puts tremendous 
stress not only on ourselves, but I think even in a particular way 
on our families. 
 
Very often when we’re here in this Assembly and we’re 
conducting the affairs of the province, we sometimes can easily 
forget that our spouses and families are at home and are 
meeting the public and meeting our constituents in the 
communities. And quite often they end up pinch-hitting for us 
in so many ways. It always seems to me a particular sacrifice 
for those that have young families, and they miss special 
occasions because of the duties of this Assembly. 
 



May 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

Mr. Speaker, in agreeing and seconding this adjournment, I 
would like to express that everyone has a very safe and happy 
and relaxing summer period in the bosom of their families and 
also in communication with their constituents because that’s 
what this job is all about. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to take a minute to associate 
myself with the remarks of both House leaders with respect to 
the thank yous for everyone that’s involved, in particular in my 
case to thank you to the Clerks, all the departments within the 
Legislative Assembly Office, and my personal staff in the 
office. 
 
And I do want to take a minute to recognize the MLAs who 
work here diligently and the attention that they pay to the 
business on behalf of their constituents. MLAs have a very 
heavy schedule and a very intense session with long hours and 
committees and other obligations. And MLAs don’t get thanked 
very often. They don’t expect to get thanked, but they deserve 
to get thanked because the work of the MLAs goes far beyond 
just what the people often see through the media. 
 
I have the privilege of seeing history being made before my 
eyes here daily. And I can say that the leadership, the research, 
the scrutiny and the debate, and watching MLAs consider all 
factors on very complex issues and the consensus making and 
the voting, it’s the MLAs’ action in this that keeps our 
democracy functions and safeguards our freedoms. And the 
MLAs deserve credit for that, and families of MLAs certainly 
deserve recognition for the support that they give to their 
MLAs. 
 
And very specifically I wish to give special credit to the House 
leaders and to the members of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services for blazing the trail by applying a new 
provision from the rules of the Assembly and with respect to the 
consumer protection Bill. This Committee on Human Services 
broke new ground when they opened the doors for public 
comment after first reading of a Bill. 
 
The result was legislation endorsed by all in the House where 
no law existed previously at all, and a lot of satisfaction from 
that process. So congratulations go out to the Chair of the 
committee and all committee members for piloting this public 
consultation. And I project your success will be replicated by 
much more opportunities for the public to comment upon 
legislation in this Chamber in the future. 
 
I too wish all members a pleasant, productive summer along 
with some rest. And to the MLA from Martensville, God speed 
your recovery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the ending of sitting 
day today it shall stand adjourned to the date and the time 

set by Mr. Speaker upon request of the government, and 
that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 
notice, if possible, of such a date and time. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until the call of the Speaker. Pardon me. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve just decided what 
we’re going to do when we adjourn, so why don’t we? I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the Government House Leader for 
using his experience as a former Speaker, and he has just 
moved that this House do stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Now this House stands adjourned until the 
call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:35.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1771 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1772 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1773 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1774 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1775 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1775 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1775 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1776 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Team Wins Silver at World Junior Curling Championships 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
 Canada Northwest Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Conference 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1776 
 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 Attributing Blame 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 High Performance Athletic Camp for Aboriginal Teens 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1777 
 Leaving No One Behind 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1778 
 Good News for Saskatchewan 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Review of Infant’s Medical Treatment 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1778 
 Health Care Issues 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1779 
 Support For Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1780 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1780 



 

 Government’s Performance 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1781 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1782 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1783 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1783 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1783 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1785 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act .....................................................................................................1786 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1787 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 ...................................................................................................1787 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Agriculture and Food — Vote 146 ..................................1788 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 ...............................................................................................................1788 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 .......................................................................................................1788 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Executive Council — Vote 10......................................................1789 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 ..........................................................................................................................1789 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Health — Vote 32 .........................................................................1790 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 ........................................................................................................................1790 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Learning — Vote 5.......................................................................1790 
 Motions for Supply 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1790 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1791 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 66 — The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1792 
 Recorded Division ......................................................................................................................................................................1792 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1792 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1793 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1794 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1795 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


