




















































Hansard: March 27, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 28A  MONDAY, MARCH 27, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 797 
 March 27, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of individuals concerned 
about the availability of the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed primarily by constituents or 
individuals from the constituency of Arm River. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of residents of the province regarding the cancer drug 
Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
Saskatoon area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition as well. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have a petition to present on behalf of residents. The prayer 

reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators on this petition come from the 
communities of Kindersley, Kerrobert, Wilkie, Meadow Lake, 
Milestone, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about the drug 
Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Swift 
Current, Regina, Clavet, and Guernsey. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to fund Avastin signed by residents concerned that this 
is the only cancer drug recommended by the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency that the government has denied. The prayer of 
the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from residents 
of the city of Saskatoon, and I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The communities that are involved, Mr. Speaker, in the petition 
are from Kenaston and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

petition signed by citizens concerned with cancer relief. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Swift Current and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition signed by 
citizens concerned with the funding of Avastin, the drug. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise this 
afternoon to present a petition regarding the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon 
and Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
this province. The prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Saskatoon, Martensville, and Arelee. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have several 
pages of a petition of citizens who are concerned that they have 
to pay for a drug for cancer, which results in two-tier health 
care. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Emerald 
Park, Hudson Bay, Tisdale, and Hafford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise 
with my colleagues today to present a petition about the 
concern about no funding for the drug of Avastin. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signatures on the petition today are from the communities of 
Meadow Lake, Regina, St. Walburg, Kerrobert, Wilkie, 
Saskatoon. And I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those citizens that are 
very concerned about this government’s refusal to fund the drug 
Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Macoun, 
Meadow Lake, Saskatoon, Maple Creek, Swift Current, and 
Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from constituents and citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the government’s 
failure to fund Avastin. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Clavet and Saskatoon. I so 
present. 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition with reference to Avastin and the fact that the 
government made the decision not to fund it. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens from Prince Albert, 
Estevan, Weyburn, and Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators of this petition are all from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too arise today to 
present a petition about the drug Avastin. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with my 
colleagues with this very important petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by the good citizens from Davidson, 
Bladworth, and Girvin. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good citizens 
primarily of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding the government’s refusal to fund the drug Avastin. I 
will read the prayer for relief. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by concerned citizens from 
Kenaston and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
government’s decision not to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the very good folks from Saskatoon, 
Loreburn, Kenaston, Melville, and Martensville. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional papers nos. 5, 64, 67, and 638. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many ski hills 
applied for funding from the department in the fiscal year 
2005-2006? 
 

And also another question, too: 
 

And which ski hills received funds from the department in 
the fiscal year 2005-2006, and if so, how much? And how 
many received funding? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC: does management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2002? 
 

Also: 
 
To the Minister Responsible for CIC: how did 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help to 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002? Does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2002? If so, what is the nature 
of this activity? 
 

In addition: 
 
What did management of the department find as a result of 
its monitor of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2002? 

 
And in addition: 
 

Is management of the department aware of any allegations 
of fraud or other illegal activity within the department or 
its agencies in the year 2002, such as information received 
from employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 

And I have the same set of questions for the year 2001. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation: did management of the department have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation: how did management of the department 
monitor any established programs and controls to mitigate 
fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 
2001? 

 
To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation: does management of the department have 
any knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activity within the department during the year 2001? If so, 
what is the nature of this activity? 
 
To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation: what did management of the department find 
as a result of its monitor of any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 
2001? 
 
To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation: is management of the department aware of 
any allegations of fraud or other illegal activity within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2001 such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 

 
I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for the year 2002. 
 
[13:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to stand today and happy to stand today to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature good 
friends of our family, Barry and Chris Firby from Kenaston, 
Saskatchewan, who are seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both Barry and Chris have been very strong 
supporters of community projects in Kenaston and both have 
spent many long hours as good volunteers. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
Barry was . . . The original brain child of Barry’s was Super 
Draft which has gone on to become the world’s largest hockey 
pool, Mr. Speaker, raising a great amount of funds for 
community projects in Kenaston and right throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So I’m very proud 
today to welcome Barry and Chris here to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 
there are 17 students here from the Western Christian College, 
accompanied by Harmony McMillan. And I just want to say 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

what a great addition the Western Christian College has been to 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Not only has it brought new life back to the college facility in 
the community, but a great group of students studying there. 
I’ve been at some of their events, their graduations, and I know 
they’re a group of young people who set a very high standard 
for themselves and for what they hope to do with their lives. So 
I’ll be meeting you later, and I want the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce some 
guests from my constituency, are Earl and Gail Priddle who 
have been very good supporters, worked hard in my campaign. 
And they have the privilege of having three daughters that also 
live in my constituency, all of whom have been co-opted and 
have been active supporters as well. 
 
So I welcome them and wish them well, as well as their 
children and grandchildren who are now approaching voting 
age as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

100 Years of Nursing on the Prairies 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the summer of 
2005, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, in collaboration with 
the United Nurses of Alberta, have been working on a nursing 
documentary. 
 
The documentary called 100 Years of Nursing on the Prairies: 
History of Change and Progress in Our Health Care Systems 
was developed in order to commemorate the centennial 
celebrations of both Saskatchewan and Alberta. The 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses will host a gala launch tonight 
at the Hotel Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organized nursing began very early in the last 
century in both Saskatchewan and Alberta. It seems only fitting 
to celebrate the centennial of each province as the centennial of 
Prairie nursing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the United 
Nurses of Alberta represent a combined total of 30,000 
members, including almost all the registered nurses in both 
provinces. It is important, Mr. Speaker, to provide such an 
integral portion of our Prairie population with a sense of history 
and a context for the important work that they do. 
 
A DVD [digital versatile disc] of the documentary will be 
available for purchase and a website has been created to 
accompany it. 

Mr. Speaker, as part of that history I would like to invite the 
Assembly to join me in congratulating SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] and UNA [United Nurses of Alberta] on the 
wonderful work they have done in developing 100 Years of 
Nursing on the Prairies, and I look forward to attending the 
gala launch tonight. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Dinner in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 
great pleasure that I rise this afternoon to make this member 
statement. 
 
This past Saturday, March 25, P.A. [Prince Albert] hosted a 
fabulous dinner for 400 guests. Mr. Speaker, you should have 
been there. The dinner was hosted by the Sask Party P.A. 
connection. It consists of Batoche, P.A. Carlton, P.A. 
Northcote, and Sask Rivers constituencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people came to hear our leader, the member 
from Swift Current. They came to hear about Sask Party’s 
positive plan for the future. They came to listen and they came 
to share their dreams for the future with a large group of 
like-minded people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the annual event has grown in the past three years 
from 100 people to 400. This is a fine example of how the 
people of Saskatchewan are viewing the Sask Party as a viable 
alternative to the present government. One of the first questions 
people ask is, when’s the next election, because we need a 
change in government. 
 
I would like all members to join me in congratulating the fine 
job that P.A. connection committee did in hosting such an 
excellent event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Pianist Wins International Recognition 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, every day in this House and 
in the media, we hear of the amazing accomplishments of 
Saskatchewan people. And more and more often we hear that 
we have some of the best competitors in the world. 
Saskatchewan has proven its international achievements in 
many different regards. These achievements become apparent 
when a TV camera crew follows your every move down the 
Champs Élysées in Paris. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what Thomas Yu from Saskatoon recently 
experienced after being recognized at the international level for 
his outstanding ability as a pianist. On February 26 Thomas 
won the 17th international piano competition for outstanding 
amateurs in Paris. This is an incredible accomplishment. The 
competition brings together 100 of the best amateur pianists 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

from 30 countries around the world. 
 
Of course winning a competition at this level takes dedication 
and hard work. Thomas still practises religiously despite the 
demands of working toward his master’s in periodontology. 
Since his win, Thomas has had offers to perform in Florence, 
Tokyo, Washington as well as two confirmed dates with the 
Paris orchestra and admits he will have to give serious thought 
on how to keep his life balanced. But for now he’s enjoying his 
hard-earned success. 
 
Thomas’s accomplishments at home and abroad are something 
that we can all be proud of here in Saskatchewan. I would ask 
all members to join me in congratulating Mr. Thomas Yu for 
winning his title at the international piano competition and for 
putting Saskatoon and Saskatchewan on the global musical 
map. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Championship 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Well well well, Mr. Speaker. Finally the signs 
of spring are upon us. The water is running down the streets, 
and it’s playoff time in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, the high school basketball association 
wrapped up basketball season with a very successful Hoopla. 
 
And as late as last Friday night, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert 
Mintos won the Saskatchewan provincial AAA midget hockey 
championship. Mr. Speaker, of almost 20 years of existence, 
this was the first time that the Mintos have won the 
championship. And I want to congratulate obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, the players, the coaches, and the parents of all these 
young men. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a connection to this young team, to this 
team in our family. Bobby Spigott from Outlook is a good 
friend of our family, and I can tell you a very solid defenceman 
with a great future in hockey, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you also 
that his parents, Barry and Sharon, have hardly missed a game, 
and that says a lot given the road conditions and the weather 
this last few weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other players of course on this team. Ten 
of them are from the city of Prince Albert and 12 from rural 
Saskatchewan, including Brendan Turner from my 
constituency. His home is in Tisdale. Dustin Tokarski, who is 
the top goalie in the league, is from Watson. Others include 
some from Martensville, Creighton, Watson, St. Brieux, 
Wadena, Humboldt, and Hoey, Mr. Speaker. As well, Tim 
Leonard and the coaches and the families and the billets and all 
the fans certainly are very excited about this event in Prince 
Albert. And I want to wish the Prince Albert Mintos a very 
great success in the western regional tournament to be held in 
Tisdale in April. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Govan Rink Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend the 
Govan rink committee held a very enjoyable and successful 
fundraiser. The meal was barbecued steak with all of the 
trimmings, but the dessert was provided by auction. More about 
that in just a few seconds. 
 
The program was filled with humour and there was four lucky 
couples that were showing their friends in Govan how well they 
knew, understood, and connected with their spouses as they 
played a game called the Oldly Weds. Once the Oldly Weds 
portion of the program ended without violence, Mr. Speaker, 
they moved to the dessert auction. And the desserts were a sight 
to make mouths water. Of course as the desserts were 
auctioned, the spouses of the very people that made the desserts 
had to bid the desserts up to an appropriate level and, Mr. 
Speaker, they raised nearly $3,000 for the Govan rink. 
 
The rink committee is chaired by Jason Danbrook. The 
committee members are Brad and Bonnie Hanmer, Jason and 
Glenda Danbrook, Sheavon Gales, Kevin and Sheryl Cardiff, 
and Steven and Melissa Trew. Mr. Speaker, congratulations 
goes to all of this young and exciting rink committee in Govan 
and congratulations to the nearly 100 people that participated in 
a great event in Govan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Clothing Drive for Louisiana Victims 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about a relief effort that is going on. The Knights of Columbus 
had recently travelled to Louisiana to do some volunteer work 
there and there they noticed that there is still . . . the victims 
there are still in need of many things. And one of the needs was 
clothing — huge amounts of clothing. So they’re organizing a 
clothing drive right now, and also the Sacred Heart parish in 
Davidson has joined into that effort, organizing a clothing drive 
right now. 
 
The response from the citizens of Davidson and surrounding 
area was tremendous. And just in the Davidson area alone a 
semi load of clothing was loaded for Louisiana and I think right 
now there’s at least four semi loads that have left Saskatoon 
from that area, heading towards Louisiana. It is this type of 
generosity that ensures that Saskatchewan remains the top 
province in Canada on a per capita basis for giving to others in 
need. The Knights of Columbus in Davidson has done a great 
deal of community service over the years for charities on a 
local, regional, and international basis. 
 
It is important to realize the work done by these volunteers in 
this community and communities across Saskatchewan. In rural 
Saskatchewan as our young people continue to leave into richer 
provinces, the work done by these dedicated volunteers are 
mostly older, retired folks. So I’d like to ask all the members of 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

this Assembly to join me congratulating the Knights of 
Columbus of Davidson for their superb effort to assist the 
victims of Hurricane Katrina. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Regina Neurosurgeon Named Citizen of the Year 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, March 
10 someone I know and admire, Dr. Krishna Kumar, was 
granted CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Regina’s 
Citizen of the Year Award for his outstanding work as a 
neurosurgeon and community leader. Kris arrived in Regina in 
1962, Mr. Speaker, where he intended to stay for only a year. It 
wasn’t long, however, before Saskatchewan and its people, he 
says, became special to him. He’s been practising in Regina 
ever since. 
 
Born in Jabalpur, India, Mr. Kumar graduated from the 
Mahatma Gandhi medical college in 1958. Before arriving in 
Regina he honed his knowledge of neurosurgery over a term of 
graduate studies in Halifax. Specializing in both Parkinson’s 
disease and the use of spinal implants as a means to control 
chronic pain have helped Kris Kumar assist thousands of 
patients throughout his illustrious 44-year career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he has earned the recognition of the global 
medical community as well as numerous medical awards and 
distinctions. In addition to his various professional 
accomplishments, Kris has also been a very active participant in 
his native culture. In fact he was a founding member of the 
south Saskatchewan Hindu temple here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Kumar’s advice for success has always been simple. And I 
quote: 
 

Work and work and work with honesty [and integrity] and 
dignity — and the rest will fall into place. 

 
I’d like to invite the members to join me in congratulating 
Krishna Kumar, the admirable recipient of CTV Regina’s 
Citizen of the Year Award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Funding for Avastin 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are joined 
today by a number of cancer patients and, just as importantly, 
the support groups of their friends and families in the west 
gallery. Members of the Assembly should be familiar with a 
couple of the names, Terry Rak and Bob Loeppky, that have 
gone public on this issue before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these men and their families have driven from 

across the province for one reason to this Assembly and for one 
reason only. They are here today to ask the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government why it refused to cover the 
cancer drug Avastin. This drug is considered to be the standard 
course of care for colorectal cancer. 
 
On behalf of these people that have driven here today and 
others that it affects in this province, Mr. Speaker, will the 
Minister of Health reverse his decision and fund the cancer drug 
Avastin? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite will know and those in the gallery 
and at home watching will know that, when the government 
announced its decision on March 9, that it was a very difficult 
decision for government to make and, Mr. Speaker, we 
acknowledge that it remains a difficult decision. 
 
The whole issue of cancer, the effect on individuals who are 
affected by the disease and on their families, Mr. Speaker, is 
difficult for them on a daily basis. Mr. Speaker, our hearts go 
out to all of those who are affected by this horrible disease. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, the government’s decision 
was based on science, affordability, and sustainability of the 
system. Mr. Speaker, since March 9 we have continued to 
monitor the circumstances in other provinces and across 
Canada, and at this point, Mr. Speaker, our decision must stand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this present NDP government 
holds a dubious distinction. This is the first time in the 
province’s history that the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has 
recommended funding for a drug and the government has 
refused it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the Colorectal Cancer Association of 
Canada, Avastin is considered the standard course of treatment 
for this type of cancer. This is not an experimental drug; it has 
been approved by Health Canada back in September ’05, six 
months ago. Will this minister admit that the government has 
made a mistake and fund the drug that has been recommended 
by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again the member opposite will know and those who have 
followed the government’s decision in this regard will know 
that the drug is not yet funded on a universal basis by any 
province throughout Canada. In fact many of the provinces are 
facing the same dilemma that the province of . . . in fact all of 
the provinces, Mr. Speaker, are facing the same dilemma that 
the Government of Saskatchewan is facing — that new cancer, 
new oncology drugs are coming into the system at 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

ever-increasing costs. Working with the cancer agency not only 
to assess the effectiveness of the drugs in dealing with the 
cancers to which they are attached, but also the affordability of 
the treatments, Mr. Speaker — these are decisions that we 
continue to monitor, we’ll continue to work with other 
provinces on, and we’ll continue to work with cancer patients 
and their families. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this government is sitting on 
$1 billion of extra revenue from oil and gas — $1 billion. 
Coverage for Avastin works out to $6.5 million annually. And 
yet members on that side of the House don’t think that they 
should spend money on this drug that will extend people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they think it should be spent in other ways. How 
about six and a half million dollars that they have spent on 
Minds Eye films only to give them another $600,000 to produce 
a Tommy Douglas film, Mr. Speaker? Will this government do 
the right thing and cover Avastin today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has received a commitment from 
this government, not just this year but consistently over the 
history of the agency. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the last year alone 
the dollars that have been increased to the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency equal 15 per cent of its budget year over year in the last 
year. 
 
On the new cancer drugs coming into the system, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has supported an increase to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency of 22 per cent per year in each of the last five 
years. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to support the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. We will continue to increase 
their ability to support the people of Saskatchewan who are 
facing this incredibly horrible disease. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
commitment extends to working with them on additional 
oncology drugs that are coming into the system. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we realize that governments 
must make difficult decisions. People in this province are 
wondering now with the government’s decision not to fund 
Avastin if that is precedent setting. People are wondering if 
they’re going to start to need to find private insurance to cover 
some of these drugs or make other arrangements such as selling 
their properties to cover such drugs. 
 
I ask the minister today, does it have to be all or nothing? 
Would the minister consider some sort of copayment 
arrangement to cover this medication? Will the minister 
consider some alternative policy so people do not have to do 
without the standard of care for this cancer? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And again I emphasize the difficulty with which this 
government had to make this decision. And, Mr. Speaker, I add 
it was very difficult personally to make this decision as well. In 
my own constituency, I am very active in the local cancer 
community and do a lot of fundraising within the community. 
Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a difficult decision for all of us. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, when the government was 
faced with the decision about moving forward on this drug and 
at the end of the day making the decision that we were not in a 
position at this time to approve funding for the drug, we did 
make a decision, Mr. Speaker, that we felt was the right 
decision. And that was to support those who had the ability to 
fund the drug themselves and make access to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency a reality for those people to ensure safe and 
secure administration of this IV [intravenous] drug. Mr. 
Speaker, that access is not universally available across this 
country. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that people who 
do have access to the drug have safe and secure administration 
of it. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the home of 
medicare. Tommy Douglas believed that a person’s ability to 
pay should not affect their access to health care. The 
government’s decision not to fund Avastin goes against the very 
core values of medicare. 
 
In their election platform in 2003, they go on to say, our 
commitment is to “. . . provide the best . . . health care in 
Canada.” Mr. Speaker, the best health care in Canada covers 
Avastin. Mr. Speaker, will this minister do the right thing and 
not force this province into two-tier health care which this 
decision has made? Will he do the right thing and either fund 
Avastin fully or look at some sort of copay agreement so that 
people that do not have the ability to pay can still access the 
drug? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And again I remind members opposite that the drug is not yet 
funded on a universal basis in any province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we are aware we have one 
of the most comprehensive drug coverage plans in Canada for 
cancer patients. The Cancer Advocacy Coalition report recently 
indicated that Saskatchewan ranks number four of ten 
provinces. Only three provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker, fund 
more cancer drugs than the province of Saskatchewan does. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re proud to say that the National Cancer 
Institute indicates that Saskatchewan has one of the lowest 
cancer death rates in the country. Mr. Speaker, that shows the 
commitment of the province to cancer patients and their 
families in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has said that 
Avastin is not covered because it doesn’t cure the problem. 
Well there are few cures for cancer. Mr. Speaker, he also goes 
on to say that it’s not cost-effective. Studies have indicated that 
Avastin can prolong a person’s life for up to six months. I 
wonder if the minister then can put in dollar figures on what he 
thinks cost-effective is for a month of life. In that context, Mr. 
Speaker, one would have to re-examine everything that we do 
in the health care system. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, people around the province that 
have or do not have the ability to pay for such a drug need it to 
continue on living. Will the minister revisit his decision and 
look at either fully funding or copay policies in the province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated at the outset, the government’s decision in this regard 
contained a clause indicating our interest in monitoring and 
reviewing the circumstances of this drug and other oncology 
drugs throughout Canada. We will continue to work with the 
other provinces in this regard. Mr. Speaker, our commitment to 
ensure that the spirit and intent of medicare is felt throughout 
this province and we continue to be a leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to clarify the original intent, I went back and 
reviewed the 1961 Throne Speech of then Premier Tommy 
Douglas on The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 
The premier at the time acknowledged the value of medicare in 
Saskatchewan but further acknowledged the need on 
prescription drugs to have a national program in place to 
support provinces like Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we would fully fund a 
national program, but this government has a responsibility. It 
can campaign around the province on this very election 
platform saying we’ll provide the best health care in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, the best health care. 
 
If British Columbia is covering on a case-by-case basis, why is 
this government not? They have campaigned saying they’ve got 
the best health care policies in Canada, and yet we see the 
government falling behind other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will he at least look at the BC [British Columbia] 
model and what they’re doing in BC because in this case 
they’re far ahead of us. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
yes indeed the province of Saskatchewan consults with the 
other provinces, in particular the Western provinces, on all 
developments in oncology drugs. 
 
We are certainly aware of what’s going on in the province of 
British Columbia. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite knows — and he should not exaggerate the 
circumstance there too much — British Columbia had a surplus 

in their cancer drug program this year. They have chosen to 
utilize that surplus to fund Avastin on a case-by-case basis. Mr. 
Speaker, that funding in British Columbia could indeed lapse at 
the end of this fiscal year. And, Mr. Speaker, the province of 
British Columbia, like other provinces in Western Canada, have 
not yet approved the funding of Avastin past the end of this 
fiscal year. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 
two-tiered health is alive and well in Saskatchewan under that 
minister. 
 
I understand that the government has no money to fund Avastin, 
but Executive Council has approved a payment of an additional 
$2 million to the Saskatchewan Health Information Network, 
SHIN. To the minister: why does SHIN need an additional $2 
million? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
just a week and a half time, the Minister of Finance will bring 
down a budget for the province of Saskatchewan. At that time, 
we will have an opportunity to discuss all of the impacts of 
spending within health care and across government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s keep in mind, as I indicated earlier, our 
commitment to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and 
Saskatchewan people remains very strong. Last year’s budget, 
Mr. Speaker, increased funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency by 15 per cent, and the drug plan under the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker, by 22 per cent. 
Our commitment to people and their families in these 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker, is intense. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
completely avoided the question. We have an OC [order in 
council] here from March 2006 that says $2 million more for 
SHIN. Why does SHIN need the $2 million? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health 
operates in a very complex national-interprovincial- 
intergovernmental environment. And, Mr. Speaker, managing 
the surgical care in Saskatchewan is part of our commitment 
under the national health protocol negotiated between premiers 
of the provinces and the ministers of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is currently leading the nation in 
terms of its Surgical Care Network and ability to monitor 
waiting times. Mr. Speaker, this is a significant commitment 
made to the other provinces and the federal government. And, 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to balance the needs of patients 
in the system with the ability of the system to meet the needs of 
those people. Mr. Speaker, there are expenses involved in 
things like that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this OC ends in four more days. The $2 million is to be spent 
this month, not in the future, Mr. Speaker. So why does SHIN 
need that money? How many of the health districts are actually 
using SHIN, and how many facilities are using it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer to 
that question is very simple indeed: it is all of them. And in fact 
all of the regions want us to improve our ability to do that. Mr. 
Speaker, being able to monitor people on waiting lists applies 
not only to the regions, but to the Saskatchewan cancer care 
agency as well. And, Mr. Speaker, this is an important part of 
reducing waiting lists in this province and across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to indicate that this government will 
continue to work with other provinces and our federal 
counterpart not only on a national pharmaceutical plan, but on a 
plan that will improve surgical care and reduce waiting lists for 
all of those in the system across our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
many of us read the story in the paper this weekend and saw 
pictures from a large farm auction near Stockholm in my 
constituency. Land and equipment in most cases went for fire 
sale prices. And, Mr. Speaker, with the number of sales in the 
province this spring, we’re expecting this story to be repeated 
over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so much hurt in rural Saskatchewan, and 
now the NDP government is adding to that hurt and adding 
stress to farm families. We understand that registered letters are 
being sent to crop insurance clients across Saskatchewan. These 
letters demand payment of all outstanding balances before 
Friday of this week. Failure to do so will result in cancellation 
of the 2006 contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are these letters being sent out to 
Saskatchewan farm families with such short notice? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, I’ll take that under 
advisement and get back to you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not satisfactory to 
the farmers that are contacting us. After Friday they’re without 
crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, and the predicament that they’re 
in, the last thing that they need is to farm without crop 
insurance. They cannot stand the risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the minister must be aware that these letters are going out. 
Mr. Speaker, the government is spending $7 on a registered 
letter telling a farmer that if he doesn’t respond and do 
something by March 31, you have no coverage. These are 
farmers that are already in financial trouble. The stress level is 
at all-time highs, and we have a minister that says, I will take it 
under advisement. That’s not good enough. These farmers need 
to know today that this government and that minister will 
extend that deadline by a couple of months and give them time 
to make arrangements to come up with this money. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re well aware of the difficulties that many farm families are 
facing. Mr. Speaker, we have been putting pressure on the 
federal government to come through with payments to provide 
initial support for farmers for seeding, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. 
Speaker, I have been very clear in terms of the kind of support 
that we have provided and the encouragement and the challenge 
that we will continue to make on the federal government to 
meet the needs of the people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At over $700 per capita, we’ve provided support for agriculture 
over this past year. Mr. Speaker, we know this important 
industry in this province needs support, Mr. Speaker. They need 
the support of our federal government in order to meet the deep 
needs that are caused by inequities in trade, low commodity 
prices, Mr. Speaker. And as far as the crop insurance question, I 
have said I will take that under advisement and get back to 
them. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we saw the kind of support this NDP government and 
that minister show farmers. In the past number of years we saw 
22 rural service centres close. We saw spot loss hail removed 
from crop insurance. We saw a 20 per cent reduction in rebate 
on bulk farm-fuel purchases, and the list goes on. We saw 
downloading in the past 10 to 15 years on the municipality 
which translates down on to farmers. We saw them download 
education tax on to farm land which also cost farmers many 
thousands and thousands of dollars a year. 
 
And when asked to do one thing that really wouldn’t cost them 
money — give an extension to the deadline on crop insurance 
and help a farm family out there — the minister doesn’t step 
forward and do that. Mr. Speaker, it’s an easy request for the 
minister to respond to. Will he extend that deadline today and 
help Saskatchewan farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a new federal government that has promised 
to give support to farmers in this country — promised. These 
folks across the way backed them heavily, Mr. Speaker. And 
Mr. Speaker, when they come to this province, when they speak 
internationally, what do they say? What do they say, Mr. 
Speaker? Well we don’t have authority to do it. We just can’t 
do it, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we hear back from them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough in a world where 
international pressures, trade issues are taking the legs out from 
under our farmers. We need it. We need it now for the farmers 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government — this provincial NDP government — has been 
there for the farmers in this province: on BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy], Mr. Speaker, on education 
property tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have been there every year, on every 
program that has come forward providing the support that 
farmers have asked for. We’ll be there in the future too, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, before the Minister of 
Agriculture completely blows a gasket, I’d like to inform him 
that this is not the federal government’s fault. It’s not the 
federal government’s responsibility. It’s his responsibility and 
that NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, why is this NDP government 
so against helping farm families? It’s the backbone of this 
province. It’s an economy driver out there. And this 
government doesn’t seem to get it. 
 
For 14 years, we’ve been downloaded on by this NDP 
government, and farm families can’t take much more. They’re 
at the end of their rope. We know of farmers that are scared to 
even answer the phone any more because it’s somebody 
wanting money, trying to collect a bill. The last people they 
expect to be on the other end of that call or the other end of that 
$7 registered letter is their own government — their own NDP 
government — from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister and that government can help farm 
families, and it’s time to do it now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly 
during that rant, it became evident that the member opposite 

really does not have a handle on the crop insurance program. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tripartite program — provincial 
government, federal government, and farmers, all involved. 
There are rules that are established by the federal and provincial 
governments, Mr. Speaker, across this country. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those rules must be followed. I have assured them that 
I will take this under advisement. I will follow up immediately 
and find out what the issues are and whether we are constricted 
by federal-provincial rules. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order. 
Minister of Ag. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this program has paid out significant dollars over 
the last few years — over $2 billion, Mr. Speaker — to provide 
substantial support to the farmers of this province. It is a good 
program, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to build it. We will 
continue to support it. And, Mr. Speaker, I will get back to 
those members opposite with the full information. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 30 — The Film 
and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 30, The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2006. It’s very timely to be discussing these 
types of issues, Mr. Speaker. As we know, with the advent of 
Internet, children and all people can have access to all sorts of 
unseemly types of productions. And we certainly need to look 
at those types of items as well as what’s being sold in video 
stores and as far as video games and videos — as far as their 
violent content — and other areas that parents and society need 
to be concerned about. 
 
It’s paramount, Mr. Speaker, that we in society protect our 
children from inappropriate types of videos and information 
that can be downloaded from the Internet. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the number one safeguard in this whole area has to be the 
parents. I know parents are very concerned about the types of 
information and video games and pornography and those types 
of things that the young people can get their hands on through 
both rented video games, computer games, videos that they rent 
at stores, and also things that can be downloaded from the 
Internet. But it’s just not only . . . Parents can only do so much, 
and I know parents do the best they can. But certainly as a 
society . . . And this government has to take safeguards in order 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

to address those concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know of young people that can walk into video 
stores and buy computer games that are of a violent nature, and 
it’s interesting to note that no ID [identification] is asked for. 
There’s stickers and marks on the games which are rated for a 
certain age of child, but it seems that they’re rarely enforced. 
And so I think it’s a step in the right direction to be looking at 
those types of classifications. 
 
And of course it’s one thing to have things classified; it’s 
certainly another to enforce those classifications. And I think 
there needs to be really a learning process and an educational 
process with the stores and small businesses that sell and rent 
videos and sell computer games to people, not only young 
people. And so I think it has to go hand in hand with the 
reclassification. The educational portion is also very, very 
important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about compliance to the ESRB 
[Entertainment Software Rating Board] ratings. And he goes on 
to say: 
 

As a result it will be an offence to sell, rent or exhibit 
video computer games classified as mature to a person 
under the age of 17, and sell, rent or exhibit a video or 
computer game classified as adults only to a person under 
the age of 18. 

 
And we certainly will want to speak to all the stakeholders 
involved, Mr. Speaker, because there’s a number of issues. First 
the ages that are listed here, are they the right ages that . . . is 
that the right threshold of young people that will be allowed or 
not allowed to buy certain video games or rent certain videos? 
That certainly is an issue. And again what procedures and 
policies are going to be put in place at the level of the store, of 
the video game renter, and also the computer stores that are 
selling these other games, and to make sure that those types of 
issues are addressed to protect our young people from really 
material that is of a more mature nature. 
 
It’s interesting to note as well, Mr. Speaker, is there’s been 
studies done on what violent videos . . . what kind of an effect 
they have on young people. And I believe that type of 
information needs to be brought forward to get everyone — the 
legislators and the public — a better understanding of the effect 
violent videos and those types of games have on young people. 
And that’s why I speak of, is the classification and the certain 
ages appropriate? Should they be lower? And those are types of 
areas that need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
It’s interesting to note that there has not been an amendment, I 
believe, to this Act since 1985, and that certainly has been a 
long, long time, given the nature and the change and 
advancements in technology. That’s quite frankly an 
unacceptable time to lapse before we in the legislature deal with 
this type of an amendment. 
 
As we know, the computer industry and the video industry has 
really exploded, quite frankly, and I understand it generates 
about $1,890 million in total revenue. So this is certainly an 

industry that is growing and that also will put pressure on 
retailers to sell more and more. And it certainly is very 
necessary to have the proper classifications to address these 
issues and what is allowable to sell to young people or rent to 
young people and what is not. Mr. Speaker, I certainly will 
want to speak to the stakeholders involved and get a better 
handle on what is being asked for and what should be in the 
Act. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, that also the penalties for 
contravention of the Act are to be updated. And I understand 
failure to comply with the Act is guilty of an offence and liable 
for a first offence a fine not exceeding $5,000 or imprisonment 
not exceeding six months; for a corporation, a fine not 
exceeding $100,000. And the second offence either both of a 
fine not exceeding $10,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one 
year; for a corporation, a fine not exceeding $500,000. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of offences that are also part 
of the Bill that are of very significant nature. The Act, I 
understand, establishes a new regulation-making authority to 
the Lieutenant Governor that includes: setting out the classes of 
video games not included in the definition of video game; 
setting out the classification scheme to be used for classifying 
films, including establishing different classifications for 
different classes of films; adopting by reference a classification 
scheme established by another person or body subject to 
changes that the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers 
appropriate; also prescribing the process to be followed in 
making appeals pursuant to the renting of films; and for the 
purpose of classifying video games, prescribing criteria to be 
followed by the person or body in classifying video games. 
 
So there’s a number of areas that need to be looked into. 
There’s a number of people who we would like to speak to. And 
so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 30 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 31 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise to speak to Bill No. 31 this afternoon, An Act to 
amend certain Statutes and regulations with respect to 
Accounting Professions. 
 
As explained by the minister, the intent of the legislation is to 
recognize three accounting designations within our province — 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

Certified General Accountants’ Association, the Society of 
Management Accountants of Saskatchewan, and the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan — and to recognize 
that members of these three recognized accounting professions 
may perform the duties imposed by this legislation. 
 
The Bill is intended to complete the task of including certified 
general accountants and certified management accountants with 
chartered accountants when referring to this profession and in 
particular to recognize that all of these designations would 
qualify to perform the duties of a professional accountant. 
 
The minister has stated that the three agencies have been 
consulted and are supportive of this legislation. My 
understanding that in years gone by, the designation of 
chartered accountant was generally associated with all of the 
aspects of accounting but recognized as the experts, if you 
please, in the auditing function. Their training that led to 
achieving their specific designation involved more 
concentration on this aspect of accounting than did the CGA 
[certified general accountant] program or the CMA [certified 
management accountant] program. And likewise, the certified 
management accountant program concentrated more on 
management areas of accounting and less on the auditing 
aspects. 
 
I note in this Bill that, in the changes in the wording, the new 
wording refers to “a member in good standing of a recognized 
accounting profession that is regulated by an Act.” This restricts 
the more restrictive, a chartered accountant, as was in the 
previous Act. 
 
I also note in this same section of the Act in describing other 
designations that are listed include a lawyer, an architect, an 
engineer. And I would wonder why the word accountant could 
not be used to simplify this profession. Obviously in referring to 
a lawyer, an architect, an engineer, there is the implications that 
these designations infer membership in good standing of a 
recognized profession that is regulated by an Act. 
 
In most cases, this legislation is including more professionals 
that could perform these tasks. However in section 37 I note, 
Mr. Speaker, that the wording originally was: 
 

Clause 37(a) of The Mutual Medical and Hospital 
Benefit Associations Act is amended by striking out 
“member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan or any other accountant satisfactory to the 
registrar” and substituting [now] “member in good 
standing of a recognized accounting profession that is 
regulated by an Act”. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the intent appeared to be to include certified 
general accountants and certified management accountants 
whenever accounting work is to be done, and yet this part 
specifically includes someone who was referred to as “. . . any 
other accountant satisfactory to the registrar.” Now I would 
assume if the person was satisfactory to the registrar, then they 
were in a position to perform those duties. 
 
This proposed legislation may accomplish its intended purpose 
to recognize the designation of chartered accountants, but also 
the designation of CGAs and management accountants, as all 

having the qualifications of a professional accountant and 
therefore in a position to perform the duties in prior legislation 
limited to chartered accountants originally. 
 
As we intend to study this proposed legislation further with 
those involved, including the three recognized accounting 
associations, I would at this time move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford that the debate on second reading of Bill 31 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 32 — The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy today to be able to speak to this Bill, this particular Bill, 
Bill No. 32, which involves a lot of the segments and issues 
surrounding victims of crime and compensation and so on and 
so forth. It is obviously an amendment to The Victims of Crime 
Act that was passed in 1995 in this very Assembly. 
 
And it carries with it some changes into the Act, Mr. Speaker, 
that I think are important, that could have been perhaps dealt 
with at an earlier time. However, they weren’t for one reason or 
another. I can’t speak to that because my time in this legislature 
is short and relatively short compared to some others. 
 
And certainly, you know, I guess if you look at the 
government’s history, this particular government’s history, 
NDP government’s history dealing with issues of crime and 
violence and policing in our society, we know that the 
government obviously has fallen well short of — well short — 
of what we think could have and should have taken place many, 
many years ago. But not only just us, Mr. Speaker, when we 
talk about violent crime and victims thereof, but the people of 
the province themselves are saying those exact same things. 
They are saying that, you know, we are concerned about the 
safety and the well-being of our property and our personal 
selves on a daily basis. 
 
The reason I want to open my words by speaking about this, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’re so related, so directly related to 
what happens after a crime takes place. And that’s sort of where 
maybe the other half of the story takes place. The lead-up to the 
crime and the crime itself is something sort of different and 
should be dealt with differently than what takes place after a 
conviction or after it’s realized that there are victims of any 
particular crime. And really, you know, you look at . . . there’s 
lots of, lots of different areas of crime that are certainly serious, 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

but some more serious and some more personally devastating 
than others. And sort of that’s what I wanted to talk about 
today. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, you know, in my travels around the 
province, in my time in politics both federally and provincially 
over the past 13 or 14 years, I’ve had the opportunity to speak 
to a lot of people, a lot of people about how they feel about the 
security and the safety that they feel in their own homes and in 
their own communities. And, Mr. Speaker, every public 
meeting that I think I’ve ever held, I always ask for a show of 
hands as to if you feel comfortable within your own home or 
your community. It’s amazing. It’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, the 
number of people who say they are not comfortable. 
 
And it really doesn’t, it really doesn’t seem to matter too much 
the age group or the demographics of any particular group that I 
talk to. Certainly I see it more often in groups of seniors or 
elderly because they are probably less able to defend 
themselves in cases of assault, robbery, break-ins, those kinds 
of things. But it really follows everywhere. 
 
You see now, Mr. Speaker, in what we might consider 
upper-middle-class neighbourhoods of Saskatoon or Regina and 
other cities in the province where people will say that very same 
thing, that they’re very concerned about their safety. And it’s 
their own safety obviously plus their children’s when they go to 
school and they’re subjected to, you know, violence within in 
the school systems or subjected to drug and alcohol abuse to a 
much higher degree — gang violence obviously in some areas 
— than we were before. And so that leads up to, that leads up 
to, you know, people of all demographic areas being truly 
concerned with their health and welfare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill particularly deals with the victims of that 
kind of activity. And it also deals with the ways that perhaps the 
society, the government, the taxpayer . . . call it what you will. 
I’m talking about the same group of people of course, how they 
will compensate people who have fallen victim to crime. And 
that’s where as I said before, Mr. Speaker, that’s sort of a clear 
line has been drawn, if you will, between what happens as you 
lead up to the crime and the crime itself and then what happens 
after. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Probably some of us, maybe most of us, maybe all of us are 
familiar with cases in the past where . . . They’re highly 
publicized cases, and people come before the courts of the 
province or the courts of the land during a trial when a person is 
accused of a crime and they have been victimized. And it might 
have been that they were victimized physically. It could be that 
they were victimized . . . their property was victimized. Their 
car may have been stolen. Their house may have been broken 
into. There are a whole host of ranges and levels of that sort of 
activity, Mr. Speaker. And I could go on and on and on at great 
length about this very subject. However I won’t because I know 
that time is of the essence in this legislature. But there are a few 
things that I really feel are very important to say and I’d like to 
talk about them today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are clear lines between federal 
and provincial responsibilities when it comes to victims of 

crime . . . [inaudible] . . . In my former political life, I was very 
involved in working with victims of crime with parole, with the 
correctional facilities at the federal level as a Member of 
Parliament when I served for seven years, two terms in the 
House of Commons. And I got really interested and involved in 
those kinds of things. 
 
And when I was first elected to this legislature almost three 
years ago now, Mr. Speaker, that was my critic duty as well . . . 
was to look after being the critic for Corrections and Public 
Safety in the provincial legislature. And I actually had the 
opportunity to spend some time with the member for Greystone, 
and I appreciated the openness that he afforded me when we 
talked about those kinds of issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I understand that there is certainly a clear delineation 
between federal and provincial. But I just want to touch on a 
couple of cases that were before Canadians. It didn’t matter 
whether you were a resident of Saskatchewan or a resident of 
Newfoundland or any place in Canada; they were really high 
profile public-type cases that we all became aware of. 
 
And the one that I want to speak about first, Mr. Speaker, is the 
murder of Constable Brian King just north of Saskatoon. It’s a 
good number of years ago of course. It’s a Saskatchewan case; 
it has obviously Saskatchewan people involved. But it became a 
major, a major case that was sort of groundbreaking right across 
the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that particular case I remember very well. We held public 
meetings on that case. And that was one of my first kind of 
forays into victims of violence, victim of violent crime, because 
I had the opportunity to meet and speak at great lengths with 
Mrs. Brian King . Of course this was a few years later, after the 
fact of course. But the thing that amazed me, Mr. Speaker, that 
truly, truly amazed me — and I guess in retrospect I shouldn’t 
have been so shocked but I was — as to how serious that impact 
was on Mrs. King and her family years after the crime. 
 
And I’m going to say some dates. I think that that murder took 
place in the late ’70s just north of Saskatoon. And the time 
period I’m talking about was the ’90s, so that’s a good number 
of years later. But, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. King’s . . . well you had 
to be there to really appreciate how she felt and how her entire 
family felt a good number of years after that. 
 
I had also had the experience, Mr. Speaker, of meeting the 
actual police officer from the Saskatoon Police department who 
made the arrest on those two individuals that were charged and 
convicted of that murder at that time. You know, you would 
think that police officers deal with those kinds of things every 
day in their career and so they wouldn’t get jaded by that. I was 
impressed in a bad way, in a negative way, negatively 
impressed at how much impact that simple — if you want to 
call it that — arrest had on that police officer from Saskatoon 
. . . is something that deeply disturbed him, that particular 
murder of a fellow police officer. 
 
And to make a longer story somewhat shorter, we spent a lot of 
time with that group of people — the police officer, Mrs. Brian 
King, her family — and the big impression that I got coming 
out of that was how much they felt that they were not properly 
dealt with. 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

We got started on that case, Mr. Speaker, because we were 
fighting the removal of section 747 of the Criminal Code which 
was called the faint hope clause. And again I know that’s 
federal, Mr. Speaker, and a federal responsibility but directly 
tied to this case in Saskatchewan. It allowed people who are 
convicted of murders to apply for early parole prior to that 
25-year minimum that should have been put on first-degree 
murder cases. That’s how we got involved in this case. And I 
went to the courts during that particular 747 hearing, and again 
the negative impression that I got from all of that case, that 
particular case, was how little the victims of that crime were 
listened to. 
 
Yes, they were allowed to make a statement before the courts to 
talk about what their lives were like having lost a loved one 
because of violent crime. Yes, they were allowed, and I’m not 
going to stand here and say they weren’t. But I felt, Mr. 
Speaker, that the courts of the land didn’t do justice to those 
kinds of heavily emotional impact statements that the victims 
give at parole hearings or those kinds of events, Mr. Speaker. 
And that was the biggest concern I had. 
 
We aren’t talking even about financial compensation at this 
point in time. We’re talking about emotional problems with 
having a convicted murderer of your loved one allowed to be 
released back into public without the courts or society truly 
listening to and hearing how you feel about them. And that’s 
sort of what we’re talking about in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I 
know that that’s maybe not the crux of the Bill or the most 
important part of this Bill, but it’s certainly a factor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have spent some time over the past few 
years as an auxiliary RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
constable. Mr. Speaker, I took my training in Dundurn . I was 
attached to the Hanley detachment of the RCMP and served 
with them for a number of years. And, Mr. Speaker, for those 
that don’t know, an auxiliary police officer really is a sworn-in 
peace officer. He or she has the same powers of arrest as a 
regular member of the RCMP or any other police force that he 
or she happens to be attached to. 
 
It just so happened that I was attached to the RCMP in Hanley. 
And what we do basically as auxiliary officers is we’re a second 
pair of eyes in the car. Many times of course now police are 
single. They travel by themselves. They don’t have a partner. 
And in rural Saskatchewan at great distances, it is really 
difficult for one member — especially if he or she gets into 
physical trouble — to protect themselves. And that’s why this 
auxiliary program was born. It’s a good, strong program, Mr. 
Speaker, and I fully support it. Most of the police officers that I 
talk to support that program as well. 
 
But in my time serving as an auxiliary member, we had the 
opportunity to go to a good number of calls. Obviously we’re 
busy. You know, police officers are busy whether they operate 
in Saskatoon or rural Saskatchewan or any other city. It’s just 
the nature of the business. 
 
Again I could say, I could say at this point, Mr. Speaker, throw 
in as an aside that the government has not lived up to its 
promise now — for how many years, six or seven years? — to 
hire 200 new police officers. I could say that. Well what the 
heck, I will say it. In fact I have said it. 

And that’s part of this whole big issue . . . is that when you get 
out there as a police officer and you are short-staffed to start 
with and you go to a call where . . . let’s say it’s a victim of 
property crime which might be considered somewhat lesser 
importance than a victim of violent crime. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you go to one of these places. Let’s say . . . 
I’ll use for instance a case where a farmhouse has been broken 
into when the couple was away. And I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, and anybody who’s had a break-in occur in their own 
house or their own property, they have a feeling of being 
violated. You know, your house doesn’t feel the same for a long 
time because somebody that they didn’t know went into their 
house without their permission, and they may have stole 
something. They may not have. But the fact remains that they 
were victims. 
 
And one of the things that I’ve found as an auxiliary officer 
with the RCMP was that you didn’t get a lot of time to spend 
with these people to try to make them feel somewhat better 
about the situation, if you might call it that, at that end of it, Mr. 
Speaker, because, you know, you just didn’t have the time to 
get in there and to do those kinds of things and, you know, try 
to make the victims feel better about living in their house or on 
their property after they had been broken into or something 
stolen. 
 
You can then take that to the next level where you want to talk 
about being a victim of physical crime. Certainly there’s been 
lots of high-profile cases, and I could again speak at great 
length about them, Mr. Speaker. I mean there’s so many, many 
high-profile cases — high-profile cases certainly in 
Saskatchewan and right across the country. Every time we turn 
on our TVs or we turn on or read our newspapers, we see more 
evidence of those kinds of crimes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know when you talk about being a victim of 
crime . . . and as I said, we’ll go now and talk about being a 
victim of some sort of physical violence. It could be a sexual 
case. It could be, you know, an assault. It could be a break and 
enter. It could be an armed robbery. It could be any number of 
levels of physical violence, Mr. Speaker. And it could be, you 
know as I said, sexual cases, assaults, so on and so forth. 
 
And each one is individual. Each one is an individual case. 
Each one will have, the victims thereof will have a different 
level of hurt, if you want to call it that. Some people bounce 
back pretty quickly from being a victim of violent crime. Others 
take much longer and still others take forever to get past those 
kinds of things. And when you get . . . And that’s where I think 
our system falls down is that we need to spend more time 
dealing with, on an individual level, those kinds of victims of 
crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know the Bill, you look at the Bill . . . and I 
haven’t read it in its entirety. I have looked at it briefly and I 
have been briefed by the member for Saskatoon Southeast who 
is the critic, Justice critic for our party, and I see some things 
that deal with victims of crime in it. But I see some things that 
aren’t there. In other words by their absence I become 
concerned that maybe this government is not as concerned 
about victims of crime as they would like us to believe. 
 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

I know in the Bill it talks about . . . A victim may apply for 
some sort of compensation or restitution from the courts. And 
of course as I said, every victim of crime is going to deal with 
their loss or their hurt in a different way. 
 
I also know that, Mr. Speaker, that in some places . . . And 
again we’re talking about property crime. Some places like the 
island of St. Thomas for instance — and I’m not suggesting for 
even a second that we want to be like the island of St. Thomas, 
but just for your example — on the island of St. Thomas, if you 
have . . . if a young person for instance is found guilty, tried, 
sentenced, accused, and convicted of a property crime and 
under their law they are required to repay the victim of that 
crime. In other words, they stole your ’67 Mustang and wrecked 
it; they would be responsible to pay for it back to the victim of 
crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not just . . . Lots of people would say that’s 
a pretty good . . . that’s not a bad law. But here’s the kicker on 
that. The kicker on that is that if that young person, let’s say it’s 
a young offender, cannot afford to pay for that ’67 Mustang, 
then it becomes his or her guardian’s or parent’s responsibility. 
In other words if my child stole that particular automobile and 
couldn’t pay restitution to the victim, I would then become 
responsible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that that’s where we want to 
maybe go in Canada or in Saskatchewan. But I can tell you, I 
can tell you from talking to people and studying that system that 
it certainly has dropped the level, the rate of property crime on 
that particular island. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they have a clause in 
their Criminal Code in St. Thomas — I’m sure you’ll be 
interested to hear this — is that if in fact your child does not go 
to jail, you as the parents could go to jail because you’re 
responsible for your child. Mr. Speaker, I again, I want to make 
sure that we’re not saying we have to go there. I’m not 
advocating that. I’m just giving you an illustration as to what 
kinds of things happen in other jurisdictions. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And so it’s important that we talk about all the issues and all the 
levels because what I’ve found in my time in politics is there’s 
sort of like a pendulum. And one time, you know, the pendulum 
will be on the side of prevention, and then the pendulum will 
swing around to the side of punishment. And someplace in the 
middle is where the balance ought to be, Mr. Speaker, and 
oftentimes we as societies do not have that good balance. 
 
And that certainly follows with this particular Bill on the 
violent victims of crime Act. And I wanted to make sure that I 
illustrated those to this legislature today because I think they’re 
important in this debate, I think they’re factors in this debate. 
And when we speak about this Bill at a later date, I think we 
ought to talk about some things like this. 
 
We ought to talk about things that, you know, like dealing with 
time periods — the time period that you would be allowed to 
apply for compensation or restitution from a crime that has been 
committed against you. Again, and here’s a factor, Mr. Speaker, 
that we all know of course that the federal Criminal Code and 
what we . . . Our provincial correctional facilities deal with 
different sentences and they deal with different areas of parole 

and so on and so forth. 
 
Of course if you’re convicted of a crime and sent to a provincial 
correctional facility, it will be two years less a day at the very 
most. So you know that in that time period the person who 
committed that crime against you, and it could be — again it 
could be a property crime or some other type of crime — you 
know that person is going to be released within two years less a 
day. That’s the most you could keep them unless of course they 
commit another crime while they’re in jail, or while they . . . If 
they’re found guilty of another crime while they’re in jail then 
of course they could, the length could be added to that sentence. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, you know the reason I say that, my point 
being here is that if you’re a victim of crime and it’s a crime 
that’s what we might call a crime that’s a heinous crime against 
person or property, and that particular victim is having a 
difficult time handling that, then two years becomes a very 
short time. Two years goes by pretty quick if you’re a victim of 
crime and you have been violated for some reason, and you 
know that that person is out in two years. And we don’t go far 
enough in lots of ways in dealing with those personal, particular 
issues because they are very important, and they are very, very, 
very serious. 
 
This Bill 32, it talks about secondary victims as well. And of 
course those would be, you know, if the victim is an adult, the 
spouse, or child of the adult victim could be what you might 
call a secondary victim. And they need to have . . . And again I 
want to refer back to this Brian King case — because that’s 
where this section of this Bill really becomes clear to me and 
kind of jumps out at me — because when you speak to Mrs. 
King you would of course know in a very short time how 
grievously her fear and her loss and her life has been destroyed. 
There is no question. You need only to sit with her for a minute 
to know that that is the case. 
 
But if you talk about her children now, her children that were 
Brian and her children, and they would then be called, they 
would be secondary victims of that particular crime. And you 
have to only talk to them for a short time, Mr. Speaker, to 
realize how much their life has been impacted by the loss of 
their father. Now these children obviously were pretty young 
when they lost their father. And we haven’t put a mechanism in 
place where their voices or their hurt could be heard, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That could be done in a Bill like this. It’s not been done in the 
federal Criminal Code, I know that. They have taken some steps 
to address victims of crime in the federal Criminal Code as 
well, Mr. Speaker, but we could do that in the province. We 
could do that on our own. We could say, yes okay we 
understand, you know, that this crime has been committed. It’s 
a heinous physical crime — it could be murder, it could be 
assault, it could be rape. It could be a secondary victim such as 
a child of a person that’s been sexually assaulted. It could be. It 
could be a spouse. It could be, you know, those sort of 
short-arm’s-length people that really become directly involved 
in these crimes. 
 
And that’s where we could, as a province, we could in this Bill, 
for instance if the government of the day, the NDP government, 
had the courage to step forward and say, we’re going to take 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

this a step further, Mr. Speaker, and talk about some of these 
very serious blanks or things that are missing in the federal 
Criminal Code but also the provincial statutes. 
 
And that’s why I really wanted to talk, Mr. Speaker, about the 
connections between those kinds of crimes — the federal versus 
provincial. There’s another one that I really think is important 
too — and again this one didn’t happen in Saskatchewan but 
there is a Saskatchewan connection — and that’s the case of 
Clifford Olson, Mr. Speaker. Clifford Olson is a well-known 
name in Canada, Canada-wide. 
 
And Clifford Olson, the connection of course with 
Saskatchewan is that he is incarcerated in the Saskatchewan 
federal penitentiary in Prince Albert. He has been for quite 
some time. But the point I’m trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is 
that there are still many, many, many victims of that crime who 
have many years later, certainly still are very concerned about 
their own safety and about the safety of people in general. 
 
Another example that I’d like to give, Mr. Speaker, that I think 
is important here are the victims of crime in Saskatchewan who 
are children, the segment of society who are least able to protect 
themselves. And that could be a property crime, Mr. Speaker, or 
it could be a physical crime against children. And, Mr. Speaker, 
to be honest with you I really don’t have that much time, I don’t 
have much time for people who commit crimes against 
children. I just don’t. 
 
And yet we in our society today, we allow people who have 
been convicted of pretty serious crimes to be released back into 
our streets without the public, without the victims — without 
even the victims, Mr. Speaker, — of that crime being notified 
that the perpetrator of that crime against them is free. 
 
And I don’t have much time for that, Mr. Speaker, because as I 
said, young children — the weakest, the youngest, the most 
vulnerable people — in our society are being left behind, Mr. 
Speaker, by this government. They’re being left behind because 
their voices are not heard. 
 
And that’s where this secondary victim of crime section of this 
Bill is so important. Because obviously sometimes a young 
person, a young person could be even at . . . so young in age 
that they couldn’t speak for themselves; they couldn’t speak on 
their own behalf. So that’s why this secondary victims of crime 
is critical because that would allow then a sibling, a parent, or a 
guardian to speak on their behalf. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that you’re a father and many of us are 
parents in this legislature. And when you see hurt in our 
youngest people, our children — it might have been something 
that happened to them at school or on the playground, and it 
might have been a very innocent thing that’s certainly of not 
much consequence — but when that young child comes home 
from school or from play and they tell you their feelings, as a 
parent you know your first reaction many times is that you want 
to stand up for your child, that you want to be able to go to a 
forum that would allow you to speak on your child’s behalf. 
 
Now sometimes, Mr. Speaker, I will admit that children will 
maybe come home with the story that’s not the complete story. 
And one should do some investigating prior to that of course. 

But the point is that there are times . . . And again I want to 
relate another Saskatchewan crime to you, Mr. Speaker, or I . . . 
again it was an incident that happened in Martensville a number 
of years ago. Members of this House will no doubt be very well 
aware of that Martensville case. And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t 
matter where you sit on either side of that case, whether you 
truly believe there was something criminal going on or whether 
you don’t believe it. It doesn’t matter. The point is, my point 
being on this particular instance, this example is that there was 
concern. There was concern amongst parents. There was 
concern amongst community. And there was concern amongst 
society about this particular instance. 
 
There was also concern, Mr. Speaker, on the law enforcement 
side of it obviously. But the victims . . . and I’ve spoken with 
the victims if you want . . . the people named, the parents and 
children that were involved in this case. And they didn’t feel 
that they got the complete opportunity to really have their voice 
heard at the time that those things were happening and at the 
time that those cases were taking place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know I’ve mentioned quite a few 
examples today that, you know, most people are certainly aware 
of and have come to be familiar with over the last good number 
of years. And you know that, that having said what I have said 
today, that I support the idea of a victims of crime Act. I don’t 
think there’s any question. I don’t think there’s any . . . There’s 
not a member in this House who would not support the idea or 
the theory of a victims of crime Act. 
 
But you have to, I think you have to lay out in clearer form, Mr. 
Speaker, what those responsibilities are by . . . on the side of the 
justice system or on the side of the government of the day. And 
again it is the NDP at this time but hopefully not for very long. 
And I’m pretty sure it won’t be for very long because I think the 
people of the province are going to give us a chance to be able 
to listen to victims of crime from that side of the House. 
 
But my point again is that I think we need to be very clear when 
we lay out the mandate of this government, of any government 
and how we’re going to deal with the victim of crime in the 
future. We need to be clearer on levels of compensation. We 
need, you know, we need to talk about the restitution of cases 
and the orders given for restitution and how much it’s going to 
be and where it’s going to come from and who’s responsible for 
restitution, where it’s going to go to if it’s a secondary victim. If 
it’s a child that was the victim, where does that restitution go 
to? Does it go to a trust fund for that child? Are the parents able 
to use it for some other financial means? Those are things that I 
don’t think this Act deals with and I think we need to be much 
clearer on that. 
 
The other side of it, Mr. Speaker — and this might be the most 
important part, and I talked briefly about it a few minutes ago 
— is that I think we ought to expand the responsibility of the 
government and not necessarily even in the area of restitution or 
compensation. But we need to expand and look further at who 
we listen to and how we listen to the victims, and that we ought 
to treat every one on its own individual basis and we ought to 
treat every case separately because every case is different. It 
could be as I said a man; it could be a woman. It could be a 
child. It could be somebody who deals with what’s happened to 
them in various ways. 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

And that’s why it’s important that we allow the people that are 
good at these things to take the ball and carry the ball in these 
cases. It could psychologists that are needed. It could be 
teachers. It could be parents. It could be a group. I know that 
First Nations people have healing circles. And that’s a sort of an 
example of things that work well. That’s a First Nations 
custom, and it’s a custom that has been gone on for many, many 
years and should be continued. 
 
There are other ways to make sure that people who are not First 
Nations people have that same kind of access to the same kind 
of rebuilding of their lives after they have become a victim of 
crime. And that’s why we need to clearly lay out and enunciate 
exactly what we want to do and how we want to handle those 
kinds of issues when it comes to victims of crime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Money is part of it. The compensation is certainly important in 
property crime and must be dealt with, but it’s only part of it. 
And the other part deals with people. And I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think the government is sorely lacking when it 
comes to dealing with people. They claim to be, they claim to 
be and they have claimed to be the defenders of human right 
and good, and they’ve claimed to be the party of the people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what I hear out in the country. 
The people of this province feel generally very much left behind 
by this government when it comes to dealing with these kinds 
of issues. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion then I guess, you know there are 
things that I would support in this Bill, and we may end up 
supporting the Bill, Mr. Speaker. But the government has a 
great opportunity here in this Bill. The government has a great 
opportunity in this Bill to fix some things, to help some people, 
to really take a step forward to show the people of the province 
that they’re concerned about victims of crime. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And they could go two ways on this. They could either say, 
well we’re going to listen to the opposition; we’re going to 
work with the opposition; we’re going to fix some of the 
problems. Or they could say, no we’re just going to leave the 
Bill the way it is, and carry on and keep their head in the sand 
and not to worry about it. 
 
But, Madam Speaker — as I see now, you’re in the Chair — if 
you haven’t heard anything, I maybe could start over again. But 
having said that, having said that, I won’t repeat it, Madam 
Speaker, because I know that my time is certainly getting short 
today. 
 
But the government has the opportunity in this Bill to really 
make a difference. The court of public opinion is going to 
decide whether they’ve taken that opportunity to make a 
difference. Because, Madam Speaker, until you look into the 
eyes of a victim of crime . . . And again I want to go back to 
where I started when I talked about Mrs. Brian King and when I 
talk about talking to victims. And I have talked to victims of 
Clifford Olson and the families of victims of Clifford Olson. 
 
And I know my colleague from Rosetown, who is the former 
leader of this party and a former member of the House of 

Commons, has had the opportunity to talk about and to listen to 
those people as well when we were in Ottawa. And he can tell 
you and he’ll support, I know he’ll support me when I say that 
until you look into the eyes of those people, those victims, you 
will never know the hurt that they feel. You will never know the 
loss that has destroyed their lives and their well-being until you 
listen to those people. And it doesn’t take a year or two or five 
to get over it; in some cases it takes forever. 
 
So the government could really step up to the plate here in 
making significant, substantive changes to this Bill. And so we 
in the opposition — and of course that’s our job; that’s our job 
in the opposition — that we want to make sure that, and to push 
them to make those changes. And then they get to be in 
opposition — and that’s going to happen soon — then it’ll be 
their job as opposition to push us to make changes. Well of 
course we will already have made those good changes — but 
having said that, it will be their job. And the few of them that 
will be here will have the opportunity to stand up just like I’m 
standing up and speak to a Bill and tell us and tell the province 
how they think things should be done. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, I want to just end by throwing out a 
challenge, issuing a challenge to the government. And I 
challenge them. I challenge them to . . . I challenge Minister of 
Justice. And I know my colleague is willing to sit down in 
committee or sit down in this House and discuss the changes 
that we think are necessary. 
 
I would challenge the government, challenge the Minister of 
Justice to come to this House, to bring some amendments to this 
Bill, to make the changes that I think are necessary, and to 
really stand in front of the people of this province and say yes, 
we are listening to you; we are concerned about your feelings, 
your sense of hurt, your sense of loss after you have gone 
through a crime. And again disregarding the level of the crime, 
but talking about listening to the victims of crime. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, they can go two ways on this. They can 
either step forward, step up to the plate and make it happen, or 
they can continue their wayward ways and govern as a 
government, as a party that’s on its way out. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’m looking forward to their answer to that on 
this Bill and many others. And at this point in time I would 
move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that we adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to stand today and talk to Bill No. 33, an Act 
respecting The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. Now what this 
Bill deals with is actually amending the Act, to repeal a portion 
of the Act so that land can be sold as part of the TLE [treaty 
land entitlement]. 
 
Now that’s a very important aspect of this amendment, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, because the Mistawasis First Nation has 
actually completed all of the requirements to purchase this 
particular chunk of land. And I should actually read the land 
that’s in question into Hansard. Existing provision is: 
 

737 All those lands in Township 50, in Range 2, west of 
the Third Meridian, described as follows: 
 

. . . the north half of Section 21; 
 

the south-west quarter of Section 27; 
 

the south half of Section 28 . . . 
 
And item 737 is amended to remove 638 acres to allow these 
lands to be sold to the Mistawasis First Nation to satisfy a 
specific claim settlement. Only the southwest quarter of section 
28 is retained. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we recognize the value of the 
process and the commitment to provide assistance where 
feasible to the transfer of lands to reserve status. Now the 
conditions have all been met, as I said, by the First Nation, the 
Mistawasis First Nation. 
 
So therefore this amendment is necessary to remove the land 
from the critical wildlife habitat protection list in order that it 
can be sold. And this sale would be done through the Sask Ag 
and Food, who is presently responsible for the management, 
administration of the 258 hectares under this selection. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some outstanding 
concerns with this Bill and it is . . . I’m wondering what kind of 
consultation has actually been done with the wildlife federation. 
We know that this NDP government does not have a very good 
track record when it comes to consultation, and I could 
probably talk about a great number of cases where in fact the 
consultation processes has basically been done by lip service. It 
has been two NDP supporters in a coffee shop and they 
consider that consultation. 
 
And I’m really wondering if the wildlife federation was 
consulted in this and what their comments might be, because 
the lands currently are protected under The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. And we realize that wildlife habitat protection is 
very important, Madam Deputy Speaker, to protect some of our 
critical habitat. 
 
Now I won’t go so far as to say the possum might be one of 
these critically protected animals up in this part of 
Saskatchewan, and I will not repeat the story of my colleague 
from Arm River-Watrous with his possum story. But there’s an 
example maybe of some land, some critical wildlife that needs 
to be protected and that’s why the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation is very concerned by land that is being removed 

from the wildlife habitat protection system. 
 
Now another concern that has been raised by the wildlife 
federation is there’s some pretty good land that is being 
removed from the wildlife habitat protection. And if it’s being 
replaced, is it being replaced with the same quality of land? 
And what impact does it have on an area for the critical wildlife 
of that particular area? 
 
To give an example . . . and I don’t know; again this is done 
through consultation. But if you have a parcel of land, say, in 
the northern part of the province that is designated as critical 
wildlife habitat and you remove it, you remove it from the list 
of critical wildlife habitat land and you replace it with some 
land from a different part of the province and now designate 
that as critical wildlife protection land, is it of the same value? 
And is it of the same value for the species that one is trying to 
protect? 
 
For an example, if moose were a critical habitat area in lands in 
a certain area of the province and you replace it with land in the 
west central part of the province, I don’t think that would really 
lead to the protection of the critical habitat of the moose 
because you’re replacing it with land that is far different. And 
that is a concern of the wildlife federation. 
 
Now there’s another issue actually with this Bill and the way 
the government deals with lease land. We know that 
unoccupied lease land is not an issue. And unoccupied lease 
land, the government can say in this particular case we want to 
remove it . . . and the people that are more affected by this, well 
the animals, but also the wildlife federation if it’s unoccupied 
land. 
 
But now we get into occupied land that creates a far different 
set of circumstances. And I refer to about a year ago when we 
had an issue with Crown lands that were occupied and under 
lease agreements. And under these lease agreements the 
government was not prepared, this NDP government was not 
prepared to renew leases in the last one or two years of the 
lease. The reason for that, because if the lease expired then who 
is the owner of the land? 
 
And we do know that the deal was going to be between a 
willing buyer and a willing seller. Well if you lease the land and 
the government does not renew the lease, the lease in essence 
expires. Now who’s the owner of the land? It’s back to the 
government, so the government could be a willing seller, but 
it’s at the expense of the person that was leasing the land. 
 
Now this had a huge impact in areas of ranchland when 
ranchers were being told that they couldn’t renew their leases, 
because now how do you make a cattle operation if you’re 
leasing a number of sections of grazing land . . . And we know 
in some areas of the province you might be able to run six head 
of cattle per quarter section, so you need quite a large tract of 
grazing land to make a go of it in ranching. So if the leases were 
not going to be renewed, then how could these ranchers stay in 
business if their land was going to be taken back by the 
government, which would have in fact given the NDP 
government the opportunity to sell that land as a willing seller? 
That was an issue, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I think that’s 
been held in abeyance right now. 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

So, Madam Deputy Speaker, with this Bill 33, the fulfillment of 
treaty land entitlements, we’re all in favour of having the treaty 
land entitlements fulfilled. I am again concerned about the 
consultation process with the wildlife federation, and I would 
like to hear from this government what kind of consultation 
took place with the wildlife federation. So until we hear back 
from them, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ll adjourn debate at this 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Arm River-Watrous. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Arm River-Watrous. Sorry. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up to discuss a few points about this particular Bill, an Act to 
amend the wildlife. I know that there’s a few amendments in 
here. I’d like to talk a little bit. 
 
Any time you open up The Wildlife Act, it goes right across 
board. It’ll affect quite a few people and all aspects of wildlife. 
Anybody that has been watching the news lately will know 
what’s happening in Eastern Canada with the seal hunt, 
affecting their . . . That’s a licensed, regulated hunt that’s very 
regulated, and yet it’s very contentious in the news right now. 
And you know, for the people doing it, there is problems. 
There’s always a danger of somebody getting hurt there, in that 
particular end of it, when it comes to hunting. And 
Saskatchewan can be no different with hunts. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I know that there has been always a move to remove the bear 
hunt. It started in Eastern Canada and maybe not so much here 
in Saskatchewan, but there always is that movement to restrict 
hunting when it comes to Saskatchewan at that end of it and 
across Canada and the United States. And that movement — I 
think I’ve talked about it in another Bill, in the veterinary Bill 
— it’s growing out there. 
 
So when we open up this Act, you always have to make sure 
that the hunting is protected, but it’s being very, very regulated. 
That is one of the worries out there of the people. And it should 
be very regulated as hunts go on. This Bill deals with some big 
game changes plus some smaller game at that end of it. 
 

Out our way, big game has been growing. We’ve had mule 
deer. In fact it’s even being a problem now with all the grain 
piles that are on the ground this year because there’s been such 
a poor movement of grain and a good crop taken off. 
Unfortunately there isn’t a price for it, and the system just isn’t 
moving it right now. So there’s huge piles of grain and lots of 
them spread out in my constituency from one end to the other. I 
know there’s a pile along No. 11 Highway. I drive there and 
early in the morning, it’s not uncommon to see as many as 30 
mule deer spread out all through that pile. Now unfortunately 
they may have trouble selling that grain at that end of it. 
 
And we never used to have a problem in our area with mule 
deer. And right where I farm, we don’t yet but it’s coming very 
close. It’s within 10, 20 miles that you will see herds of 30, 50, 
maybe 80 deer and that was unheard of. When I was a kid 
growing up, you never seen that. If you were lucky, you seen a 
few white-tailed deer out our way. Mule deer were protected. 
You couldn’t even hunt mule deer in our particular zone 
because they were pretty well . . . there was none. They were 
hunted to . . . I wouldn’t say near extinction because that wasn’t 
true up north. But in our area, they probably were, in our zone 
at that end of it. Now they’ve opened up hunting on mule deer 
at that end of it. So it’s shown how restricting hunting and 
moving licences around can affect wildlife. 
 
Another one is moose. We never had moose. When I was a kid, 
you never seen a moose out home — never. And now it’s not 
uncommon to see moose. And I was talking to a conservation 
officer — that was last year — just in our area alone, there were 
60 to 80 moose. And ten years ago that was unheard of, to have 
that many in an area. In fact they’re almost now a problem. 
 
At first when the first moose moved in, you know, a few years 
ago they were a novelty. I mean everybody just was, you know, 
happy if they happened to catch a glimpse of it. That was story 
that they would see somebody in town, they’d say yes, you 
know, I just seen a moose. 
 
I remember the first time that one was spotted in our area. It 
was near dark and a guy had spotted it. He came and he said, 
that’s a moose. And I said no, that’s got to be a horse, just a 
horse running wild, not a moose out in our area. I mean where I 
am, it’s pretty flat and not a lot of bush. I say, you know, like 
where can you get . . . where you going to see a moose at that 
. . . And it turned out all of a sudden somebody else saw. The 
story grew from there that it is . . . they have seen moose and 
they’ve moved into our area. 
 
And in fact when I was talking to a conservation officer, he 
wanted to open hunting on it. He said, you know, we need to 
regulate it. We need to open hunting in our area. And the word 
got out a bit, and all of a sudden there was a push, probably out 
of Saskatoon, Regina, from . . . [inaudible] . . . Oh you can’t 
open moose hunting, you know. 
 
And they just dropped it right away. The conservation officers 
didn’t push at that end to the government. And I’m not sure 
exactly where the government stood on that, but he said, it’s 
going to be a problem. They are starting to break fences. They 
are out in one wheat pile that’s west of me. There’s five or six 
of them on top of that wheat pile now, and there’s getting to be 
lots of them around. So they’re going to have to look at opening 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

hunting and different things here. 
 
And also we’re talking about hunting in this different wild Act 
amendment. I’m not sure how it deals with bird games at that 
end of it, but I know that we never used to have a lot of bird 
hunting in our area too, and now that there is bird hunting going 
on in our area. And they’re not with outfitters because in 
southern Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker, right now that there is 
. . . the zones haven’t been broke up. I kind of split . . . where 
my farm is . . . splits what you’d call zone 22 and zone 23. And 
both them zones come in . . . They’re as large as a constituency. 
They’re as large as my Arm River constituency. Zone 22 I think 
starts way out by Lucky Lake and runs up past Davidson. It 
probably takes in 5,000 square miles. Zone 23, same thing — 
probably takes in a good 5 or 6,000 square miles at it. 
 
But there was a survey. And I had a couple of calls from people 
that do take game or bird hunters out, and there’s been a survey 
done with these hunters asking them if they would want to have 
outfitters, or they’d only be allowed to come across and hunt 
birds without outfitters at that end of it. And they were a bit 
concerned with it because they know how big the area is here, 
that you’re basically not going to get an outfitter with that big 
of an area. And the survey was . . . There’s more surveying, but 
it was also worded that it may be legislation coming. 
 
Now when I talked to the one hunter, he couldn’t tell me 
whether it came from Saskatchewan or if it was a Government 
of Canada kind of a survey, looking on input on it. But I know 
every hunter had said that . . . filled out the survey also had 
some other questions on. One of them was, would you pay more 
for a licence to come to hunt in Saskatchewan? Would you pay 
more to have more birds taken in? And then also, would you 
just pay to have an outfitter? And I know that the hunters I talk 
to, they said that they would pay more to be able to hunt more 
birds, allowed to hunt more, or a longer period. But they all said 
no, they would not want an outfitter. They would not want to be 
under an outfitter because a lot of these hunters came here for 
years and years at that end of it. 
 
And they’ve used local people. I know a couple of them that’s 
. . . They make some extra money on that side of it. When 
farming’s a little tight in the fall, they will guide hunters 
around. They’re not licensed because of the outfitting 
restrictions here in southern Saskatchewan. The zones are too 
big. There’s one outfitter who has zone 22, and another outfitter 
has zone 23 which I said are close to about 5,000 square miles 
at that end of it. And so they’re a little worried that if they 
weren’t allowed to come here, if they had to have an outfitter to 
come here that they wouldn’t probably be able to hunt in 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that’s huge to the hotels. When they come into the 
Govan-Nokomis area, the hotels are full. The rooms are all 
taken. They’re there for a week, and to them it’s a holiday. 
They spend money. They come here to hunt, and they spend 
money. It’s good for the local economy. It helps the people. The 
service stations, they’re selling them a tank of gas every day. 
They’re into the restaurants, and they also help the provincial 
government. They’re spending money. That’s tax money 
they’re getting. They’re buying licences. 
 
And the biggest thing is they’re thinning out the bird population 

which is growing. As I’ve talked about deer, if you think deer 
are growing, we’ve had more trouble with ducks and geese. 
More geese coming from up North, and snow geese are huge. 
I’ve seen, like the skies full of them at times. And this year, this 
fall with the crop being taken off late, it’s been a problem. 
There was guys that probably lost 30, 40 acres of a field that 
you know they didn’t collect anything off it. And if you don’t 
have wildlife insurance, it’s hard to collect any money on it. 
Because crop insurance, you may have thousands of acres and it 
won’t affect your yield, but you’ve lost 40, 50 acres here that’s 
gone. And you basically can’t collect money on it. 
 
So we need to look at expanding the hunting here and not bring 
in the outfitters at that particular end of it with amendments. 
And there’s various amendments here. Some of them are 
dealing with making it tougher if somebody gets caught doing 
hunting illegally, which it should be. It should be. Hunting 
should be very regulated, but it shouldn’t be so restrictive that 
people can’t come here. 
 
And it’s good that they’re making certain acts of it, if you’re 
caught now hunting illegally that you’re fined more because it’s 
getting to be more of a problem. I think you’ve read the paper 
that there’s been more hunters caught illegally because the 
States are getting hunted out. Eastern Canada is getting hunted 
out. You take Saskatchewan, Manitoba, BC, Alberta are 
probably the last — and the Yukon territories — are really the 
last places where you can hunt freely. You’ve talked to people 
that come across . . . I know somebody from South Carolina. He 
comes to Saskatchewan. There, they have to pay per bird when 
they hunt. They go basically to hunt farms. That’s it. A guy will 
own a part of a sloughy area, and you have to pay to hunt there 
. . . [inaudible] . . . of your licence to the state, you also pay this 
person, and you have to pay per duck. And he will hunt there all 
day. And he says, if I get five ducks, I was happy, he said. 
 
He came to Saskatchewan the first time. And I mean, the first 
five shots he got five birds, and he couldn’t believe it. And he 
says, I’m coming back every year. And he tells his neighbours 
and his other hunter enthusiasts that they come here. And that’s 
good for the economy. That’s what we want. 
 
We talk about the tourism for this province, and that is one 
aspect that we can . . . economy that can grow here. And it can 
grow with the hunting as long as it is regulated at that end of it. 
 
Big game is another thing added now. There are hunters that 
will pay big money for bear hunting. My cousin runs a hunt 
farm, not a hunt farm, but he does a little outfitting way up 
north. And he said it’s people that come to hunt bear, that’s 
where he makes his money at. You know, the ones who come to 
hunt deer, you know, the prices aren’t that high, and they don’t 
pay a lot. But he said they will pay a lot to hunt bear up north. 
And there is lots of bear there, and he said that’s basically what 
he makes his living off, as a lot of many northerners do. 
 
Many First Nations people up north, that’s how they make their 
money, isn’t it? And that is a growing economy that can help 
First Nations up north, that we can grow with that and help 
them at that end of it, Madam Speaker. 
 
And that needs to be . . . that’s why these Bills, when you open 
something on the amendment Act, it needs to be looked at and 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

needs to be respected and done right. And when you make 
amendments to here, they should be done right. And with this 
government, you never know because they’ve messed up a 
couple Bills. 
 
And one of them is they don’t consult a lot of people. And a lot 
of them don’t have a lot of the experience at that end of it. And 
I don’t think they talk to the groups that do . . . the wildlife 
federation, different end of it; outfitting groups, I don’t think 
they’ve talked to them at that end of it a lot. 
 
So that’s why when they bring a Bill forward, it’s up to us — 
and we’ve done that a lot — to make sure that these people 
have consulted with people that’s going to be affected. When I 
talked to the legislation before . . . Basically when you deal a 
piece of legislation, it affects peoples’ lives. You’re talking 
about peoples’ lives, talking about their livelihood at that end of 
it. You’re talking about how they make a living. 
 
And when you affect this Act, it affects a lot of people. It 
affects outfitters. It affects hunters. It affects landowners that 
make money off the hunting. It affects the bar owners in the 
area, the hotel owners, the restaurants, the gas stations. Also it 
talks about hunt farms. It affects people that work on that end of 
it. And it affects a wide-variety of people. 
 
And that’s why when you bring forth legislation like this, we 
like to get it out to the groups to make sure that down the road 
you don’t have to mend it or that you’ve hurt a business. And 
this is a business that is just starting in this province. It is just 
starting to grow in this particular province. And this is a 
business that can help the economy. Saskatchewan is suffering. 
We’ve had under this government, you know, numerous job 
losses and population loss. Now we are going to have to do 
whatever we can to help the people here still make a living, and 
that is one of them at that end of it. 
 
This Bill also talks about game farming which is a growing 
business at that end of it. There are huge game farms. And 
people in the city sometimes think of a game farm, they think 
maybe they’re dealing with a penned animal, that’s not much 
bigger than this room. Well it’s not. It’s over sections of land. 
And basically all it is, it’s no different than an outfitter. A guy is 
turned loose, and he can go in that area just like he can whether 
it’s an outfitter up north. He has just a certain area to hunt in 
and to hunt a particular animal. 
 
This Act also . . . The minister talked about in part of it here, 
dealing with seizures of animals at that end of it. When animals 
are seized, I guess right now that they are taken off the farm or 
taken off the property. Now he’s talking about that they may . . . 
the cost is great in transportation. They may leave them on the 
farm at that end of it. And you know, that can be good. But that 
also can cause a lot of trouble too. You have to know the reason 
why they were being seized, whether it’s on account of disease. 
Yes, that’s different. Maybe they can quarantine them right 
there on the farm and contain them rather than move them off. 
But if illegal activities are being done, that can make a 
difference because gates can mysteriously get opened through 
the night and animals can disappear. You know it’s happened 
before at that end of it. 
 
It also deals with dealing with the sale of illegal animals, which 

I said is growing here and not just here in Saskatchewan. But it 
will be a problem in Saskatchewan because it’s growing in 
other provinces and other states where people will pay big 
money for trophy animals whether they hunt them out of season 
or not. And it can be quite tempting for somebody that doesn’t 
have a lot of money to . . . yes, take somebody out illegally and 
hunt an animal, try to find a trophy animal out of season, to take 
to that person. And it’s happened quite a bit. 
 
And as the money gets bigger and bigger, which it’s going to be 
as time goes on with trophy animals, there’s going to be more 
and more money. People are . . . I’ve heard stories of guys 
willing to pay $10,000 for a trophy animal. And I mean, that’s 
quite attractive to somebody that maybe doesn’t have much 
money. And, you know, if you were kind of in an area you 
know — if you’re from northern Saskatchewan — you know 
where some of these trophy animals are. But it’s out of season 
and they can’t be hunted. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Or if they’re in an area like where I am, where moose, where 
they can’t be hunted. They’re not licensed right now. And they 
will pay up to $10,000 for a trophy moose right now. And it can 
be pretty tempting to know that what’s eating your wheat pile 
there and basically costing you money . . . Or you could lose 
that wheat pile right now because as you know, that right now 
that basically there’s zero tolerance for any feces in wheat, 
basically zero tolerance right now. And the animals are getting 
to be a problem out there, and you can lose — that’s your 
livelihood — you can lose a couple, 5,000, 10,000 bushels. That 
might be the idea between break even. And even feedlots won’t 
even take it if it’s badly spoiled at that end of it and badly 
damaged. So that’s a concern out there. And also, you know, if 
there’s a guy sitting there — you know, things are tight and 
there’s a moose eating his . . . or it’s a trophy deer — and he 
knows in the States he can get $10,000 for it. It can be pretty 
tempting to suddenly dispose of that moose and try for that 
$10,000 at that end of it. 
 
That’s why when you open it, you have to make sure that the 
business is regulated. That it doesn’t get overregulated. And it 
isn’t in Saskatchewan. It needs to be . . . I think it needs to be 
the hunting to adjust it here. One of the kids had told me — that 
does take these bird hunters out — saying, I don’t mind if you 
bring this outfitter licence in but, he says, you’ve got to make 
your zones smaller. He said, give me a chance to outfit in a 
25-mile radius of my hometown, he said. In zone 22, you’d 
probably have 10, 15 legal outfitters then instead of one trying 
to monopolize it at that end of it. 
 
So I hope that government — and I’m not sure whether it’s 
coming from the Government of Canada or the Government of 
Saskatchewan — that they were doing some surveys saying, 
with birds, that you have to have an outfitting licence before 
you come across, that they’re looking at it. Now the rumour was 
that legislation was coming at that end, but now I’ve heard that 
there isn’t. But I don’t know if that means that they’re still 
looking at it. 
 
Now if you’re looking at that particular piece of legislation, I 
hope that you look at breaking the zones down at it in southern 
Saskatchewan because they are huge. They were drawn up in 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

the Hudson Bay days pretty well. Because at one time there was 
very little hunting in southern Saskatchewan at that end of it. 
Where I was, like I said, 10 years ago, there was no hunting. 
There was no bird hunting. You know, and now we have seven, 
eight hunters from the States that come just to our area, and 
we’re not even on a bird path. You get in the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis areas, and I mean there’s hundreds of thousands of 
birds pass through there and tons and tons of hunters at that end 
of it. 
 
But that’s showing how much it’s been growing, that the snow 
geese is a problem, that we should be trying to encourage these 
guys to come more to do more hunting. Because they are doing 
more damage. I understand up north that they are damaging the 
tundra quite a bit — the snow geese — that it’s becoming a 
problem at that end of it. Yet there’s always that push to ban 
hunting. I mean I’ve talked about PETA [People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals] and Humane Society and different 
aspects of it that, you know, in their minds that there should be 
no hunting. But if you want . . . There should be and there 
should always be regulated with rules. 
 
Talking about the conservation officers, they’re spread thin out 
my way. We have a few at Blackstrap, a couple at Elbow. And 
you talk to them and they say, you know, it’s all right to bring 
in some of these rules and make it tougher for people that do 
illegal game hunting which is good . . . or legal big game 
hunting. But he says we don’t have the resources to catch them. 
And he said if we catch somebody, it’s just pure luck. He said, 
we’re just happened to be at the right place at the right time. He 
says, we . . . there just isn’t enough of us. 
 
There’s been some cutbacks at Blackstrap. There’s been some 
cutbacks, I understand throughout the province, a bit over the 
years. Just like everything in Saskatchewan, they just keep 
cutting a little bit at a time. They never cut a lot where 
somebody will raise a lot, but they will always cut a little. And I 
can talk about SaskPower . . . [inaudible] . . . about 
conservation office. They cut one office a year. And then next 
year they will cut one SaskTel office. 
 
And sure when you only cut one at a time and say, well this one 
in this area isn’t being used. But as you cut, it grows every year. 
And it’s with the conservation officers. They says, we’ve been 
cut back our funding a little bit every year and cut back with 
manpower a little bit here. Maybe this year they’ll cut one man 
here or they’ll cut some man hours over in northern 
Saskatchewan. They said eventually it’s catching up. 
 
And this government over the years has been cutting and 
cutting and cutting. And all this government knows how to do is 
just basically it seems like cut jobs, especially when it deals 
with rural Saskatchewan. And when you’re dealing with this 
particular amendment, they say, you know, we won’t be able to 
hardly enforce it, you know. And it’s going to be more of a 
problem out there with hunting and trying to regulate that, 
because there is going to be more and more possibly illegal 
hunters coming across the border, especially if they know the 
danger of getting caught is pretty slim, at that end of it. And 
right now unfortunately out in our area it is. 
 
If you’re . . . I know when guys go out hunting now it’s very 
rare you ever see a conservation officer, very rare, at that end of 

it. And at one time when I was a kid they were always out there. 
You seen . . . if you went hunting two, three days in a row, 
you’d always see one, you know. He’d stop you, look for your 
licence, you know, ask you how things are going and that. Now 
you can hunt for two weeks out in our area and, you know, 
you’ll never see one at that end of it, just because they’re 
stretched so thin. There’s only, you know, two or three for an 
area probably the size of my constituency at that end of it. And 
they’re supposed to regulate the hunting and make sure the 
illegal activities aren’t going at that end of it. 
 
But dealing with this particular Bill, An Act to amend The 
Wildlife Act, and we’re always in favour of being it regulated 
and being that it’s done right at that end of it. Because there 
needs to be rules. People want their wildlife protected but they 
also want to be able to hunt it in safe, reasonable manners — 
that it’s managed right at that end of it. 
 
And when you deal with this particular Act, I know that we 
would like to talk to people . . . I’d like to show it to some of 
my hunters back home and talk a bit with them to see what their 
feeling is on this particular one. I don’t have any hunt-farms in 
my constituency but I’m not sure exactly how it fits . . . will 
affect them or not. But that’s something that should be also 
discussed and shown to them at that end of it. 
 
So with that, Madam Speaker, I will adjourn debate on that 
particular Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 35 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant 
la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Well it’s a pleasure to rise today on this Bill that deals with 
corporate entities, deals with the directors and officers of 
corporations and their responsibility towards their shareholders 
and towards the public. 
 
You know, when you take a look at some of the major news 
stories in the last few years — particularly dealing with Enron 
and WorldCom — you find out that sometimes things are not 
always as they appear to be in the corporate world. And I would 
include in that all kinds of corporations — private corporations, 
public corporations, co-operatives. There have been difficulties 
at every level here, Madam Deputy Speaker, when it comes to 
ensuring that the information provided to the public is accurate 
and factual. 
 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

What this particular piece of legislation does is changes the 
onus a bit and in fact rolls back the role of the directors and the 
CEOs [chief executive officer], giving them more protection 
than they may have previously had in the near past. And I find 
that kind of surprising in light of what has happened with Enron 
and WorldCom when it comes to their reporting structures. It 
says in this particular Act, Madam Deputy Chair, that when 
people do their work honestly and with due care in relying on 
the reports coming from professionals within their organization 
or the external auditors, that they are absolved of accountability 
and responsibility. 
 
Well I’m not just sure, Madam Deputy Speaker, that it should 
be quite that blanket. I think we need to define and determine 
exactly what the role of directors and officers are of the 
corporations. What role do they play in ensuring that the 
information being provided to them by the professional is 
actually accurate? Do they have a responsibility, do they have a 
duty to their shareholders, be that private shareholders or in the 
case of public corporations, the taxpayers of, let’s say, 
Saskatchewan? What duties do they have to ensure that the 
information being provided is indeed valid and verified? 
 
The Act doesn’t explain whether this is written information 
such as a report from an accountant that says, you know, these 
books are duly audited and everything is as it should be in an 
annual report. Or are these oral reports where a professional — 
a lawyer, the accountant, the engineer — says, yes I’ve looked 
at this and it’s okay. And everybody at the board of directors, 
the officers say, okay well the accountant said it’s okay, the 
lawyer said it’s okay, so it must be okay, and we’ll just sign off 
on this. 
 
I think perhaps there needs to be more involvement than simply 
that. I think the officers and the directors have a fiduciary duty 
to ensure that the information provided to them is at least 
questioned in some manner as to its veracity. They need to 
ensure that they have asked appropriate questions of the 
officials to determine whether or not the information provided 
is the correct and proper information. And I don’t see that 
spelled out in this particular piece of legislation, when in actual 
fact they’re rolling back the responsibility of and the 
accountability of the directors. So I think that’s one area, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that we need to be concerned about. 
 
I think perhaps what we need to be also looking at is ensuring 
that the information provided by the professionals is indeed 
correct, that’s it’s accurate to the best of their abilities. You 
know, after Enron there’s value-for-money auditing starting to 
be developed and utilized. And I think that’s a very important 
part of the responsibilities of directors and officers to ensure 
that that is occurring. 
 
It’s not simply a matter of saying that there was $10 came into 
the corporation and we spent nine of them, so there’s $1 left 
over for profit. It’s did you get the value that you should have 
got for the money that you spent? And that needs to be 
incorporated into the rules. That needs to be incorporated into 
the decision-making process of the directors and the officers of 
the corporation to ensure that the information they’re receiving 
and the information that they’re providing is accurate to their 
shareholders. 
 

One of the issues as well is that if there is a concern, if there is 
some litigation, if there is some legal activities that are taking 
place in questioning the directors and officers and their role and 
their statements, it allows for the corporation to provide some 
cash, some remuneration for them to pay their ongoing legal 
expenses. And I think in that particular case, because there’s 
been no guilt found, there’s been no fault found, there’s been no 
error found yet, that that would be appropriate. So on that area, 
Madam Deputy Chair, I think that is probably a valid step 
forward. Obviously at the end of the day though there has to be 
some sort of mechanism in there to perhaps recover some or all 
of that expenditure if indeed the transactions have been 
fraudulent or have been less than forthright in their statements, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think, as I mentioned earlier, there’s a duty on behalf of the 
officers and the directors to ensure that the information they’re 
receiving from their professionals is correct and valid in some 
manner. So that they need to be able to show — perhaps before 
a court of law — that they did ask the appropriate questions to 
determine the validity of the statements, that they simply 
weren’t taking the statements at face value, because not all of 
the people that may be providing information are living up to a 
professional standard, Madam Deputy Speaker. So the directors 
of the corporation need to be in a position to be able to verify 
that they did carry out their proper fiduciary duties in ensuring 
the correct information was provided and that the shareholders 
were protected. 
 
And in the case of the Crown corporations in this province, 
those shareholders are the people of Saskatchewan. So they, the 
people of Saskatchewan, need to be able to be assured that the 
officers and directors of say SaskPower, SaskTel, any of the 
Crown corporations are carrying out their duties properly, that 
they’re questioning the information that’s coming forward. 
 
Because we’ve seen things like Channel Lake where the 
president of the corporation was not carrying out the duties that 
were within the boundaries of SaskPower. The president of the 
day was carrying out gas arbitrage which was outside of the 
realm of the corporation. This had been gone on for some 
period of time and eventually amounted to a loss of greater than 
$10 million. So in the reporting structures within the 
corporation, how was that dealt with? How was that transmitted 
from the actual operations of the corporation to the board of 
directors and from the board of directors then to the 
shareholders of that corporation, the public of Saskatchewan? 
 
[16:00] 
 
Well we know that that was covered up for a period of time and 
that what was going on was not proper. The proper 
authorizations were not there. So just the fact that there are 
professionals involved in these issues, the fact that there are 
professionals making the reports, doesn’t necessarily mean that 
the reports are accurate. 
 
So we need to ensure that there is a strengthening of the need 
and the demand. That when professionals provide that 
information, that we the public, that we the shareholders of the 
corporation, or that the directors and officers can rely on the 
validity of that information. So if you’re going to roll back the 
responsibility and accountability of the officers and the 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

directors, you need to strengthen then to ensure that the 
information they’re receiving is valid. And I’m not sure that 
that’s happening in this piece of legislation, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
There are also a number of other changes that are taking place 
within this particular piece of legislation because it’s a fairly 
wide-ranging Bill, an omnibus Bill that is dealing with various 
sectors all in one particular piece of legislation — even though 
they are not directly related to each other — because we’re 
talking about the responsibilities and the indemnification of 
officers and directors of corporations. 
 
Whereas in the same piece of legislation, we’re actually dealing 
with the meanings of words when it comes to the use of French 
within the legislative structure. It explains the meanings of the 
words like année and Assemblée and avocat, banque — how 
they’re officially understood within the legislation, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. So, you know, and there’s pages of these 
words. 
 
I guess the concern that I would have on this is that this 
particular piece of legislation will allow the government to 
interpret the meaning of those words that it wants to define a 
new definition to by using regulations. That the Assembly does 
not necessarily find out in a timely manner what the new 
definition of the word is because the government does it in 
regulation, changing the definition of a particular word. Now if 
you look at English, if you want to understand the definition of 
a word, you look at the Oxford English Dictionary to make that 
determination. And I’m assuming that there is a similar 
dictionary in French that would define the meaning of a word. 
 
So I’m not exactly sure why the legislature needs to give the 
ministers responsible the ability to define individual words. So 
that the minister can make the definition as to what the 
definition of a word is and how it’s going to be applied to one 
Act perhaps? Is it going to be applied equally to all Acts? Those 
are some of the questions I think that the minister needs to be 
prepared to provide some answers for in dealing with this 
omnibus Bill that deals with a variety of different subjects. 
 
So I think we need to have the opportunity, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to take a look at exactly what this piece of legislation 
is doing, what these definitions are being changed from or to, if 
they’re being changed at all, Madam Deputy Speaker. So at this 
time, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 36 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 
2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des 

administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (no 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
great pleasure for me to rise and speak to Bill 36, an Act to 
amend certain Statutes with respect to indemnification and 
Insurance of directors, officers, and certain other individuals. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe the intent of this Bill is to . . . 
Under directors, officers, and certain other individuals, I believe 
it only refers to those involved in non-profit corporations and 
co-operatives, Madam Deputy Speaker. And this is apparently a 
Bill that’s mainly of a housekeeping nature that will bring 
provincial legislation, hopefully, regarding indemnification and 
insurance as it relates to directors and officers of non-profit 
corporations and co-operatives up to date with federal 
legislation. 
 
These changes appear, Madam Deputy Speaker, to be needed to 
assist Saskatchewan-based non-profits and co-operatives in 
recruiting and retaining officers and directors, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I refer to the minister’s own words when he described 
this Bill in this Hon. Assembly on March 20 of this year. And 
he says, and I quote: 
 

These changes broaden the basis for indemnification and 
insurance which . . . [would] assist in the recruitment and 
[the] retention of officers and directors for such 
corporations. 

 
Members of the bar . . . [have] raised the concern that the 
existing provisions are out of date when compared to the 
federal legislation and that this is creating [an] additional 
risk for officers and directors serving with . . . [the] 
corporation. 

 
And he, previous to that quote, Madam Deputy Speaker, he 
clarified the fact that this Bill updates the indemnity insurance 
positions contained in The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 
and The Co-operatives Act of 1996. 
 
Without these amendments, Madam Deputy Speaker, officers 
and directors face additional liability risk when they serve on 
the boards of non-profits and co-operatives. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I think we’d all agree that this is not acceptable in 
Saskatchewan where we have a high level of volunteership and 
many of us have sat on the boards of non-profits . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Good. Have sat on the boards of non-profits as 
volunteers, strictly volunteers. 
 
I go back to 1990 in my own case when I was a member of the 
board of directors of the Pense rink corporation at the time 
when that rink burnt down. The last thing on my mind the day 
of the fire was whether or not I was covered by insurance. But 
in subsequent days as I found out there was considerable 
damage to rooftops of houses in the village of Pense — and 
relieved to say that no one was actually injured in the fire, but 
there was considerable property damage — I became somewhat 
concerned as to what my legal standing might be, as did other 
directors. 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as it turned out, there was no 
action taken. This was considered a community event, and those 
who suffered losses I presume made insurance claims. In this 
case the claims were rather on the small side so there was no 
. . . the matter was not pursued further. So I guess we don’t 
know to this day what our legal standing really was. 
 
But I understand that since 2001 when the federal legislation 
was changed — that would be the Canada Business 
Corporations Act that was amended in 2001, Madam Deputy 
Speaker — that our legal standing may not have been as solid 
since that time. And that is apparently the purpose of this 
legislation, Madam Deputy Speaker, to put those volunteers and 
those members of boards of non-profits and co-operatives on 
more solid legal footing, make them more insurable, and to be 
sure that they’re covered that way, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But it occurs to me that in the five years since the Canada 
Business Corporations Act was amended that there may have 
been some real legal difficulties in this province. And I can’t 
put my finger on any specific cases, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
but I suspect there have been some in five years. And maybe the 
bigger issue is attraction and retention of directors and other 
officers to these types of corporations, Madam Deputy Speaker 
— these types of corporations that keep our small communities 
alive, that is co-operatives and non-profits, and play a role in all 
sizes of communities in this province as well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
In the time since the Canadian business corporation Act was 
amended in 2001, I suspect that non-profits and co-operatives 
have had a very difficult time in retaining directors and other 
officers. And it makes me wonder why this government hasn’t 
moved on this Bill in a more timely fashion. 
 
We also wonder, Madam Deputy Speaker, whether or not this 
Bill goes far enough to protect those directors and we’ll be 
asking input from the principals involved in these types of 
endeavours, Madam Deputy Speaker. And accordingly, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I move we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 37 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The current 
piece of legislation, Bill No. 37, that we’re dealing with at this 
moment, Madam Deputy Speaker, is actually somewhat similar 

to the piece of legislation that we just had before the Assembly 
a few moments ago, Bill No. 36. And as the minister had 
indicated when he introduced this piece of legislation, he 
mentioned the reason for the Bill is to update the indemnity and 
insurance provisions contained in The Business Corporations 
Act, The New Generation Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union 
Act, 1998, and The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the questions I think we 
need to ask is why it actually has taken the government so long 
to respond to changes to the Canada Business Corporations Act 
of 2001. And I understand the reason for the amendments to 
Bill No. 37, as we have them before the Assembly today, were 
to address some of the concerns and to indeed bring legislation 
in this province into line with legislation we have across 
Canada in other provinces, and certainly the Dominion of 
Canada. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you consider the fact that across 
this province we have many co-operatives, many credit unions, 
new generation co-ops, and each and every one of these 
organizations operates solely on the basis of volunteer work by 
men and women across this province who donate their time — 
volunteer of their time — to act as members of the boards of 
these many co-ops and credit unions . . . . In fact, Madam 
Deputy Chair, I would suggest that many members currently 
sitting in this Legislative Assembly have at one point or other 
been a director for a local co-op or a credit union. 
 
And I know myself a number of years ago I was on a co-op 
board, a director of our local co-op, at the time not really giving 
any consideration to the fact that as a director I might be held 
liable for a decision that was made by our co-operative board if 
something had gone wrong and individual members had taken 
action against the board for a decision we had made. 
 
And I believe, Madam Deputy Speaker, that if you were to ask 
people across this province, each and every one would indicate 
that the reason they’re a director on their local board is because 
they believe in the co-op movement. They believe in the new 
generation co-ops. Or they believe in the credit union, their 
credit unions and the work they’re doing to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, serve their communities and the surrounding 
area. And I’m sure you would find, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that very few would even have given any thought to the fact 
that they might be held accountable for a decision that they 
made and that they made in good faith — a decision that they 
may have made, whether it was a monetary issue or an issue 
regarding how they’re going to provide loans in regards to 
credit unions or how a co-operative is going to expand. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And I think each and every member out there and those of us 
who have been part of boards, Madam Deputy Speaker, over 
the years when we decided to move ahead on an issue, have 
relied on good, sound, what we felt was solid information that 
was provided to us by individuals or professionals in the field 
that we were counting on, to come forward and ensure that we 
had whatever information necessary — all the information, all 
the details necessary — in order to make a decision as to what 
direction our co-op would take, or our credit union for that 
matter. 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

And many directors, Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe 
would have even given it a second thought about the fact that if 
the decision was something that would have gone awry, that 
they might be responsible, especially if it happened to be a 
monetary issue. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, as my colleague before mentioned, 
when the minister mentioned the changes to The Business 
Corporations Act in 2001, it would seem that the five years 
have gone by. The government should have been aware of the 
fact that we needed to move on this issue. 
 
And I guess the question is why has it taken us this long to 
finally come forward with a piece of legislation to address some 
of the provisions in regards to legislation to ensure that in the 
province of Saskatchewan directors are certainly protected from 
any . . . officers and directors are protected from any actions 
that may be taken against a board of directors. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I think we certainly agree that it’s high time. 
And it’s certainly time. It’s appropriate that we’ve now moved 
in that direction. 
 
I guess the concern as well, Madam Deputy Speaker, and any of 
these boards or organizations or directors may have become 
aware of the fact that . . . and had some concerns about their 
responsibilities as a director in regards to decisions they made 
and the feeling that they may be held responsible. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I know it’s happening in our area that it’s 
becoming more and more difficult for local co-operatives and 
credit unions to even find individuals who will put their names 
forward to act as directors for those corporations. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe it’s necessarily 
related to the issues surrounding this Bill and protection from 
liability. I think it’s just the fact that men and women, and 
young men and women, are becoming more and more involved. 
They’ve got their families and there’s activities that are taking 
their time. And it just becomes more and more difficult for 
younger individuals to get involved as they did in the past in 
regards to being a member and a director for a local co-op or a 
credit union. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, it seems quite appropriate that 
we’re finally moving ahead in this area despite the fact that it’s 
five years past due, I would suggest. 
 
But I believe, Madam Deputy Speaker, as more people become 
familiar with the Act and with the legislation before us — 
individuals who are directors and officers of these corporations 
— I’m sure . . . and they become more familiar with the 
consequences of actions that may have been taken in the past 
and realize that they didn’t really have the protection of any 
actions taken against them and that they might have been 
responsible for any liabilities, that I’m sure, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, more and more people will take the time to come 
forward to volunteer of their time to serve on these boards. And 
so that our credit unions and our co-operatives and our new 
generation co-ops, as we see across the province, can continue 
to function and serve their local communities and their 
membership well. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I guess one of the issues that has come 
to our attention has already been indicated in regards to Bill 36, 

is the recruitment and the retention. And I think it’s certainly 
appropriate that this piece of legislation, Bill No. 37, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, be brought 
forward to ensure that the boards and the directors and officers 
of these boards are not held accountable for actions they take in 
good faith based on the information that they are presented with 
and the decisions they make based on that sound information. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that, in 
view of while it’s taken five years, I think it’s important as well 
that we take the time to ensure that this legislation addresses all 
the concerns and that it meets the requirements, certainly brings 
the Act in the province of Saskatchewan in line with what’s 
happening across Canada and in other provinces. And in order 
to facilitate that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 38 — The 
Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I’ve 
enjoyed the debate on a number of issues or Bills brought 
forward by the government this afternoon. It strikes me though 
that most of the legislation we’ve been dealing with, while it 
may be of a housekeeping nature and have some significance, is 
not particularly significant to the problems facing the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Nevertheless we have before us the . . . a Bill 38, An Act 
respecting the Settlement of International Investment Disputes. 
Madam Speaker, this Bill is quite a bit different than most 
pieces of legislation that come before this House in that it deals 
with existing legislation that is part of an international 
agreement. And I read with quite a bit of interest the minister’s 
inaugural speech on the second reading debate of this Bill and 
there were some, I think, significant pieces of information that 
were left out of his speech, and I would hope at some point 
maybe a member from the government side would fill in some 
of the details that were omitted. 
 
First, Madam Speaker, I noticed that the original agreement that 
has brought about the Bill that we are dealing with today was 
struck in 1965. In 1965 I was but a child, Madam Speaker, and 
while the minister says that there have been some changes 
between 1965 and 2006 that has required the legislature in 
Saskatchewan to, I guess, ratify or sign on to this international 
agreement between states, as far as international investment 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2006 

disputes are concerned he really didn’t outline in any clear or 
significant terms why we’re at this point in time dealing with 
this piece of legislation. Apparently the Government of Canada 
has asked that the provinces bring forward pieces of legislation 
like this. He didn’t even indicate in his speech at what point the 
federal government has made representation to the provinces to 
introduce legislation such as Bill 38 that we are dealing with 
today in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
So I would hope that the Minister of Justice would instruct 
someone from his side or perhaps would in some way answer 
some of the questions that he omitted in his rather short second 
reading speech with regard to the Bill. 
 
We know that this Act makes changes to incorporate the 
international agreement and its application in Saskatchewan. 
Madam Speaker, I think it would be important to know what the 
implications of these applications are within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We are in an age where international agreements have never 
been more important. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have 
international trade agreements that began with the trade 
agreement with the United States and has spread to include 
Mexico and the western hemisphere. And we’re looking at 
World Trade Organization agreements that would help 
agriculture and help softwood lumber and some of the areas 
where there has been some contention as far as trade is 
concerned. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, this Bill does not deal with trade, but it 
does deal with international investment disputes. And, Madam 
Speaker, if we want Saskatchewan to be a place where 
investment is encouraged, we need to make some changes. 
Possibly one of the changes is to vote in favour of this Bill. 
 
Obviously other changes would be to change the provincial 
government here in the province of Saskatchewan. And my 
guess is that if we change the provincial government and gave 
the investors confidence in Saskatchewan, that would do a 
hundredfold more to bring investment into our province than 
would passing Bill 38, An Act respecting the Settlement of 
International Investment Disputes. 
 
In fact the member that’s chirping over on the other side has 
been one of the biggest problems. That minister was the 
minister that gave Saskatchewan a black eye over the SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] issue. 
That minister is the person who is giving Saskatchewan a black 
eye by not resolving the Weyerhaeuser dispute. 
 
How are we going to attract investment — even if we do pass 
this Bill, Madam Speaker — if the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote continues to give Saskatchewan a bad reputation? If 
he continues to be a bad apple in the NDP barrel over there, 
Madam Speaker, how are we going to attract investment? What 
investment disputes will we even have to mediate if in fact there 
are no investments coming to our province whatsoever? 
 
Now I’m sure, Madam Speaker, that this legislation would also 
protect our investors who are investing in other places. And that 
too is a problem here in NDP Saskatchewan because 
Saskatchewan people are fearful to invest in their own province 

when they have a government like the NDP in charge of 
economic decisions, in charge of labour laws in the province. 
We’ve seen so many Saskatchewan people leave this province, 
take their investment dollars out of the province. They’re not 
even worried about whether or not we need to have a dispute 
mechanism for investments here in Saskatchewan. They’re 
concerned about their investments in other parts of the world. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, there were a couple of phrases . . . I 
looked at the Bill actually, and there were a couple of lines in 
here that caught my attention. And I’m not sure what the impact 
of these two lines are on the province of Saskatchewan if in fact 
we pass this Bill. But just the wording, it made me think of the 
NDP, Madam Speaker. If you will look at section 3 on page 22 
of the Bill, which is the conciliation proceedings, and you look 
at the very first . . . article 32 (1), it says, “The Commission 
shall be the judge of its own competence.” 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, that is the wording in the Bill. You’d 
have thought the NDP wrote this Bill. Now I think this is part of 
the international agreement. I’d love to hear the minister clarify 
that for us in this House, but you know you have to be a little 
bit concerned when “The Commission shall be the judge of its 
own competence.” It’s exactly what we’re seeing from the NDP 
government. They’re deciding that they will in fact be the judge 
of their own competence. And so they set the bar as low as they 
can where even, you know, an ant can get over it, and they say 
they’ve done a fine job. 
 
Well that’s not the only place in this Bill where we see someone 
being the judge of their own competence. If you’ll flip over a 
couple more pages to page 26 in the Bill . . . we’re still in 
section 3, but now we’re looking at the powers and functions of 
the tribunal. And this is article 41(1): “The Tribunal shall be the 
judge of its own competence.” Now, Madam Speaker, I would 
love to have the minister who introduced this Bill explain what 
the implications of being the judge of your own competence is 
on the effects of this agreement. 
 
We certainly know what the effects of being the judge of your 
own competence is here in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
have the weakest government with the least amount of 
confidence of the public that we have seen in many, many a 
year. 
 
Madam Speaker, the minister claims that this Bill will 
streamline investment dispute mechanisms with other countries 
and Saskatchewan. If that is in fact the case, you can be assured, 
Madam Speaker, that the official opposition is supportive of 
that principle. 
 
Also this Bill apparently undertakes that the court may make 
any rules that it considers necessary to regulate the practice and 
procedures with respect to proceedings under the Act. That of 
course causes a little bit more concern, Madam Speaker, 
because apparently that gives this court pretty extensive powers. 
And again I think the minister would have been wise had he, 
when he spoke to this Bill on second reading, more clearly 
outlined what effect these extensive powers would have here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because the minister, as is the case with the NDP, left so many 
questions unanswered, it is incumbent upon the official 



March 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

opposition to ask the questions and do the research. Madam 
Speaker, we’ve done an excellent job of doing our research. We 
have done our research on Avastin, and the government is in 
big trouble there today. We have done our research on 
agriculture issues, on social issues. 
 
Madam Speaker, the official opposition certainly will scrutinize 
this piece of legislation. We will continue to ask the minister to 
be forthcoming with answers. If he doesn’t do it in the second 
reading of this Bill, then we’ll have to take our requests for 
information to the minister at the committee level. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Madam Speaker, in closing, I would ask the government to 
bring in more significant legislation. This obviously is a piece 
of legislation worth considering. But given the significant 
problems we’re facing, I think that there are more important and 
higher priority issues that need to be brought forward. 
 
Nevertheless, Madam Speaker, we are going to continue to look 
at this piece of legislation, Bill No. 38, The Settlement of 
International Investment Disputes and to do that, Madam 
Speaker, I would therefore now move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Rosetown-Elrose 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I request leave of 
the House to introduce two motions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave has been asked. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move by leave 
of the Assembly, seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members from 
Regina Northeast and Saskatoon Silver Springs for 
Monday, March 27, 2006, to Friday, March 31, 2006, to 
attend the CPA Canadian Regional Council in 
Washington, DC, on behalf of this Assembly. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Moose Jaw North, the Government House Leader, and 
seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That leave of absence be granted the member for Regina 
Northeast and Saskatoon Silver Springs for Monday, 

March 27, 2006, to Friday, March 31, 2006, to attend the 
CPA Canadian Regional Council in Washington, DC, on 
behalf of this Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move, seconded by the House Leader, leader of the 
House for the opposition: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) and the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 13, 
2006, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 19, 
2006, at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader and seconded by the member from 
Melfort by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 13, 
2006, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 19, 
2006, at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this House do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House does stand adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:34.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................799 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................799 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................800 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................800 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................800 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................800 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................801 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 100 Years of Nursing on the Prairies 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................801 
 Saskatchewan Party Dinner in Prince Albert 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................801 
 Saskatoon Pianist Wins International Recognition 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................801 
 Prince Albert Mintos Win Championship 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................802 
 Govan Rink Fundraiser 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................802 
 Clothing Drive for Louisiana Victims 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................802 
 Regina Neurosurgeon Named Citizen of the Year 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................803 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Funding for Avastin 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................803 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................803 
 Funding for Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................805 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................805 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................806 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................806 
 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................807 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................808 
 Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................809 
 Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................815 
 Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................816 
 Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment 
 Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (no 2) 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................821 
 Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment  
 Act, 2006  
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................822 
 Bill No. 38 — The Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................823 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................825 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................825 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


