
















































Hansard: November 14, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 12A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 367 
 November 14, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s again a pleasure to stand in this 
Assembly to present a petition from the many residents of the 
Whitewood and Broadview areas of the province in regards to 
dialysis services in the Broadview Union Hospital. And I read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills and 
some communities outside of Cypress Hills regarding the 
condition of Highway 18. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s signees are from the community of Consul 
and also Oxbow, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present on behalf of citizens of the province, and 
this petition was signed regarding the funding of the drug 
Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people in the 

Carnduff area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of a 
constituent at Carnduff, I present the following petitions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities 
of Carnduff, Gainsborough, Glen Ewen, Rouleau, and Avonlea. 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of Saskatchewan, and actually other Western 
provinces, concerned about the state of Highway 49. The prayer 
of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the great city of 
Regina, the communities of Lintlaw, the city of Saskatoon, the 
community of Codette, Saskatchewan, as well as Edmonton, 
and Prince George, British Columbia. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise today on behalf of 
people who are concerned about Highway No. 49. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Sturgis, Kelvington, and Lintlaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
a petition that says it’s time to improve Highway 49. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from 
Kelvington and Fosston and Tisdale. And I am pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with the funding of the drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Carnduff and Kennedy. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
who are very upset with this government’s move to turn 
highways back to gravel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who have great concerns regarding the future of the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and 
Macoun. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition from citizens opposed to 
possible reductions of health care services in Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, you petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from parents concerned about the 
unnecessary delay in the release of the 2006 Department of 
Learning capital priority list and the resulting delay in the 
construction of a much needed elementary school in the 
Willowgrove and Arbor Creek areas of Saskatoon: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build an elementary school 
in Arbor Creek. 
 

The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, live on Kenderdine Road, 
Bentham Crescent, and Budz Green in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Carnduff, 
Alida, Saltcoats, and Gainsborough. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan Highways 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

employees who would be affected by such possible 
closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by good citizens from 
Watrous, Prince Albert, Young, and Simpson and Lockwood. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with upgrading Highway 
20 to primary weight status. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Drake, 
Lockwood, and Lanigan, Saskatchewan, and I’m happy to 
present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding the government’s 
failure to fund the cancer drug Avastin. I will read the prayer 
for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition on Highway 36, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people of Bengough, 
Coronach, Rockglen. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that on day no. 17 I shall ask the government the 
following four questions, all to the Minister of the 
Environment: 

 
Is the provincial government aware of the study released 
on November 13, 2006, by the world wildlife federation 
Canada, raising concerns about the impact of the Alberta 
oil sands development on Saskatchewan’s water supply? If 
so, what action has the government taken to address the 
concerns raised by the sustainability of the water supply 
that flows to Saskatchewan through the McKenzie River? 
 

The second question, Mr. Speaker, is again to the Minister of 
the Environment: 
 

Has the provincial government raised the issue of ensuring 
sustainable supply of water for Saskatchewan with the 
Government of Alberta? If so, what actions have been 
taken by the provincial government to ensure that 
Saskatchewan has access to sustainable downstream water 
supply from water sources flowing into Saskatchewan 
from Alberta? 
 

The third question again to the Minister of the Environment: 
 

Has the Government of Saskatchewan taken action to 
negotiate a binding water agreement to regulate 
transboundary usage of water from the McKenzie River 
Basin? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the fourth question: 
 
To the Minister of the Environment: given the importance of 
sustainable oil sands development for Saskatchewan and a 
sustainable water supply to develop our oil sands, what 
action is the provincial government taking to ensure that 
Saskatchewan oil sands are served by a sustainable water 
supply? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SPM: to date how much 
has been spent on the construction project of the Finance 
headquarters on College Avenue in Regina? 
 

Further question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker: 
 

What will the actual final cost upon completion of the 
construction project at the Finance headquarters on 
College Avenue be, in Regina? 
 

Continuing, Mr. Speaker, in the same line of questioning: 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

To the Minister Responsible for SPM: what was the total 
cost estimate from Dominion Construction approved by 
the Government of Saskatchewan for the construction 
project at the Finance headquarters on College Avenue in 
Regina? 
 

One final question for this minister, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SPM: to date how many 
floors have been completed in the construction project of 
the Finance headquarters on College Avenue in Regina, 
and what will be the end number of floors constructed in 
this project? 

 
One other question, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Learning: on what date 
will the 2006 capital priority list be released? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 17 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
what is the repayment schedule for the $2 million loan to 
the Northwest Communities Wood Products? 

 
Similar question: 
 

For the Minister for Investment Saskatchewan: what is the 
interest rate for the $2 million loan to Northwest 
Community Wood Products? 

 
And the third and final question, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
what type of loan was provided to Northwest Community 
Wood Products? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to be able to welcome to the Assembly today, Mr. Brian 
Graham and with him Cherrie Martel, constituents of mine from 
the constituency of Riversdale in Saskatoon. Brian serves as the 
community association president in Pleasant Hill, and Cherrie I 
know is involved in the association as well. I want to welcome 
them here and thank them for the commitment to their 
community, to the community of Saskatoon, and to the 
province. 
 
Thank you very much. Good to see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
join with the Premier and the members opposite in welcoming 
Brian Graham and Cherrie Martel to the Assembly today. We 
had the opportunity of meeting with them this morning to 
discuss crime issues in Riversdale and elsewhere in Saskatoon, 
and want to commend them for their continuing hard work and 
wish them every success in future endeavours in bringing more 
resources to much needed areas of crime enforcement, and etc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome them to their Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Legislative Assembly, a large group of provincial 
representatives of the Canadian Diabetes Association sitting in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today is World Diabetes Day, but on an ongoing basis these 
Saskatchewan branch volunteers, staff, and directors help to 
raise awareness of the issues surrounding diabetes and advocate 
solutions for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to show their appreciation 
for the good work these people do for the citizens of our 
province and welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to join with the 
Minister of Health in welcoming the people from Canadian 
Diabetes here to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
I know we’re going to have an opportunity to meet with them in 
a more formal basis this evening and certainly look forward to 
that as a number of members, I think on both sides of the 
House, will be attending that reception and dinner. So we look 
forward to that. And welcome to the Assembly. And maybe this 
evening we can answer some of the questions that were posed 
today during question period if they don’t get answered in here. 
So we look forward to that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview, the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce some students and teachers and parents who are 
here from the Discovery Learning Foundation. They’re sitting 
in the east side of the Speaker’s gallery. There are 10 students 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

and they’re accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Melitta Bosse 
and Ms. Elizabeth Pyror. The chaperones with them are Mrs. 
Joanne Marsh and Mr. and Mrs. Ian Cockburn. And I ask all 
members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, among 
the group in your gallery here to recognize World Diabetes Day 
are four constituents of mine. So to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, I would like to introduce Doug, Pat, 
Mark, and Michelle Ferguson from Estevan. And Mark is a 
victim of juvenile diabetes and so the whole family has a 
special interest in this today. So I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly, I’d like to welcome a 
couple of members from my constituency in your gallery. Mr. 
Jim Bateman and Merv Costley are here to visit and they should 
be joined later by Lyle Shada. 
 
These individuals are members of the Notekeu flood group. 
And this is a bit of a sad story in that this group of farmers were 
flooded out in the year 2002, so that’s some four years ago. And 
they’ve been trying to reach resolution with the government on 
their flooded out issue since that time. So they’re here in the 
Assembly today to witness the proceedings, but also with the 
hope of meeting the Premier and the Minister of Highways later 
on. So I’d ask all members to join Jim and Merv to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce a friend and a constituent. I think he’s in the gallery 
and I’m going to ask him to stand up. Is Grant Key in the 
gallery? I heard he was. There he is. Grant Key is from Waseca 
and in the constituency of Lloydminster as well. Grant has been 
a great supporter, but even more so, Grant’s sister is my 
daughter-in-law. So I welcome him especially to his legislature 
and will you help me welcome Grant. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today 
to rise and introduce a member, a former member of this 
Assembly seated in your gallery. We have the former member 
for Weyburn, Mr. Lorne Hepworth. And I have to say while 

he’s in the gallery that I was probably no older than some of the 
students that are here today, and Mr. Hepworth was the MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Weyburn and he 
took some time out of his busy day to write me a little note and 
to sign it. And I’m happy to say that it’s on my wall in my 
office. And I’d like to ask all members to join me in welcoming 
him today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the hon. 
member for Weyburn in saying welcome to Mr. Hepworth. I 
was in the Assembly at a time when he was and, Mr. Speaker, 
he was a self-appointed expert on the worst and best speeches 
that this Assembly has ever heard. And all can I say is we’d 
rather see him there than here, Mr. Speaker. Good to see you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

World Diabetes Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we’ve heard, today 
is World Diabetes Day — and welcome to our guests from the 
Diabetes Association — first celebrated 15 years ago in the 
hope that it would coordinate diabetes advocacy worldwide. It 
has become the main global awareness campaign of the diabetes 
community and is recognized in 150 countries. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the World Diabetes Day campaign 
slogan is Diabetes Care for Everyone. It draws our attention to 
the plight of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and the fact 
that not everyone with diabetes, or at risk of having diabetes, 
receives the care they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan our provincial diabetes plan 
provides a framework for a new approach to diabetes 
management. It supports a team approach to diabetes 
self-management education, primary prevention of type 2 
diabetes, and the care and prevention of diabetes complications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we pay particular attention to the needs of our 
First Nations residents. And we continue to work with our 
partners on a national diabetes surveillance system and national 
diabetes strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, World Diabetes Day is about raising awareness of 
diabetes issues and what must be done to address them. I would 
like to acknowledge the excellent work of the Canadian 
Diabetes Association in working towards this goal and in 
particular thanks to the CDA [Canadian Diabetes Association] 
Saskatchewan branches and their employees and volunteers 
who deliver programs and services in support of diabetes 
education, research, service, and advocacy in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise today on World Diabetes Day, and I’m proud to rise today 
with people from all around the world to acknowledge World 
Diabetes Day. November 14 was chosen because it is the 
birthday of Dr. Frederick Banting, the Canadian who 
discovered insulin in 1922. Dr. Banting won the Nobel Prize for 
his remarkable discovery and is one of our greatest Canadians. 
 
Diabetes affects over 50,000 people in Saskatchewan. It is a 
leading cause of major complications that include blindness, 
kidney failure, heart disease, stroke, and amputation. Effective 
diabetes management can help prevent these complications. 
 
Much progress has been made that makes managing diabetes 
easier. Innovative technology like sophisticated glucose 
monitoring systems that are designed to be worn like a 
wristwatch or a pager or hearing aid will soon be available. 
Glucose sensors based on sound waves and infrared light 
technology will virtually do away with the need for pricking 
fingertips. Insulin pumps and even inhaler of insulin are 
incredible advancements for those suffering from type 1 
diabetes in Saskatchewan and around the world. This is 
something definitely worth celebrating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Canada West Wins World Junior A Challenge 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members of the House know that when we stand up on this side 
of the House in the Assembly, we talk about positive things that 
are happening right across the province. And last week in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in Yorkton and Humboldt and 
Canora, thousands of fans enjoyed and extended their 
appreciation to the Junior A World Hockey Tournament that 
was held there. Almost 2,000 fans crammed the Farrell agency 
in Yorkton and watched an all-Canadian final to the World 
Junior A Challenge. 
 
And well, Mr. Speaker, we can report today and through our 
convictions that the West is the best. And the game was a 
nail-biter. Canada West went ahead 4-0 over Canada East, 
including two goals from Rosetown’s Jordie Johnston, before 
having clipped the lead to 4-3. But us Western Canadians are a 
tenacious bunch, Mr. Speaker, and we held on to become the 
first ever World Junior A Challenge winners. 
 
And congratulations to Johnston and Canada East’s David 
Kostuch for being the named the players of the game. And 
congratulations to Canada West forward, Kyle Turris, for being 
named MVP [most valuable player]. A 17-year-old from British 
Columbia picked up 11 points in just four games to lead the 
tournament in scoring. 
 
I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that next year the tournament 

will be held in Quesnel, British Columbia. 
 
We want to extend our appreciation to Dick DeRyk and Barry 
Shields and all of the committee who worked in bringing this 
outstanding event to Saskatchewan. And we want to also 
congratulate the communities and ask all members of the 
legislature to congratulate the communities of Humboldt, 
Yorkton, and Canora who were so successful in making this a 
great event for our province. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Rosetown-Elrose Chooses New 
Saskatchewan Party Candidate 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My statement’s 
even more positive than the Deputy Premier’s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Last night was Saskatchewan Party night 
in Rosetown-Elrose. Over 1,000 people from every community 
in the riding and beyond converged on the Civic Centre in 
Rosetown to choose my successor to run in the next election. 
What an exciting event. 
 
Two strong candidates, Brian Braun and Jim Reiter, gave strong 
appeals to the crowd based on a positive vision for our 
province. Our leader addressed the full house and got a standing 
ovation for daring to believe that Saskatchewan could play a 
leading role within Canada once again after decades of 
stumbling behind under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. The 
best line I heard last night was this: the NDP are so 
incompetent, they can’t even do socialism well any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after 800 votes were counted, Jim Reiter of 
Rosetown was chosen to be the Sask Party candidate in the next 
election. Jim is the RM [rural municipality] administrator for 
two municipalities in the Rosetown area. He served as president 
of the Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association for five 
years and as such was an ex officio member of the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] board. He 
is currently past president and executive director of the RRMA. 
Jim sat on the University of Regina senate for six years. 
 
Jim’s many accomplishments range from chairing the board of 
the $1.2 billion Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission to 
serving on the board of the Rosetown curling club. 
 
Rosetown-Elrose has a message for the Premier: bring on the 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
[14:00] 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

Radiothon Raises Funds for Pediatric Ambulance 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, for three days the 
fourth annual Harvard Cares for Kids Radiothon asked the 
residents of southern Saskatchewan to direct some of their 
hard-earned cash to the Children’s Health & Hospital 
Foundation of Saskatchewan and the purchase of a new 
state-of-the-art pediatric ambulance for sick and injured 
children here in the southern part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well Saskatchewan people came through with their hearts and 
money — lots of money. Last Friday afternoon at the end of 
three days and with donations still being added up, almost 
$270,000 had been raised. As well, Mr. Speaker, the Hill 
Companies are providing an additional $100,000 donation. All 
in, Mr. Speaker, the money raised by the radiothon will fully 
cover the cost of a new pediatric ambulance that is designed and 
outfitted to meet the specific needs of children and their parents. 
 
Congratulations and thank yous to the people who have 
donated, to the radiothon sponsors, to the Hill Companies, to 
the volunteers and employees of Regina’s Harvard 
Broadcasting stations and of course to the people of southern 
Saskatchewan who made the 2006 Harvard Cares For Kids 
marathon such an overwhelming success. 
 
Congratulations all around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Suggested Names for New Democratic Party 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was so 
engrossed in this presentation that I forgot to stand up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of the non-partisanship that the 
Premier exemplified yesterday in the equalization debate, we 
wish to provide some new assistance to the NDP, Mr. Speaker, 
from our online new name for the NDP contest. 
 
We’ve had a good number of responses and they continue to 
come in, Mr. Speaker, and some of them are very creative 
indeed. With the NDP’s convention coming up this weekend, 
Mr. Speaker, time is running out on the NDP so it’s important 
that they get the words right. 
 
Some of the submissions to our office have been — that we’ve 
received in the last couple of days — have been Saskatchewan 
Vikings, the party that pillages; Saskatchewan democrats, the 
party with no new ideas; the next defunct party; BDP, blame it 
on Devine party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — You can’t read it on the wall if it’s not 
done in crayon party, and the three L’s, loves lost labour, 
everybody’s moving to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan continue to provide us 
with a good many new names for the tired, old NDP as they try 

and rebrand themselves. And we are sure that through this 
contest we can provide the NDP with at least one more idea to 
steal. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

St. Walburg Wins LivCom Award 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The UN [United Nations] sponsored LivCom Awards are the 
world’s most prestigious awards for livable communities. For 
10 years LivCom has been presenting awards to municipalities 
from around the globe in five different categories based on 
population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to announce to the Assembly that 
the town of St. Walburg in my constituency has recently been 
awarded a Bronze Award in category A, representing 
communities with a population of up to 20,000. The LivCom 
Awards are all about encouraging best practice, innovation, and 
leadership in providing a vibrant, environmentally sustainable 
community that improves the quality of life for its citizens. It 
brings communities together in a common goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issues that the awards raise are issues common 
to all communities even if the solutions are sometimes different. 
The most important aspect of LivCom is the opportunity it 
presents for living in co-operation, for learning in co-operation. 
 
Representatives Tony Leeson and Norm Linkert travelled from 
St. Walburg to China, Mr. Speaker, to appear before an 
international panel of world-renowned judges who had no easy 
task. The panel heard representations from 47 communities and 
projects from 16 countries around the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join with me in 
congratulating the town of St. Walburg for winning the Bronze 
Award at the 2006 LivCom Awards. The town has made the 
people of Saskatchewan truly proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning we heard another disturbing story about a 13-year-old 
girl. She was sent to a house, Mr. Speaker. The house was 
supposed to be a safe house. The staff was supposed to watch 
out for her. The staff was supposed to protect her from those 
who would do her harm. 
 
She was beaten. Her ribs were broken. Her skull was fractured. 
Mr. Speaker, after all that has been written and all the criticism, 
we finally heard the voice of a child. 
 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister, how did his NDP government let 
this happen? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes all 
the issues raised by anybody in reference to child abuse very 
seriously, Mr. Speaker. As I pointed out time and time again, at 
the Oyate Safe House there is certainly challenges in dealing 
with some of these high-risk children. And while I can’t make 
any comments about the specific case, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
you that there was certainly action taken on behalf of the board. 
There was certainly more training that was required by my 
officials, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that actions of this nature don’t 
occur and shouldn’t occur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I can’t get into the specifics of the case, I 
can tell you that that incident did occur. There was some 
problems around that particular area, and staff were advised 
thus that this should never occur again. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s all I have to say about that particular case. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, challenges are the word that 
he uses. Mr. Speaker, once again we discover that the Minister 
of Community Resources covered up and failed to tell the 
whole story. Once again the people of Saskatchewan have had 
to rely on the media to discover this whole story. Once again we 
discover the government was funding a safe house that was 
anything but safe. Not a word in the thousands of documents 
released under the freedom of information Act. Not a word in 
the thousands of pages released in the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did this minister fail to 
mention that a resident of a safe house had been attacked and 
beaten under his care? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is really important is 
that certainly from the perspective of getting information and 
sharing that information as to what the challenges were in the 
safe house, this government has been more than open. It has 
been very accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is we set 
up the Children’s Advocate’s office to make sure that they have 
a role in ensuring that the children of this province have an 
additional support mechanisms in place. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government led by example. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, we announced this morning more 
solutions to help with children that are involved with sexual 
exploitation, Mr. Speaker. And today I’m very proud as the 
minister to say that good progress is made. We’re going to 
continue building on that progress, Mr. Speaker. 

And yes, there were hard lessons learned. We have never denied 
that. But, Mr. Speaker, we made the effort to make sure that this 
government led, Mr. Speaker, and we got a plan in place. We’re 
going to implement that plan, and we’re going to make sure that 
the children are cared for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, after he tried to cover it up. 
Only because of news reports has the Children’s Advocate . . . 
did he even act or that facility would still be open today under 
the same existing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, this girl was so seriously injured and is now back 
on the streets . . . apparently most of the others who went 
through the safe house. Now not only was this safe house 
dangerous; it didn’t work. And the minister’s decided to stay 
the course. Three years after the facts, he’s decided to stay the 
course. 
 
He can’t tell us when the safe house will open again. He can’t 
tell us how much money Oyate will get. And in the meantime 
the young girls are on the street and exposed. Mr. Speaker, how 
will the minister justify staying the course with the current 
board of directors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is important for the 
public to know that as a minister I am bound by confidentiality. 
I’m not going to be talking about a specific child nor her case. 
That member knows that and he’s being irresponsible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What’s much more compelling, Mr. 
Speaker, is on this side of the House we’re trying to provide 
leadership. And, Mr. Speaker, part of that leadership is making 
sure that we stay the course where we think it’s going to be the 
best benefit for the children. 
 
And this morning the Minister of Justice and I announced a 
number of measures that’s going to help support these children 
to make sure they have as many options, Mr. Speaker, to exit 
the sex trade, Mr. Speaker. We take that role very seriously. 
 
What we’re not going to do is become a politician and play on 
people’s lives and do what they can in their grasp for power, 
Mr. Speaker. That is irresponsible. They say one thing in this 
Assembly. They say another outside the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. There is no leadership from that file, so stand back, 
step aside, we’ll provide leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — He continues to defend the indefensible. 
Three years — he calls that leadership. Three years to even act 
on a file, and he wants to call that leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are vulnerable young girls. They come from 
troubled families and they live troubled lives. And 
programming offered to help them must be held to the highest 
standards. The people who work with these young people must 
be highly trained and clearly motivated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a 13-year-old girl had her ribs broken, a fractured 
skull, was beaten and injured in a safe house, in a place she was 
supposed to find refuge. Mr. Speaker, how does this minister 
ever justifying renewing a contract with that organization at any 
time at any date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, again as a minister I’m 
bound by confidentiality. I’m not going to make any comments 
about that specific case. I will refuse to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s what ministers do; they provide leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, this morning alone 
the Minister of Justice and I announced a series of steps for 
making sure we provide as many options for these children to 
exit that trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we got Ranch Ehrlo involved. And Ranch 
Ehrlo is known throughout the country for some of the work 
that they’ve done with troubled youth, and they are now 
actively involved with a new model, Mr. Speaker. So not only 
are we reaching out with these new groups in the cities, Mr. 
Speaker; we’re also involving Ranch Ehrlo. We have an 
after-care model, Mr. Speaker. We have more police officers. 
We’ve got awareness campaigns. Things are moving in the 
right direction, and we’re going to act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re not going to do is politicize the event. We’re going 
to make sure that we make some good progress on this file, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, how many children’s lives 
were ruined in the three years before he started to take action? 
Were there criminal charges brought in this action? 
 
Let’s review what we’ve learned over the last several weeks, 
Mr. Speaker. There were criminal records checks never done. 
There were allegations of nepotism never investigated. There 
was an advocate’s report stating that political considerations 
trump the needs of children. 
 

And now we hear the voice of one of these troubled children — 
not from the minister, but in the media. And the one thing we’re 
concerned about, the minister says, let’s stay the course. That’s 
beyond sad, Mr. Speaker. That’s inexcusable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this minister fire the Oyate board today, do 
the right thing, put this whole project under Ranch Ehrlo where 
it belonged in the first place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one of the important 
references that I’ve made is that we often get advice from many 
sources. And the all-party committee that spoke about this 
particular issue, of what that member knows, various members 
of his caucus were on this all-party committee. And what did 
the all-party committee say? And I will quote, Mr. Speaker, 
from a document from February 9, 2000. And I quote: 
 

Ms. Draude: — I also would like to suggest that, 
especially in Saskatoon and Regina, we make contact with 
the tribal councils and find out if we can be meeting with 
them and explaining what we’re doing. Because we were 
also informed by the groups here last week . . . or last 
month, that there was a large percentage of Aboriginal 
people involved. And if we can . . . I would hate to be 
doing this sort of [thing] . . . outside of the band councils. 
They may feel like we’re pointing fingers and I would 
rather have their involvement [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
That’s exactly what is wrong with the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
They say one thing here, another thing outside the House. 
That’s why they’ll never be Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Retaining Young People in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since this 
Premier took office, 18,000 fewer people now live in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Last year alone, in the middle of a 
boom, Saskatchewan lost 4,500 people while even the province 
of Manitoba grew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of those are young people. They get a great 
education in the province of Saskatchewan, and then too often, 
they leave for other jurisdictions. 
 
Last year the New Brunswick government introduced a tuition 
rebate plan. Mr. Speaker, it rebates up to 50 per cent of tuition 
cost to students who stay and work in the province for several 
years. It’s a long-term plan. Now we know the Manitoba 
government is also looking at a similar long-term tuition rebate 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current government policy is just for one year, 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

and it’s not working. Will the Premier confirm for the 
Assembly today that his government will look at such a 
long-term plan to keep young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the members will know, our government is in the second year 
of a three-year tuition freeze for the University of Regina and 
University of Saskatchewan students. 
 
In addition the Premier of Saskatchewan has announced the 
member from Regina Elphinstone’s review on affordability and 
accessibility to post-secondary education in the province. It’s 
the intention of the minister who is looking at this issue to 
provide an interim report this winter and a final report next fall. 
I fully anticipate there will be a number of recommendations 
that come out of that report that will ensure that young people 
in this province have access to an affordable education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re hearing from the 
minister is we’re hearing what we’ve heard from the NDP for 
10 years while people have left the province. The Premier’s 
been in office for six or seven years — too long by any count 
— and we’ve lost 18,000 people. Well the Minister of Finance 
says it’s only five years, but it seems like a lot longer, Mr. 
Speaker, frankly. 
 
In the last provincial election, in the last election the 
Saskatchewan Party did propose a long-term plan. We need a 
multi-year plan, not only in the interest of tuition levels in the 
province but as an incentive to keep young people here. New 
Brunswick’s done it. Manitoba is looking at it; the NDP in 
Manitoba are looking at it. The Saskatchewan Party believes 
this is the kind of thing that’s necessary. Will the Premier act, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to share some facts with the members of the opposition. 
 
October 2006, we are up 22,900 full-time jobs in the province 
of Saskatchewan over last year. In addition we have 8,100 more 
youth employed in the province of Saskatchewan. We currently 
have over 5,000 jobs posted on saskjobs.ca. In the last two 
years, Mr. Speaker, we have over 3,900 more training 
opportunities in the province, and more will be announced 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have $12 million going to 
community-based organizations for career and employment 
programs. We have $2.9 million in tax credits for qualifying 
tradespeople. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re in the third year of a 
four-year program to get to a $1,000 tax credit for those people 
who graduate from post-secondary institutions and stay in the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister makes our 
case for us. She makes the case for exactly what we’re talking 
about today. She is talking about what is a labour shortage in 
the province of Saskatchewan. She’s highlighting the training 
aspect and responsibilities of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And it’s true that young people can get a great post-secondary 
education in the province of Saskatchewan. The problem is, is 
that under this NDP government they leave for other 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Premier, last year in the middle of a boom, oversaw the 
loss of 4,500 people. Other provinces are looking at a long-term 
plan, tuition rebates as an idea that will keep young people in 
the province, Mr. Speaker, that will keep them here to fill those 
jobs, to pay taxes, Mr. Speaker, to improve the quality of life in 
our province, to make our province grow. 
 
Can we expect some action on this count from this Premier, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely amazed at the comments 
coming from the Leader of the Opposition, and let me tell you 
why. In July of this summer, July 2006, a young woman 
emailed the Leader of the Opposition asking about 
opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. She said she 
loved the lakes and the rivers and the forests, and she wanted to 
move here and get a job. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, did that member opposite, did he once invite 
that young woman to come to Saskatchewan? Did that Leader 
of the Opposition at any time mention our hot economy? Did he 
refer her to the city of Swift Current’s website where there are 
jobs? Did he refer her to the chamber of commerce website in 
Swift Current? Not once. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about a labour 
shortage, but when he has an opportunity to speak positively 
about this province, does he do it? All he does is dump on the 
members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

Vacancies in Nursing Positions 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
during the 1999 nurses’ strike, this is what the former Health 
minister had to say, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, in a 
letter to SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]. This is what she 
said, and I quote: 
 

We made some mistakes . . . one mistake was being too 
busy to really listen, to really hear all the legitimate 
concerns facing nurses . . . some problems that should 
have been dealt with promptly were allowed to fester. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the festering is continuing in the nursing 
profession. Here is what nurses are saying. Stress levels are too 
high because RNs [registered nurse] are overloaded. The 
overtime is incredible, and it makes it impossible to balance 
work and family life. That’s what the RNs are saying to this 
government right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When will this minister start listening to the concerns from 
nurses on the floor? Or is he going to allow this situation to 
continue to fester, and are we going to be faced with a nursing 
strike like in 1999? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
throughout the previous session of the legislature and now this 
one, almost every day I am surprised at how little the member 
opposite is paying attention to what’s actually going on in the 
world and in the government today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 1999, Mr. Speaker, this government has been actively 
engaged in consulting and working on policies relating to health 
human resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2001 we brought forward the action plan. In 2005, Mr. 
Speaker, we brought forward another plan that further updated 
how we will respond to this issue. And, Mr. Speaker, just a 
couple of months ago I reconvened the nursing committee, put 
the actions in place on recruitment and retention policies — $15 
million, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues to 
manage nursing vacancies with overtime. As a result, nurses are 
getting burnt out, and that’s what they’re trying to tell this 
government. 
 
Here’s what one nurse had to say. Schedulers constantly harass 
nurses to work on their days off. It becomes very stressful. We 
know that some nurses have been asked to work at least three 
shifts in a row out of desperation because they can’t find 
enough people. 

Overtime costs have increased by $2 million in Regina and 
Saskatoon in the last year. In one year, overtime costs for 
Regina and Saskatoon amount to $10 million. How many 
nurses would that hire full time? Ten million dollars a year is 
what this government is spending on overtime. 
 
Will this minister commit today to funnel some of that money 
from overtime and offer it for full-time, permanent nursing 
positions to start dealing with the issue that we’re facing in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite is fully aware that the recruitment and 
retention issues that this government is addressing, Mr. 
Speaker, speaks directly to the issues that are being raised with 
this government by the organized nursing profession and by 
individuals throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the process of recruitment . . . Because 
recruitment and filling vacancies certainly goes a long way, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensuring that there is less requirement for overtime, 
less requirement for filling in for holidays, Mr. Speaker, in our 
recruitment initiatives, Mr. Speaker, we have gone to the 
nursing education program, and we’ve said to the young people 
there who are graduating, will you work in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, those people have voted with their 
activities, Mr. Speaker. Ninety per cent of last year’s graduating 
class are working in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
health care professionals put any faith in that minister’s 
recruitment and retention program. We heard them talk about a 
health plan that they introduced five years ago that has had 
them back away from committing a 30-minute drive to primary 
health care. They’re having to back away from many of their 
promises, and I believe that’s what’s going to happen with this 
initiative too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Managing overtime, managing vacancies with overtime is just 
poor management. We’re hearing nurses that are being burnt 
out, are being burnt out and leaving this province. Morale is 
low, and we’re seeing WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 
claims in the nursing profession skyrocket because you’re 
managing vacancies with overtime which is simply wrong. 
 
They didn’t listen to the nurses in 1999. Will they start listening 
to the nurses in 2006, so we don’t avoid the shemozzle that we 
faced under this NDP government in 1999? Will he start 
listening to SUN and taking their recommendations into heart? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
simple answer is yes, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been listening to 
nurses. And, Mr. Speaker, the significant problem is not that 
there aren’t programs and incentives and recruitment and 
retention initiatives that we’re taking. Part of the problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there aren’t large groups of unemployed nurses 
throughout the world, Mr. Speaker, that are prepared to come 
and work in these vacancies in Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities manage as 
best they can given the resources that they have. I encourage the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, if he knows of unemployed 
nurses in the province of Saskatchewan, bring forward their 
names and we’ll hire them tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. We’ll put 
them to work. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we are working to increase the 
seats in our nursing education program and, Mr. Speaker, we 
are working on recruitment and retention initiatives that are 
going to fill vacancies and give us opportunities to improve . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t give the minister any 
names of nurses that aren’t working in the province right now. 
But what I can give him are the thousands of nurses that we 
have trained in this province that that government hasn’t 
retained. We have the worst nurse out-migration of any 
province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, under this NDP government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the record and some of the 
decisions this NDP government has made. In 1991 
Saskatchewan graduated 364 nurses. Today, this year we’ll 
graduate about 230. That’s 130 nurses short. He asks me what 
we should be doing about retention and recruitment. How about 
increasing the number of seats back to where we were in 1991 
to start dealing with the issue? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has got us into this mix, this 
mess in the last five or six years or ten years. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
about time they start increasing the number of seats so that we 
deal with the problem internally. Will he increase the number of 
nursing seats in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I don’t have the time to give the member opposite a history 
lesson about the financial state of this province in 1991. There 
are other people around today, Mr. Speaker, that can help with 
the member understanding the state of this province in 1991 and 
again in 1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this economy is re-energized. It’s in a position 
now, Mr. Speaker, where we can improve health care, increase 
the number of seats. Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech of just a 

week and a half ago indicated very clearly, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote, “Strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving 
public health care while reducing wait times and improving 
access to services.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and his party voted against 
that very initiative just this week, Mr. Speaker. I encourage the 
member opposite to stand up and say that he supports the 
initiatives that the government has taken because every single 
initiative we take is going to have additional nurses working in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it only took that minister four 
chances to stand on his feet and re-confirm that this blame, 
blame it on the Devine party is the perfect name for that NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t live up to the 
decisions that they made five and eight years ago that’s put us 
in this problem, Mr. Speaker. We’re in this problem because of 
the decisions that government has made. We have been calling 
on this government for the last . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. The 
member for . . . Order please. The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if it comes down to backing 
that government and what they’re doing regarding recruitment 
and retention of nurses or backing up what SUN is saying — 
what’s actually happening on the floors of our hospitals — 
we’ll back up SUN each and every time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the health care 
professionals that are making this system work, but the 
overload because of overtime and lack of staffing levels is 
causing burnout, is causing huge issues in the health care 
profession. Mr. Speaker, this minister has got to start acting and 
not just present another report or another committee. He’s got to 
start acting and recruiting and retaining the nurses that we have 
in the province. When will he start dealing with the overtime 
and the vacancy issues in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like 
I said, I don’t know where the member opposite has been or 
who is doing his research. In the nursing education program, 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 we had 1,023 students enrolled, Mr. 
Speaker. In 2005-06 we have 1,557. We have increased by 120 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, the number of seats in the nursing 
education program since 1999. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

a part of a party that distributes a pamphlet in Saskatoon that 
says their goal going into the next election is for steady, gradual 
reduction in government spending. Mr. Speaker, how do we 
increase seats and do these sorts of things while decreasing the 
health care budget? I ask the member opposite to stand up and 
be clear on that matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Expansion of Provincial Strategy 
on Child Sexual Exploitation 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the use of a child or 
youth under the age of 18 years for sexual purposes in exchange 
for money, drugs, food, or shelter is sexual exploitation. Mr. 
Speaker, children and youth exploited in these ways are victims 
of sexual abuse and should be protected. Sexual exploitation of 
youth and children is reprehensible and cannot be tolerated. 
 
In 1997 Saskatchewan developed a comprehensive strategy to 
protect children from sexual exploitation through the sex trade. 
Further actions were implemented in response to the June 2001 
recommendations of the joint special committee of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan — Special Committee 
to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the 
Sex Trade. 
 
Front-line service providers tell us that the strategy has had a 
positive impact. Police report a marked reduction in traffic in 
the stroll areas. Intervention committees have improved 
networking among service providers. And there are more safe 
places for sexually exploited children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to announce that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is providing funding of $133,000 
this year and nearly $1 million annually to expand the 
provincial strategy on child sexual exploitation. We are 
expanding our strategy to provide new police and prosecution 
resources to further protect children from sexual exploitation. 
 
We will provide $50,000 this year with $550,000 annually to 
expand the capacity of police services to deal with street-level 
sexual exploitation of children. Five new municipal police 
provisions are being provided — two each in Regina and 
Saskatoon and one in Prince Albert. These positions work 
closely with community organizations and government 
agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we also begin work to establish a 
specialized team staffed by two prosecutors and one assistant 
coordinator to strengthen the province’s ability to use the 
national flagging system to identify a long-term offender or 
dangerous offender cases. One new RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] investigator will work closely with the 
prosecutors. Thirty-three thousand dollars is being provided this 
year to begin this important work with $390,000 to be provided 
each year thereafter. 
 
And finally, funding of $50,000 will be made available this year 

to begin development of a $150,000 public education campaign 
aimed at prevention of child sexual exploitation. Further details 
of the campaign will be announced following detailed 
development of the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these new initiatives build on the extensive 
amount of work that has already been done to protect 
Saskatchewan children from sexual exploitation. Those 
initiatives include legislation to keep predators away from 
at-risk children and to ensure that victims of sexual exploitation 
receive the support they need. Legislation to seize vehicles used 
in the commission of prostitution offences or that are repeatedly 
seen driving or parking in stroll areas, and to shut down a 
property used for sexual exploitation. Funding for outreach and 
residential services for sexually exploited youth. Policing and 
prosecution policies that recognize sexually exploited children 
and youth are vulnerable victims and that those who prey on 
them must be held accountable. 
 
Participation in the establishment of the national sex offender 
registry. Initiatives to keep children and youth in school. 
Ensuring that there are a range of medical, public health, 
alcohol and drug, and mental health services to address the 
needs of at-risk youth. And ensuring youth who have offended 
are provided the right services to reduce both the risk of 
reoffending and the risk of being victimized by sexual 
predators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to advise the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, the members of the Legislative Assembly, of 
these new initiatives to protect our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
respond to the ministerial statement that was just given to the 
House. Five years ago I had the opportunity to sit on the 
committee that was dealing with the sexual exploitation of 
children. Five years and there’s been nearly deafening silence in 
this legislature on the issue. Only this year when CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] broke a story on a scandal 
at a safe house did we actually start hearing it in the House 
again. 
 
And today we have an announcement by the Minister of Justice 
on three initiatives — three great initiatives that we do applaud. 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the timing is suspicious. It’s 
more to take the heat off the Minister of Community Resources 
than it has to do with anything of their commitment to children 
in this House. 
 
We have $133,000 spent on this issue this year, Mr. Speaker, 
and $1 million after the next election. 
 
It happens to be also the timeline for Project Hope. Let’s put it 
off. Let’s just say what we have to say right now and put it off 
till after the next election. 
 
Anyone who doubts this need only ask the minister how he’s 
going to spend the $30,000 on the public ad campaign. It was 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

announced today, but it hasn’t been designed. There’s no idea 
how the money’s going to be spent. There’s no timelines. 
There’s no best practices. And there was no consultation. There 
was no partner standing beside this minister saying, that’s a 
good idea. The minister just decided to spend some money, and 
hopefully it’ll direct the focus off the minister who failed our 
children. 
 
We talked about the committee and the recommendations that 
were made, Mr. Speaker. There was 49 recommendations made 
by the committee that were dealing with the children who are 
being exploited. And from my calculation, there’s been 13 of 
those recommendations that this government has actually dealt 
with. 
 
The second recommendation about adopting a zero-tolerance 
policy for children who are sexually offended hasn’t been 
talked about at all. The committee recommended the 
government should publish the names and pictures of those 
convicted of offences against children — has not been touched. 
 
We haven’t seen the work that’s been done with the federal 
government. We don’t have a provincial-wide tracking system. 
We don’t have a secure home that we’ve asked for. We don’t 
have a safe home in Regina. We don’t have satellite recovery 
homes across the province. We have not expanded funding to 
wraparound and absenteeism. We have not talked about the 
service agreement between governments and service providers. 
We haven’t dealt with the issue of racism that’s continuing to 
expand in our province. We do not have mandatory treaty 
education in the school. We do not have any kind of a network 
to build understanding and co-operation between the 
governments and FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations]. We do not have the school curriculum that’s dealing 
with sexual exploitation of children. Those issues have not been 
dealt with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier the minister quoted the statement I made 
during the committee when we talked about the necessity of 
having First Nations involved. What I said, I believe. But I did 
not say that that would abdicate the minister’s responsibility for 
the work he had to do. At the end of the day the minister is the 
father of all the children under his care and it is his ultimate 
responsibility. 
 
The only way that people in Saskatchewan will believe that 
sexually exploited children will be safe in this province is if the 
all-party committee has an opportunity to deal with the issue, 
not just this minister. I’ve written to the Premier and asked him 
if he’s going to reinstate the all-party committee, and I’ve heard 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do thank the minister for the work he has done, 
but there is so much to be done yet. So please don’t do any 
patting on your back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
would like to table responses to written questions no. 33 to 40 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to written questions no. 33 to 40 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the tobacco tax that is built into the 
price of tobacco products sold at retail, the provincial sales tax 
is applied to the selling price. As you will know, we have 
lowered the sales tax from 7 per cent to 5 per cent effective 
October 28, 2006. This would have resulted in lower tobacco 
prices. Mr. Speaker, this is not our intent nor our desire. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, this Bill increases the tobacco tax on 
cigarettes and loose tobacco from seventeen and a half cents per 
cigarette and 18.3 cents per gram. On a package of cigarettes 
that sells for about $10, this amounts to a tobacco tax increase 
of 20 cents. Mr. Speaker, this is roughly equivalent to the 2 per 
cent reduction in PST [provincial sales tax] on a $10 pack of 
cigarettes. As a result, cigarettes and loose tobacco prices for 
consumers will remain the same. 
 
As such, I am pleased to move second reading of The Tobacco 
Tax Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 16, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
rise in the House to participate in the debate and discussion on 
this Bill. It’s not often, Mr. Speaker, that you will actually hear 
the opposition joining with the government in supporting what 
is actually a legislated increase in taxation. But actually the 
reality is this is one of those times. 
 
The increase that the Finance minister indicated was that this 
will be an increase back to the same level of taxation there was 
before the drop in PST, so the net effect of this Bill is to prevent 
a drop in prices for tobacco. We have over the last number of 
years, Mr. Speaker, seen some significant benefits towards 
society’s efforts to try and combat and reduce the consumption 
of tobacco in all citizens, but in particular young people. 
 
We’ve seen this through an effective combination of an increase 
in the prices of cigarettes and tobacco products, aggressive 
labelling, and a significant public education program. All of 
these things have worked together to provide noticeable and 
significant drop in the consumption of tobacco products. 
 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

Nobody’s unaware of the fact that tobacco usage is one of the 
most significant health risks that we have in our society today, 
and it’s because of initiatives that society and governments at 
various levels have taken that we’re actually seeing a reduction 
in tobacco usage. And I note, Mr. Speaker, that one of the target 
groups for reduction tobacco usage was young women who 
were earlier regarded as the most at risk for starting the usage of 
tobacco, and that has been where it has been successful. So in 
that area we’re pleased to see that there’s been a benefit and that 
measures such as this have started to bear some fruit. 
 
The concern that we have, Mr. Speaker, is whether the 
additional revenue from this increase, or the revenue that will 
actually be yielded to the government by maintaining this tax at 
the same level, that it be used and committed for purposes for 
either health or for measures that will further reduce the 
consumption and usage of tobacco. 
 
Earlier in this session we saw and indicated some support for 
the fuel tax accountability Bill. And we would like to see 
something similar with regard to this Bill, where the additional 
revenue that will be generated as a result of this tax initiative 
would be targeted specifically for public education regarding 
tobacco use and education of young people in schools and one 
of the earlier levels. We would like to see some of this money 
be used and targeted for classes for adults and non-school-age 
people to stop smoking and just broader public education in 
general. 
 
Part of this money could go to, and we would be pleased to see 
it being used for health services for people that have got cancer, 
emphysema, and other tobacco-related illnesses. We want to 
make certain that this is not seen by the public as just a tax grab 
or as is commonly referred to as a sin tax. So we want to make 
sure, Mr. Speaker, that this money go where it’s targeted for 
and where it can be well used. We want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, 
that there is a good measure of accountability and transparency 
with all expenditures by the government, but in particular where 
money can and should be used to protect youth and people. 
They’re at risk for starting one of the most addictive habits 
there was. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I’m pleased, amongst my caucus colleagues, there’s been some 
aggressive efforts to have people stop smoking, and I’m pleased 
to see it throughout our province and want to see that those 
measures continue. And the additional revenue that will be 
generated here would be a good place to try and ensure that that 
money be there. 
 
So I hear the Finance minister over there making some of his 
usual type of derogatory comments. I think he’s talking about 
losing money. This is actually preventing a reduction in 
revenue. I think the Finance minister would be well advised to 
think back on his days as the Health minister and try and target 
some of this money where it would do well. We are at a time, 
Mr. Speaker, where The Tobacco Tax Act could generate some 
revenue that would be well used in fighting health issues and 
fighting addiction issues. 
 
And if that’s not enough, Mr. Speaker, they could use that to 
fight other addictions other than tobacco. They could deal with 

alcohol, drug abuse. We’ve got a large problem with crystal 
meth in our province and an issue and a problem that that 
particular minister ignored when he was in the Health and the 
Education portfolios. So that minister would be well advised to 
look back at what his failings were in his earlier portfolios and 
would want to take some of this money to try and shore up 
some of the problems that he let grow unchecked during his 
tenure in previous portfolios. It would be a good use for this 
money to go towards drug abuse, for crystal meth, towards 
additional policing, and a variety of other measures that are 
necessary. 
 
We will, Mr. Speaker, want to have some consultation with 
other groups that are affected by where this money is and 
should go and by retail merchants that will be affected by this. 
Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
16 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased today to rise to move second reading of Bill 
No. 32 which is An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act . . . Sorry, let me say that 
again. This is The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Amendment Act, 2006. It also makes consequential 
amendments to The Provincial Court Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is moving to provide pension 
increases equal to 70 per cent of the change of the consumer 
price index for superannuates from the Public Service 
Superannuation Plan, the Power Corporation Superannuation 
Plan, the Liquor Board Superannuation Plan. This indexing will 
also extend to the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
Superannuation Plan and the Anti-Tuberculosis League 
Superannuation Plan. These are often referred to as the old 
plans. 
 
This indexing of pensions has not been guaranteed by 
legislation by this Assembly since 1965, Mr. Speaker. As such 
this government has been the first in my lifetime to move 
forward with a guaranteed indexing plan for these pensioners. 
The government has, however, been providing increases to the 
public sector pensioners on an ad hoc basis. 
 
Over the last several months, I’ve had an opportunity to meet 
with the pensioners to hear their grievances and to understand 
their concern. I agree that we should put an end to the ad hoc 
approach to pension increases and we should serve to legislate 
an annual increase of 70 per cent of the change of CPI 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

[consumer price index]. 
 
It will be important for us to note that the existing provision for 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council approval for ad hoc 
increases is no longer needed. This legislation will take effect as 
of April 1, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our retired civil servants will now have the benefit 
of a locked-in annual increase to these civil service pension 
payments. At 70 per cent of the CPI, Saskatchewan will be 
providing higher guaranteed indexing than either Alberta, 
which is at 60 per cent, or Manitoba, which is at sixty-six and 
two-thirds. I would also note that this exceeds the commitment 
that was made by my Finance critic last session when he said 
that what Alberta was giving was simply good enough. I’m 
pleased that we have been able to do more. I am pleased that 
we’ve been able to guarantee a 70 per cent indexing for these 
civil service pensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move as a result second reading of Bill 32, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 
2006 and to make consequential amendments to The Provincial 
Court Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 32, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is once again my privilege to 
rise and participate in a debate and discussion regarding Bill 32, 
superannuation legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unfortunately an example where even when 
the NDP members decide they want to copy something from the 
Saskatchewan Party platform, they can’t get it right. We 
contemplated a band of acceptable increases of what percentage 
of the CPI would be included in this, and what the Minister of 
Finance chose to do was arbitrarily pick a number. 
 
What the minister failed to do was consult with the people that 
were here yesterday. We met with some of those people and we 
talked to them about whether there’d been any meaningful 
consultation or any consultation at all. And what we had was a 
Finance minister that decided, oh yes, this sounds like a good 
number; I’m going to go with it, without having any discussion 
with them, without looking at what the effect of this was on 
them. And while we’re supportive of this concept in a general 
sense, we take very serious exception to the minister’s lack of 
consultation and lack of meaningful rapport and dialogue with 
the people that are directly affected by it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that anything less than 100 
per cent of CPI is in effect a reduction in income for those 
people that are affected for it. And those people are not asking 
for 100 per cent, nor is anybody advocating 100 per cent. But 
we have to understand as legislators when you are not meeting 
cost-of-living changes, you are actually moving somebody 
backwards on the scale. 
 

So what I would like to ask the Minister of Finance to do is 
engage in some meaningful dialogue and some discussion with 
the pensioners that are directly affected by this to try and 
determine what would be satisfactory, what would be 
appropriate, what needs they have financially, which of their 
expenses are affected by inflation, which of them are not. 
Clearly the cost of purchasing a house for seniors and retirees 
may not change. They may live in the same existing house. But 
they are affected by inflation when it comes to things like 
utilities, groceries, gasoline, fuel, and heating costs. 
 
So we would like to invite the Finance minister to have 
meetings by the people that are directly funded by this type of 
legislation. We think it’s important that they enter into a 
meaningful dialogue to ensure that our seniors are well and 
adequately cared for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also goes without saying that our seniors are 
some of the people in our province that are the most vulnerable. 
They do not have a voice in legislation any more because the 
unions that they belonged to, they have now retired from. So 
they no longer participate in union elections, management of 
their locals. So they’re not in a position to advocate or lobby 
through . . . for better pension benefits or appropriate pension 
benefits through a collective process. There are retirees spread 
out through the province that don’t have the same level of 
organization or resources to try and negotiate on their behalf. So 
I think it’s incumbent on the government to do an adequate and 
appropriate job in dealing with these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as opposition members we also have concerns 
about where the funds are going to come from for this particular 
purpose. While we support the benefits going, we want to 
know, Mr. Speaker, how much the ongoing costs are going to 
be to fund this, whether it’s the intention of the government to 
make a one-time payment into those pension funds that will in 
perpetuity ensure that there’s sufficient funds in there to meet 
the obligations required, or is it the intention of the Finance 
minister to have this as an ongoing obligation of the province? 
 
We have a problem, Mr. Speaker, with superannuation type of 
expenses throughout the finances of this province. In this 
province we’ve got large funds, large pension funds, that have 
got significant unfunded liability. What we have now is a 
minister that said, I want to increase the benefits that are 
payable out of one of these funds. Fair enough. He wants to do 
that. But what’s he doing with the other unfunded liabilities? 
What’s he doing with the other expenses that are in those 
funds? 
 
We are at a point right now in our financial history where we 
have had some significant windfall gains. Those gains, those 
financial benefits that we’ve had in the last two or three years as 
a result of resource revenues, may well not be something that’s 
continued for a long time in the future. This is the time to play 
catch-up on things like dealing with topping up pension funds, 
dealing with unfunded pension liabilities, and other capital 
funds that the minister does not seem to regard as important 
because they’re not part of his leadership agenda or part of their 
next election agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this minister should be doing, if he was a prudent steward 
of the taxpayers’ resources, would be saying: how much is the 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

unfunded liability in the pension funds in this province? How 
much money will this additional cost be for this, and am I 
prepared as the Finance minister to put additional funds in this? 
And will I be taxing the future of this province to do so? And 
hopefully he has done that analysis, and we would like to hear 
about whether he’s done that analysis. And we’d like to know 
about the ongoing issues that he’s going to deal with, unfunded 
pension liability. 
 
And we’d also like to see that minister go outside and have 
some discussion with the retirees and with the pension 
recipients of this province to ensure that he has made an 
adequate plan to deal with them. 
 
This is the first time this has been brought back before this 
legislature since 1965 is what he had indicated earlier. So we 
are now some 40 years hence is the first time it’s been brought 
back. So why don’t we develop some kind of a plan that can 
look after this type of issue, not just now but in perpetuity, by 
ensuring that there’s ongoing legitimate funding that’s going to 
be in there. And where is the funding coming from? Is it a 
one-time . . . 
 
So if he wants to know what our position is and he’s asking 
what our position is, I’d like to urge him to call an election or 
talk to the outgoing Premier as to what the election is going to 
be called. So that when we have that election he can sit down 
and he can read about our platform, he can go to our press 
releases. I know he’s reading a lot about our platform on the 
website and I’d like to encourage him to continue to read about 
it on the website and in our literature because there’s no doubt 
he’s getting a lot of good ideas from that. He doesn’t do a very 
good job of transplanting them over there and turning them into 
NDP ideas. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the superannuation Act is an important piece 
of legislation to the seniors in this province. It’s an important 
piece of legislation to this party and we’re going to see to it that 
the seniors in this province are looked after. And it’s not 
enough to say we’re going to wait another 40 years before the 
seniors get brought before this legislature again. 
 
We want to see to it that their funding is safe, secure, long-term, 
made by reasonable consultation with them, and addressing 
what the needs are of those people. And I think before that’s 
going to happen appropriately, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
need another election in this province. And as far as this party is 
concerned, we want to bring it on because we know the seniors 
are behind us and the seniors want us to look after them with 
this type of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear that the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I hear three 
people vying for attention, or four, and the Chair at this time 
has recognized the member for Saskatoon Southeast and he 
should be the person that is heard. The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what I’d like 
to do — I know that they missed a lot of my comments — I 
think I’d like to just go back and start again at the beginning 
and review everything from the top. But in the interest of time, 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is urge the Minister of 
Finance to do listening instead of talking, not just in the House 
but outside when he’s talking to seniors, so seniors can be heard 
and seniors can have a legitimate voice in what their needs are 
in this province. The Minister of Finance above all else is 
someone that should be listening, should be caring, and should 
make a commitment to those people. 
 
Unfortunately we’ve heard a lot of, a lot of noise from that 
minister and, Mr. Speaker, we have not heard anything that 
means that there’s been any kind of meaningful commitment to 
those seniors as to what they’re going to receive for ongoing 
benefits, what their needs are, and how he’s going to pay for the 
costs of this Bill on a long time basis. Mr. Speaker, I would 
move adjournment of debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill 32 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, a few brief 
comments in introducing second reading. The Bill proposes 
changes to The Regional Health Services Act respecting the 
operating agreements between regional health authorities and 
affiliates. 
 
In each health region, the regional health authority is 
responsible for the delivery of health services. In several 
regions, regional health authorities entered into agreements with 
one or more affiliates to provide those important services. 
These new provisions will allow regional health authorities and 
affiliates to develop more effective relationships that support 
improved performance management and the delivery of quality 
health services. 
 
I would like to note that regional health authorities and affiliates 
are very supportive of the proposed changes. In turn 
Saskatchewan Health will be in a better position to ensure 
regional health authorities are accountable for the delivery of 
those important services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2). Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 32, The Regional Health Services Amendment 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with 
pleasure to speak briefly on Bill No. 31, An Act to amend The 
Regional Health Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it certainly is true that regional health authorities 
have a primary responsibility for the delivery of health care 
services in the province. They do not have the only authority. In 
fact the prime authority rests with the Minister of Health and 
the Department of Health. And very often the regional health 
authorities are caught in the middle between a lack of proper 
direction and guidance from the Department of Health and from 
the minister and trying to cope with issues that are laid on their 
table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is sort of a shame that regional health authorities 
have to pick up the inadequacy of the NDP’s direction and 
guidance in terms of many of the fundamentals of the health 
services field in our provinces. We’ve been telling this 
government for over a decade now that they were facing a 
looming crisis in people, in health care professionals to be 
available to work in the system. And systematically one Health 
minister after the other ignored the advice that was given by the 
official opposition. 
 
And now they sit there and sound as if they’re surprised or 
point to recent decisions to increase training seats. Those 
decisions should have been made a decade ago or 12 years ago 
when now we could be reaping the benefits of those decisions. 
Unfortunately they weren’t made, and the result is that regional 
health authorities are trying to cope with this lack of vision and 
this lack of direction and this lack of leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it probably is worthwhile for contracts 
to be clarified between regional health authorities and affiliates. 
But again I wonder what’s been taking so long to get this to the 
forefront. How in the world have affiliates and regional health 
authorities been able to hammer out agreements in the past 
without this kind of amendments to The Regional Health 
Services Act? It just seems as if it takes one problem after 
another to develop and get to a crisis stage before this 
government introduces any kind of legislation or any kind of 
changes to improve the situation. And certainly it has not 
needed to be that way. It was obvious to anyone who would 
take the time to look objectively at the health care system that 
we are facing a crisis. 
 
I met a doctor in our community the other day that said, do you 
realize you are going to face an even greater crisis going 
forward in the supply of physicians in Saskatchewan? And I 
said, what’s your perspective? He said, look at the 
demographics of existing practising physicians in this province 
and tell me how, with the reality that it takes approximately 
eight years to graduate a physician from a training program, 
you’re going to physically be able to have enough graduates if 
you keep 120 per cent of them. If you keep every single one 
that’s in a training seat, if you keep every single one, it won’t be 
enough to meet the demographics that are looming in terms of 
the next decade. 
 
And this is the kind of statistic that was available a decade ago, 

12 years ago, 14 years ago. And the opposition was saying that 
for all of these many years, and Health minister after Health 
minister has ignored the advice, and here we are now debating 
changes to contracts that the regional health districts have with 
their affiliates as they try to cope with this lack of leadership by 
this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suspect when we look at this at close look that 
there is probably nothing problematic in this legislation. We 
want to make sure that the regional health authorities and 
affiliates have been fully consulted. We want to investigate as 
well if this kind of changes to The Regional Health Services 
Act is going to have implications by third party providers of 
services to the affiliates and to the regional heath authorities, 
and to make sure that all of this has been fully discussed and 
consulted and that there is no unintended consequence from the 
government stumbling through the actions that they take as a 
small token of compensation for what is inadequate leadership 
over the years by this NDP government in the field of health 
services delivery. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in order to allow this discussion to occur and 
for us to make sure that they haven’t missed something else in 
this legislation, or proposed changes, I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 31 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 27, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
I’m proud to say that Saskatchewan’s film tax credit program is 
one of the most competitive in all of Canada and encourages the 
development and support of local film industry workers. It is a 
young and flourishing industry with the average age of workers 
in the film industry here in Saskatchewan at around 35 — that 
is around 10 years younger than the rest of Saskatchewan’s 
workforce — so it’s an attractive opportunity for young people 
here in the province. For every dollar invested in the film 
industry by the tax credit program, it’s estimated six more 
dollars are spent in the province from other sources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we made some major changes to the tax 
credit program. We increased the tax credit but we put some 
limits on how it can be used. Those changes have resulted in a 
small reduction to our total film production volumes but a 
significant increase to the economic benefit those volumes 
bring to our province. Madam Deputy Speaker, the proposed 
change to the tax credit program will continue down this path 
by further clarifying the intent of the program. 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

Since the inception of the film employment tax credit program, 
producers have been able to receive a bonus for undertaking 
production outside a 40-kilometre radius of either Regina or 
Saskatoon. The 5 per cent rural bonus has included all 
production costs incurred in Saskatchewan. The proposed 
amendments are designed to clarify that salaries paid to 
non-Saskatchewan residents do not, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
do not qualify as Saskatchewan expenditures for the purpose of 
the rural bonus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will ensure that the benefits of the 
film industry flow to the Saskatchewan economy while 
continuing to allow our employment tax credit program to be 
one of the most competitive programs in all of North America. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 27, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister. I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise to 
participate in the debate regarding the film employment tax 
credit legislation. Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ve had the 
opportunity to briefly review this Bill and it is one of the Bills 
that has been put forward in this session that can be described 
most aptly as tinkering with existing programs. As such we are 
always leery of and question where we’ve gone to. 
 
Film employment and films in this province have been 
somewhat of a sensitive issue over the last number of years. 
And I question the wisdom of tinkering when we may have 
been better off to have done a more detailed or careful analysis 
of, are we meeting our goals, or what are our proper . . . and 
things that we want to arrive at by having incentives for a film 
and movie industry in this province. 
 
We’ve seen places where politicians have gotten involved in 
this type of thing, and I’m troubled by the political involvement 
in the film industry. And in this particular Bill the last line of 
the Bill before the coming into force is “. . . for whom residency 
requirements have been waived by the minister pursuant to 
subsection 4(1).” 
 
So what we’ve done is allowed for this tax credit to be dealt 
with directly by ministerial intervention into how the system is 
supposed to work. And who it applies to and who doesn’t is 
determined directly by the minister. Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
can’t imagine anything more troubling than having the minister 
deal with when tax credits apply and when there’s no direction 
given as to how that should be applied or what the purposes of 
it is. 
 
Last year we saw the Tommy Douglas film produced in this 
province, something that Saskatchewan residents should have 
been able to take a great deal of pride in. Unfortunately politics 
crept into that film. We saw the character of former Premier 
Gardiner besmirched because of a political agenda on the part 
of people involved in that film or certainly if not a political 
agenda, certainly an inability to deal correctly with the history 
of what this province was. As a result of that, there’s now issues 
whether that film should be shown and widely circulated. 
There’s issues of whether it’s appropriate to use as part of 

school curriculum. 
 
And a large part of the cost of that film was incurred at the 
expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer through Minds Eye 
productions, through the sound stage, through a variety of 
different tax credits and incentives by the provincial 
government. And it’s troubling when we see that kind of a 
financial commitment by Saskatchewan residents go for 
something that because of incorrect politics has now defeated 
the purpose of why that was supposed to happen. 
 
And then the NDP come forward with an amendment that 
allows for tax credits to be granted or not granted at the whim 
of a minister pursuant to section 4(1) of the Act. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it’s not a good day when legislation allows for 
direct ministerial involvement in taxation where there’s that 
kind of discretion. There isn’t even in the legislation any 
direction for a fair-minded minister to use in applying that 
discretion. And I’m not saying the minister there wouldn’t be 
fair minded, but the minister should be entitled to rely on some 
direction from the legislature as to how that discretion should or 
should not be applied, under what circumstances, and what the 
goals of the legislation are. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have concerns with the costs that 
go with any kind of a tax credit. A tax credit sounds like 
something that doesn’t cost the province any real money, but a 
tax credit is that. It is taxes that do not need to be paid. So dollar 
for dollar it is money that the province does not receive and 
dollar for dollar it is an expense to the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
As such, Madam Deputy Speaker, we do have concerns with 
this. We will want to do some significant consultation with 
people in the film industry to ensure that the changes are 
appropriate. And we have concerns with any time the 
government puts forward legislation that gives that much 
discretion back to a minister or a government official or a 
bureaucrat. 
 
We have a reason for passing laws. And one of the reasons that 
we pass laws is to create certainty in the marketplace, certainty 
with regard to our taxation structure, and to give citizens some 
comfort that their money and their hard-earned dollars when 
they pay taxes are being used appropriately, fairly, and within 
the bounds of the law. 
 
To have something as open-ended as to allow for a ministerial 
waiver on a particular program or not, when you don’t even 
know what the number of films that are going to be produced in 
a given year — it’s not saying we’re going to allocate $300,000 
for this — this could be completely open-ended for as long as 
that industry continues on. 
 
It may be that a minister one year will want to be supportive, 
grant the waiver, and maybe the minister in a subsequent year 
won’t. How is there any consistency going to be made available 
so that people are . . . business people in the industry know 
what they’re going to receive, not going to receive? So what 
we’re going to have is gamesmanship on the part of film 
companies to try and lobby for . . . or people seeking political 
favour with a current minister to try and have the credits 
granted. 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

It’s certainly the type of legislation that the Saskatchewan Party 
is troubled by. And we want to see the film industry grow and 
prosper in this province. And we think that having a 
discretionary tax credit where the discretion lies solely with the 
minister is certainly an issue for concern and I suspect, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, will be a troubling issue for people that work 
in the industry. People that work in the industry I think want the 
same kind of certainty that any other industry would have, and I 
can’t think of very many other places in our financial structure, 
in our taxation scheme where the legislation would directly call 
for a ministerial involvement. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The government tries to distance itself and says this is 
something that’s done by an independent council, a tribunal, 
commission, board, whatever. They don’t want to participate in 
it. They don’t feel it’s appropriate to make comments when 
things are before the courts . . . [inaudible] . . . and fair enough. 
Those are fair things. 
 
But when the minister directly gives the authority back to the 
minister under a piece of legislation, it invites nothing more 
than having a particular film or a particular project become a 
political football, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s something that 
the Saskatchewan Party wants to try and distance itself from. 
We want to have a fair, reasonable, level playing field for all 
businesses in this province, and this isn’t the type of thing that 
would create that. But unfortunately the NDP don’t see eye to 
eye with the Saskatchewan Party on that issue. 
 
In any event, Madam Deputy Speaker, we will go forward. We 
will have the consultation. We may want to come back and seek 
an amendment to this Bill. I would move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. At the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving 
second reading of Bill No. 28, The Cities Amendment Act, 
2006. 
 
Madam Speaker, The Cities Act provides a modern legislative 
framework through which all Saskatchewan cities, with the 
exception of Lloydminster, exercise their powers and provide 
services. Hon. members may recall that the legislature passed 
The Cities Act in the spring 2002 session and that the Act came 
into force on January 1, 2003. 
 
Madam Speaker, some of the key objectives of The Cities Act 
are to modernize the relationship between the province and the 

cities; enable city governments to encourage initiative and 
creativity; and provide citizens with better, more accountable 
local government. 
 
Today, Madam Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 which supports these 
objectives. The amendments are a result of ongoing 
consultation with the cities as they move to implement the Act. 
 
Madam Speaker, the amendments proposed in this draft Bill 
address some significant issues. First, the Bill responds to 
requests from the municipal sector and the municipal liability 
review committee with amendments that update and enhance 
the liability provisions in the Act. Second, this Bill introduces 
policy amendments in several areas that have been identified as 
being necessary to improve the effectiveness of the Act. And 
third, this Bill provides for some clarification to areas identified 
by the cities, Government Relations, and Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 
Madam Speaker, the proposed amendments will serve to 
strengthen the legislation. Proposed amendments support the 
intention of the legislation to grant cities broad powers, more 
flexibility, and greater decision making capacity to deal with 
matters that are of a local nature. 
 
I want to take just a few moments to highlight the more 
significant changes that the Bill proposes. Madam Speaker, of 
particular note are the amendments related to municipal 
liability. 
 
In recent years, Saskatchewan’s municipalities, particularly the 
larger cities, have brought forward issues with respect to the 
scope and nature of the liability protection that is afforded to 
municipal corporations under Saskatchewan’s municipal 
statutes. Several recent developments, such as the passage of 
the new Cities Act and Municipalities Act, made it timely to 
conduct a thorough review of the liability provisions. Madam 
Speaker, a working group of officials from Government 
Relations, Saskatchewan Justice, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association], SARM, and the city solicitors from 
the four major cities, began work on the review in late 2004 and 
continued through the first six months of 2005. 
 
This review was very successful in achieving consensus and 
making recommendations in key areas such as general liability 
for nuisance claims, statutory immunity for employees and for 
the acts of firefighters. After the review was completed, 
Government Relations undertook extensive consultations with 
the municipal, legal, insurance industry, and business 
associations on the review’s report, as well as all the city 
managers and the relevant government departments were 
consulted. The recommendations met with a largely favourable 
response although, as might be expected, some of those 
consulted had contrary opinions based on their special interest. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’m pleased to say that this Bill addresses all 
of the review committee’s recommendations. These 
amendments will provide cities with a level of protection from 
liability that is equivalent to or consistent with protection 
afforded to the provincial government and its Crown 
corporations, and to municipalities in other provinces and 
territories across Canada. Madam Speaker, I sincerely thank the 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

review committee for its excellent work that led to these 
provisions. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill also seeks to address other issues that 
the cities have encountered as they have implemented the Act. 
A good number of the amendments in the draft Bill address 
policy issues that the cities have brought forward and that had 
been determined to be in the public interest. I would like to 
highlight several of these amendments. 
 
The Act currently allows a council to reimburse either a 
councillor or a mayor for legal or other costs if a citizen is 
unsuccessful with an application to have he or she disqualified. 
The proposed amendment would extend council’s discretionary 
authority to also reimburse the legal or other costs of a citizen 
where there is a successful application to have a member of 
council disqualified for reasons approved by the courts. 
 
Madam Speaker, the cities brought forward this idea themselves 
and it was agreed that the current Act is unclear. The cities 
questioned, if an elected person can be reimbursed, then why 
not a citizen? This is a matter of fairness. 
 
Madam Speaker, some might think that this amendment could 
increase the number of frivolous actions against council 
members. Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you that the 
grounds for disqualification are specifically set out in the Act 
and are limited to significant issues like becoming ineligible to 
hold office or being convicted of a criminal offence. A judge 
would have to determine that grounds exist in the first place for 
disqualification to occur. 
 
Madam Speaker, we believe that this amendment supports the 
ability and civic responsibility of electors to bring forward 
legitimate actions and allow councils the discretion to recognize 
those individuals. 
 
Madam Speaker, as members of this House are well aware, one 
of our government’s major concerns is economic development. 
Through this Bill, we are pleased to introduce a new financial 
tool to Saskatchewan in support of new economic development 
in our cities. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill contains broad provisions to allow 
cities to use tax increment financing in addition to the existing 
powers in the Act. Tax increment financing is a concept that has 
been used largely in the United States, however interest has 
been growing in Canada. This tool will allow cities to finance 
public improvements in a designated area by the increase in 
property taxes generated by a private development. Using this 
tool may help to encourage development in areas where 
development might not otherwise occur. 
 
Madam Speaker, one might ask why we need to add specific 
provisions in this regard given the general taxation powers the 
cities already have. While The Cities Act provides great 
flexibility and autonomy, its taxation provisions were largely 
carried forward from previous legislation. Legislation needs to 
be as clear and specific as possible in areas such as assessment, 
taxation, and local election procedures. In this instance we have 
included regulation making authority because tax increment 
financing is new to Saskatchewan and refinements may be 
necessary in the context of practical application. 

Madam Speaker, we recognize that city governments are often 
in the best position to make local decisions for the benefit of 
their residents. In support of this, some amendments provide 
greater flexibility for cities to respond to existing and future 
needs of their communities in innovative ways. For example, 
this Bill proposes an amendment to the provisions relating to 
bylaw enforcement that would allow a city to expedite a remedy 
to a bylaw contravention so long as the city bears all the costs. 
As an example, city police services have advised the cities that, 
to be effective as a deterrent, graffiti should be removed within 
48 hours of its occurrence. This amendment will allow city 
officials to enter a property in a timely manner and clean up the 
graffiti at no cost to the property owner. Cities will have the 
flexibility to adopt similar approaches to other nuisances if they 
so choose. Doing so will be a local government choice. 
 
Madam Speaker, another example of increased flexibility is an 
amendment that will allow a council to establish its own policy 
regarding certain land sales. With this amendment a council 
may, by bylaw, adopt a policy setting out the threshold under 
which land can be sold for less than market value and without a 
public offering. The cities often come into possession of small, 
irregular, leftover parcels that are administratively burdensome 
to deal with under the current process. This amendment will 
allow city councils additional flexibility to determine how they 
may make such a process more efficient within their local 
priorities. 
 
Finally, this Bill includes some minor housekeeping 
amendments that are all intended to clarify the intent of the 
legislation or improve the wording or practical application of 
the various provisions. 
 
Madam Speaker, this package of amendments was developed in 
consultation with a working group of municipal representatives 
who provided their professional experience, advice, and time. 
As you can imagine, this is a significant and ongoing 
commitment to take on in addition to their regular duties as 
municipal officials. I would like to take this opportunity again 
to thank this group for their participation and dedication to help 
refine the legislation to the betterment of Saskatchewan 
people’s lives. 
 
In closing, our cities have much to offer in terms of social, 
cultural, and economic development for Saskatchewan. It is in 
all our best interests to enable and facilitate the ongoing success 
and growth of our communities. Accordingly I move second 
reading of Bill No. 28, The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 
2). 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to rise and speak briefly on Bill 
No. 28, An Act to amend The Cities Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that it’s very important, on an 
ongoing basis, that we recognize the importance of our cities in 
our province’s development and future and as the place where 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2006 

many of our citizens choose to live and raise their families. 
 
When the legislation was changed in the last couple of years, I 
think it was important that there be an ongoing review and 
assessment if this legislation was adequately meeting the needs 
of our cities. And I’m pleased to hear that the government has 
consulted with cities. And the amendments being proposed in 
this legislation are a result of that direct consultation and further 
meet the cities in the challenges that they have to provide 
services to their citizens. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as we know very clearly there is only 
one citizen. There is only one taxpayer. And if cities or RMs or 
provincial governments or federal governments look to that 
same citizen to raise the taxes and the funds that are needed to 
provide for the services that our citizens require . . . And very 
often we see a duplication of services and not a clear distinction 
between the roles and responsibilities of the provincial 
government and what the cities can probably do and provide 
much more efficiently to our citizens. 
 
And so certainly from a perspective of the official opposition, 
we’re very much in favour and supportive of positive 
developments that define this relationship and ensure that there 
are adequate resources allocated to the cities so they can 
maintain and provide the services that clearly they’re 
responsible for to the same citizen that we all care about. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I am equally positive in that the cities needed and requested 
clarification and further definition of what their liabilities are in 
the providing of the services to citizens, and I think the other 
detailed amendments that the minister outlined likely will 
provide a great deal of more security and assurance for city 
managers and city council members and mayors in our cities so 
that they understand what the roles and responsibilities are and 
what protections that are available to them in the discharge of 
their duty. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the official opposition would like very 
much . . . and looks forward to the ongoing consultation that we 
have with our cities and communities in this province. In order 
to specifically deal with the issues of this Act, we would at this 
time move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Labour Standards Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006/ Loi de 2006 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards 
Amendments Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I 
rise today in support of labour standards consequential 

amendment Act, 2006. I will formally move second reading of 
the legislation at the end of my remarks. 
 
This legislation completes the amendments necessary to 
introduce Family Day, Saskatchewan’s new public holiday. The 
current Bill adds Family Day to the list of holidays defined for 
The Education Act, 1995, The Interpretation Act, 1995, and the 
French versions of each. 
 
Madam Speaker, it has been more than 30 years since our 
province last introduced an additional holiday. Our province has 
changed greatly in that time, as have the needs of our 
employees and their work environment. This government is 
stepping forward to acknowledge the hard-working families and 
the individuals that have contributed to our booming 
Saskatchewan economy. We believe Family Day is another 
means to help our workers strike a healthy work and family 
balance. 
 
By introducing our 10th statutory holiday, Saskatchewan joins 
nations such as France, Germany, Portugal, and Sweden in 
recognizing the importance of this balance. Madam Speaker, 
Family Day is one more way to ensure our families benefit from 
Saskatchewan’s strong and prosperous economy. 
 
I invite all hon. members to support Family Day by passing this 
legislation. And it is my pleasure to move second reading of 
Bill No. 29, The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2006. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
rise to participate in the debate and discussion regarding the 
labour standards amendment Act. Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
Bill is some four sections long and I would anticipate speaking 
to each section for about 20 to 25 minutes so that . . . not 
excessively long-winded on any of this. 
 
I would like to first start out, Madam Deputy Speaker, by 
commending the NDP for using yet another one of the 
Saskatchewan Party initiatives. This is something that the 
Saskatchewan Party has talked about for some significant 
period of time. And once again it shows that the NDP are at 
least doing some homework by checking our website, checking 
our platform documents, checking our policy resolutions. So 
we’re pleased to see that they’re doing that. And we want to 
give them credit for doing that and want to encourage them to 
continue doing that on financial issues and other matters as 
well. 
 
They put this forward and, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill 
will be received by the citizens of Saskatchewan in the same 
way giving the Weyburn hospital to the city of Weyburn was 
during the death throes of the NDP campaign in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. The voters in this province are getting far too savvy to 
either be tricked or finagled with electioneering. They certainly 
see through this. They know that it’s something that’s stolen 
from the Saskatchewan Party, and they also know that it’s 
something that’s a ploy to try and buy votes. 
 



November 14, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

The reality of it, Madam Deputy Speaker, is if the NDP wants 
to use this to try and buy the next election, what they really 
should do is have that holiday fall on election day because then 
most of the voting age people will be in Alberta visiting their 
children and won’t be here to vote, to vote them out of office. 
So the reality of it is the only way the NDP could hope to 
salvage the next election is by finding methods of having more 
people out of the province on election day. And perhaps that’s 
the direction that they’re going to. 
 
The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act 
broadens this out to ensure that all employees in various 
government agencies, etc., are going to be able to participate in 
that holiday and certainly, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s 
something that the members on this side of the House want to 
see. And we look forward to further discussion on this Bill as it 
goes forward. 
 
And perhaps the NDP would like to add some of the other 
hundred books. We’ve got some of those left and had some of 
them reprinted. And perhaps we could distribute those to the 
NDP members, Madam Deputy Speaker, so that they may have 
some other ideas from some legislature that they may want to 
bring forward as new initiatives. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 
Regina Victoria, the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
In order to facilitate the operation of the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies, I move that we do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Dewdney 
has moved to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 pm. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:36.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................367 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................367 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................369 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................369 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................369 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................369 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................369 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................369 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................370 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................370 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................370 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................370 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................370 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................370 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................371 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Diabetes Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................372 
 Canada West Wins World Junior A Challenge 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................372 
 Rosetown-Elrose Chooses New Saskatchewan Party Candidate 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................372 
 Radiothon Raises Funds for Pediatric Ambulance 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................373 
 Suggested Names for New Democratic Party 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................373 
 St. Walburg Wins LivCom Award 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................373 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................373 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................374 
 Retaining Young People in Saskatchewan 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................376 
 Vacancies in Nursing Positions 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................377 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................377 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Expansion of Provincial Strategy on Child Sexual Exploitation 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................379 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................380 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................380 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 16 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................380 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................380 
 Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................381 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................382 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................383 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................384 
 Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................384 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................385 
 Bill No. 28 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................386 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................387 
 Bill No. 29 — The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006/ Loi de 2006 portant 
 modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards Amendments Act, 2006 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................388 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




