






















































Hansard: May 11, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 58A  THURSDAY, MAY 11, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1611 
 May 11, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Today I’d 
like to present a petition on behalf of constituents from the area 
of Cypress Hills regarding their concerns with the condition of 
Highway 18. Their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed 
by individuals from the community of Maple Creek. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition signed by individuals concerned with 
the lack of funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Grandora, Wilkie, and Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I’d like to 
present another petition from citizens who are concerned about 
the lack of funding for the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and district. I so 

present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
residents across Saskatchewan that are concerned that 
Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island are the only provinces 
that do not have a dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, and Silver 
Spring in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
residents of northwest Saskatchewan in regards to the road 
conditions of Highway No. 3. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from 
Turtleford and Livelong. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Department of Highways 
section shop in Watrous remain open so as to ensure the 
safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan Highway employees 
who would be affected by such possible closure. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise in the House 
today to present a petition to fund the cancer drug Avastin. I 
will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens 
from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 7, 42, 67, 639, 669, 742. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 39 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third 
time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall the Bill be read 
for a third time? Minister of the Environment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment 
moves that Bill No. 39, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 53 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave to waive has been requested. Is 
that accepted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall the Bill be read a 
third time? Minister of Finance. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative 
Development Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
move that the Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 53, The Economic and Co-operative Development 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Elphinstone-Centre. 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I am instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 64 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 
committee? Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave has been asked to waive 
consideration. Is that granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall the Bill be read a 
third time? Minister of Finance. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would move that this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 
requested that Bill No. 64, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2006 be now a read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I am instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 63 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
request leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 
Whole on this Bill. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Request has been asked to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall the Bill be . . . 
for a third time? Minister of Finance. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I would move that this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 63, The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now a read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Walsh 
Acres, Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies that Bill 46 be passed without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I request that Bill 
No. 46, The Snowmobile Amendment Act be now waived 
through the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 46, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read a third 
time? The Government House Leader. 
 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader, the Minister for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation that Bill No. 46, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to also report Bill No. 59 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I request leave to waive consideration of 
Bill No. 59 in Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 59. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read 
a third time? The Minister of Learning. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 - The Education Amendment Act, 2006/ 
Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 59, The Education Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 44 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ 
Federation Act, 2006. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 44, 
The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 
time? The Minister of Learning. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Learning 
that Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
[13:45] 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 42 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 42, 
The Respiratory Therapists Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read 
a third time? Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would move that this Bill be read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 42, The Respiratory Therapists Act be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 43 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would request leave to waive consideration of 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 43, The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read 
a third time? Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation 
Technologists Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would move that this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 43, The Medical Radiation Technologists 
Act, 2006 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 54 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would request leave to waive consideration of 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 54, 
The Cancer Agency Act. Is leave granted? 
 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read 
a third time? The Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I move that this Bill be read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 54, The Cancer Agency Act be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 51 without 
amendment and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
report Bill No. 51 without amendment and ask for leave to sit 
again. When shall it be considered in Committee of the Whole? 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I will request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on the Bill. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read 
a third time? Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
would move that this Bill be read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 51, The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Madam Deputy Speaker. I would 
direct that the committees on the Economy and Crown and 
Central Agencies will sit again next sitting of the House, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 63 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: is 
management of the department aware of any allegations of 
fraud or other illegal activities in the department or its 
agencies in the year 2002-03, such as information received 
from employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? And if so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 

 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, I shall on day no. 63 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: did management of the 
department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or help prevent or detect fraud in the 
year 2002-2003? 
 

And on day no. 63 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: did management 
of this department have established programs and controls 
to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2002? 
 

Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice I shall on day no. 63 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation: how 
much money has been clawed back from communities 
who received centennial grants in 2005? And how many 
communities have been required to pay back money? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 63 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: what year 
did the Government of Saskatchewan begin participating 
in the federal EnerGuide program, and why did they not 
participate earlier? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — In the east gallery, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you, and through you, 53 grade 4 and 5 
students from the Langham Elementary School. Accompanying 
them are five teachers and also 30 chaperones. The name of the 
teachers are Evelyn Kasahoff, Audrey Kampen, Wally Dyck, 
Arlene Mack, and Kara Zukewich. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I look forward to meeting with them 
after for a glass of orange juice and a picture. And please join 
me in welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It is my pleasure to introduce in your gallery four folks 
who have attended today to witness what just happened a few 
minutes ago, the third reading of The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act. And they are from the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association. 
 
And I’d like to introduce, and I’ll just ask that they give a wave 
as I identify them, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
association, Chris Brewer. And he’s accompanied by the office 
manager, Jeannie Brewer, and administrative assistants Leanne 
Hertzog and Marilyn Phipps. 
 
And I’ll ask hon. members, Madam Deputy Speaker, to join in 
extending a warm welcome to these folks, and with 
appreciation for what they do for the sport of snowmobiling in 
the province of Saskatchewan all the time. Thank you very 
much. And good to have you here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 
Community Resources, the member from Athabasca. 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
As Minister Responsible for disability issues I proclaim May 
Speech and Hearing Awareness Month. And in recognition of 
this I’d like to introduce to you, and through you, visitors in 
your gallery, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
With us today is George Thomas who is with the Canadian 
Hard of Hearing Association, Regina and district branch. We 
have Leona Ames, with the Regina association of the deaf; and 
Karen Nurkowski who is with the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard 
of Hearing Services who is acting as our interpreter. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce 
these beautiful people and ask all members of the Assembly to 
give a very special, warm welcome to our guests today. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. In the 
western gallery, it gives me pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly four individuals. 
The first is Bert Adema. Bert, if you could please give us a 
wave or even rise. Yes, there, very good, very good. Bert is the 
executive director of the Indian Métis Christian Fellowship 
centre in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, and they do a tremendous 
amount of good work in the inner city. With Bert is his 
daughter, Jocelyn. Jocelyn studies at Luther High School. If you 
could please rise, Jocelyn. Very good. 
 
And accompanying both Bert and Jocelyn are two visitors to 
Canada, although they’ve been here for a while; they’ve been 
here since the end of August. They’re two exchange students. 
The first is Luisa Carnevali from Brazil. If you could please 
rise, Luisa. Bon dias. And also we have Alexandra Contreras 
from Colombia. Bienvenido, Alexandra. They’re here on 
exchange that wraps up at the end of July. I had occasion to 
have a meal with them over at the Adema’s about a month ago. 
It was very enjoyable, and I know they’re enjoying their visit to 
Canada. They’re learning a lot. 
 
And please could all members join me in welcoming them to 
this Assembly and to wishing them a good rest of their stay. 
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, it is my pleasure today to introduce to you and through 
you to the rest of this Assembly a young man who is in the west 
gallery. He is accompanied by one of my ministerial assistants, 
Melanie Dolton from the Preeceville area. His name is Taylor 
Maksymiw and Taylor is a summer student in my office. He 
was raised in Southey, and he’s just completed his second year 
at the University of Saskatchewan in the College of Commerce. 
His plan is to major in finance with the hope of becoming a 
financial planner and, I expect, a millionaire who can invest in 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

Saskatchewan and help build the province. 
 
In his spare time, he’s a sports enthusiast and enjoys taking the 
time to go hunting and fishing with his dad. And a final note, on 
Sunday, May 14, this young man will be 20 years old. I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature four people who are in your gallery. The individuals 
are Clayton Martin— if you can give a wave — Keith Reeder. 
And they are both employees of SaskPower, accompanied also 
by Perry Kappell from SaskPower and Scott Radonets from my 
office. Clayton Martin is a district operator, and Keith Reeder is 
a district operator supervisor with SaskPower in the Rosthern 
area. 
 
On 10 p.m. on a cold, wintry evening on March 15, Mr. Martin 
responded to what he thought would be a routine call-out to an 
area farm. Power had been lost at the farm, but the landowner 
had a medical condition that prevented him from making it 
through the thigh-deep snow to check on the problem. 
Accompanied by a friend of the farmer, Mr. Martin went to 
troubleshoot the situation and restore the power. 
 
During this time, the man went into a small pumphouse where 
Mr. Martin found him soon after, on the floor, complaining of 
chest pains. Mr. Martin called 911 then took off his coat and 
covered the stricken man to keep him warm. As his condition 
worsened, he began CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation] and 
continued until the EMS [emergency medical services] 
attendants arrived with a defibrillator and took over. 
 
At the same time, Keith Reeder hurried to the farm on a 
snowmobile with his ice fishing sleigh in tow. When he arrived, 
the man was carefully loaded into the sleigh. Mr. Reeder pulled 
him through the deep snow to the road where the ambulance 
was waiting to transport the man to hospital where, I’m happy 
to report, he recovered from the ordeal. With the crisis over, 
Mr. Martin borrowed some winter clothing from Mr. Reeder, 
and together they returned to the farmyard to fix the electrical 
problem and restore the power. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these two men would have us believe 
that they simply did what anyone would do in the same 
situation. I’m sure they would say it’s all in a day’s work for 
SaskPower transmission and distribution employees. I would 
ask all members to recognize these two outstanding SaskPower 
employees who are with us today — Mr. Clayton Martin and 
Mr. Keith Reeder. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

The Value of First Aid and Emergency Training 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. As was 
referenced just a moment ago, the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower introduced two exceptional public service 
employees, spoke of their calm and effective handling of a 
life-threatening situation and how, working together with EMS 
attendants, they helped to save a man’s life. 
 
I think the positive outcome in this situation speaks volumes 
about the individuals involved and their commitment to help 
others. I think it also speaks volumes about the value of their 
training. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, both Mr. Martin and Mr. Reeder credit 
their ongoing safety training for preparing them to face this 
emergency. It helped them to make the right decisions at the 
right time. As he had been trained to do, Mr. Martin first called 
911 to initiate an EMS response. This is perhaps the most 
crucial factor in saving a life, especially in cardiac situations. 
And he worked with the 911 operator to assess the situation and 
decide the course of action. He was able to begin CPR and 
maintain it until EMS arrived. 
 
Mr. Reeder, for his part, understanding that getting the victim 
out of the snowy farmyard and to the hospital quickly was also 
critical, came prepared with snowmobile and sled. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, not only are these actions worthy of 
special recognition, but I think they should stand as a reminder 
to all of us of the value of first aid and CPR training, and of 
knowing how the emergency response system works in your 
area. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Milton Lake Lodge Wins Award of Excellence 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Vince 
Lombardi said that: 
 

The price of success is hard work, dedication to the . . . 
[task] at hand, and the determination that whether we win 
or lose, we have applied the best of ourselves to the task at 
hand. 
 

Ted Cawkwell had a dream of developing a successful tourism 
attraction in northern Saskatchewan. Ted, a former full-time 
farmer from Lintlaw, didn’t just dream. Through hard work, 
innovation, and determination, he developed a very successful 
lodge called Milton Lake Lodge. 
 
The lodge is built entirely of natural pine and is situated beside 
Milton Lake which is in a remote, previously untouched area in 
northern Saskatchewan, 25 miles south of the Northwest 
Territories and 100 miles from the nearest road. The only way 
in is by air. 
 
Not only does this lodge offer luxury and high-class service; it 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

offers clients the opportunity to catch world-class trophy fish 
and enjoy nature that is untouched by humans. This year, Mr. 
Cawkwell is adding an adventure canoe trip down a river that 
very few humans have ever traversed. Canoeists can shoot 
rapids, catch a huge northern pike, and pitch a tent on moss a 
foot thick and enjoy a fish-fry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Mr. Cawkwell, Jr. on winning the 2005 Rookie 
of the Year Award of Excellence from Sask Tourism for his 
Milton Lake Lodge. Saskatchewan is very fortunate that this 
former farmer chose to utilize his skills in Saskatchewan rather 
than leaving the province. I am sure that we will be hearing 
more about this entrepreneur’s future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Speech and Hearing Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, many of us take 
our hearing and ability to speak for granted. Whether we are 
talking with a group of friends, playing a sport, or listening to 
the radio, our ability to communicate is vital in our everyday 
activities. But for 10 per cent of Canadians, speech, language, 
or hearing problems are daily challenges that affect their work, 
school, and social lives. Few of us will ever know the isolation 
and frustration they face. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, hearing loss can strike persons of all 
ages and at any time. It’s one of the fastest growing disabilities 
in North America today. It is estimated that it affects over 
100,000 people in our own province, and that’s why it’s so 
important that we raise public awareness about the cause, 
prevention, and coping mechanisms for this invisible disability. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing Services Inc. has for 25 years worked tirelessly in not 
only raising awareness but in serving Saskatchewan residents 
affected by hearing loss. But they don’t work alone. I want to 
recognize the work of all the other agencies and those who 
assist and provide services to people with speech and hearing 
disabilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
To help raise public awareness and to show support for this 
important cause, the province has proclaimed May 2006 as 
Speech and Hearing Awareness Month in Saskatchewan which 
coincides with the national designation. Please join me in 
saluting the work of the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing Services and in celebrating Speech and Hearing 
Awareness Month in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Meet the North 2006 Conference 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Yesterday in Edmonton a three-day conference wrapped up 

with the participants leaving with a renewed spirit of optimism 
and a better understanding of the opportunities and challenges 
for the future of the development of the North. 
 
Meet the North 2006 was spearheaded by the Edmonton 
Chamber of Commerce and drew some 600 delegates and 185 
exhibitors from across the country. This was the fourth such 
conference held in Edmonton, the first of which was held in 
1997. As more and more projects are contemplated and 
initiated, the opportunities to participate become ever 
increasingly obvious for all of us. 
 
Among those in attendance were the premiers of Alberta, 
Nunavut, Northwest Territories, and the Yukon, as well as First 
Nation and Aboriginal leaders, representatives of local 
governments, industry representatives, representatives of 
post-secondary educational institutions, and leaders in the fields 
of research and innovation, and a myriad of service and support 
industries. The working sessions dealt with the challenges and 
opportunities faced in the rapid development of the North but 
also with innovative and creative approaches in meeting these 
challenges. 
 
Over the past nine years, the relationships that developed as a 
result of this conference have developed into full-fledged 
partnerships, joint ventures, and other synergies between 
business and organizations in the North and elsewhere in the 
country. Madam Speaker, I commend the Edmonton Chamber 
of Commerce, and I would suggest that we may be in the future 
a more full participating partner in this arrangement. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Northern Education Programs Are Vital 
to the Future of Northern Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I recently had 
the opportunity to attend the graduation ceremony of the 
northern teacher education program, NORTEP, and the northern 
professional access program, NORPAC [Northern Professional 
Access College]. Madam Deputy Speaker, these programs are 
vital to the future of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Before they were established, students from the North were 
forced to leave their homes and their communities to pursue an 
education in larger centres like Regina or Saskatoon. Now, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, young people are able to stay in 
northern Saskatchewan and study in numerous fields of study 
without having to leave family and friends. 
 
Since its establishment in 1976, NORTEP has offered over 
1,000 university credit classes attended by students from over 
40 different northern communities. Three hundred and eight 
students have graduated from this program as fully qualified 
teachers, most of whom are First Nations and Métis people. 
Most are working in northern Saskatchewan in their home 
communities. 
 
NORPAC was established in 1989, and more than 230 students 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

have registered since. Students are able to take classes in arts 
and sciences, in areas of study such as health, commerce, or the 
mining industry. Madam Deputy Speaker, I was pleased to 
attend the 2006 graduation ceremony for NORTEP and 
NORPAC. I would like to close with the graduation theme and 
say to all of the graduates, well done. On this day, your dream 
has become a reality. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moosomin. 
 

Regina Rescue Mission Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, last night I had the privilege of joining my 
colleague, the member from Cypress Hills, and also the member 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre, at the Regina Rescue 
Mission’s 2006 annual Love Your Neighbour fundraising 
banquet. 
 
The master of the ceremonies for the evening was Reverend 
Ken Porter, who was a founding executive director of the 
mission. Madam Deputy Speaker, the purpose of the banquet 
was to bring to everyone’s attention and awareness the reasons 
for the Rescue Mission, and how by reaching out to those less 
fortunate we can make a difference. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there were more than 600 people 
gathered for last night’s banquet, and thanks to the generosity of 
organizations and businesses in the city each one gathered were 
treated to a scrumptious meal á la carte. We want to thank all 
the sponsors for their donations and support. 
 
The highlight I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, however was the 
keynote address by Tara Robinson, CTV [Canadian Television 
Network Ltd.] News and more specifically the testimony of 
Melissa, who acknowledged the work of the Rescue Mission 
and how her life was changed around from a life of prostitution 
and addictions to drugs and alcohol. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to extend a hearty thank you to 
the Rescue Mission for their work in this city and to the more 
than 600 guests for the $67,000 they donated to help the Rescue 
Mission. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Party’s Economic Policy 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the number one 
characteristic of the Saskatchewan Party under the leadership of 
the member for Swift Current is that they will say anything if 
they think that’s what people want to hear. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek, when speaking to workers at 
Worldwide Pork, is all for government support to keep the plant 
open and to help protect the workers’ jobs. Even speaking to the 
media for public consumption, the member for Thunder Creek 
is delighted when government support is provided. However on 

his website for the benefit of right wing supporters, he is not 
delighted, never was delighted. And he doesn’t believe in the 
government getting involved in the economy at all. 
 
Under this leader, the Saskatchewan Party policy is whatever 
they said last. Under this leader, the Saskatchewan Party is 
willing to say anything and adopt any position that’ll serve their 
political ends. The question is, what is their policy when it 
comes to the economy? Are they hands-off reformers? Are they 
Devine-school interventionists? Do they know themselves? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, under this leader, the Saskatchewan 
Party is either lacking clear direction, or they are trying to play 
both sides of the street. And who’s to say which it is, except 
perhaps maybe Brenda Bakken Lackey who says that under this 
leader the Saskatchewan Party values politics over principle. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, she was certainly in a position to 
judge. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Effect of Government Policies on School Divisions 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Well, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the destructive force that is NDP 
[New Democratic Party] math is visiting itself on the education 
system in our province and specifically in southeast 
Saskatchewan. Madam Deputy Speaker, that math goes 
something like: the NDP’s amalgamation plan, the current NDP 
budget, plus years of losing our people to other provinces under 
the NDP economic policies equals increases in property taxes, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, across this province, and fewer 
teachers. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am sorry to confirm for the 
Assembly today that the concern that the Saskatchewan Party 
had about the NDP’s plan and its effect on teacher numbers in 
our province seems to be coming true. There are reports out of 
Weyburn and Estevan that 10 per cent of the teaching positions 
will be cut there. Madam Deputy Speaker, that would be over 
50 teachers gone in one school division. They had 550 teachers, 
and if the 10 per cent figure comes true, they will have 500. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my question is to the Premier: will he 
explain to the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, to the parents 
and the teachers in that area, why his NDP plan is going to 
result in 50 fewer teachers in southeast Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Let’s just review for a moment about what 
Tory math is like. This is from the Leader of the Opposition 
who has just returned from a little fundraising gathering in 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

Ottawa last evening, or on Tuesday night. I would just be 
interested to know whether it was at that fundraising dinner that 
he happened to raise the question of his views in terms of what 
math was worth. 
 
What was it he says about the federal budget after it comes out? 
He says, well you know, we’re not too worried about this 
equalization issue because, you know, whether it’s ten-province 
or five-province, it really doesn’t matter. It’s 60 million bucks; 
it’s just semantics. 
 
Sixty million bucks to this member is semantics. The 
cheerleader for the opposition stands up after the federal budget, 
and he says, you know what, we just love this federal budget 
which increased health care spending by 6 per cent. Oh I know 
we voted against the provincial NDP budget that increased 
health by 10 per cent, but we love that Tory budget of 6. 
 
They love a budget that has a 6 per cent increase for health care. 
They love a budget that has nothing in it for equalization. And 
you know what? He goes on to say, just don’t worry about that 
federal money; don’t send us all of it, just send us . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Tory math doesn’t work. It didn’t work under 
Grant Devine; it isn’t going to work under him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, should it surprise 
anybody in this Assembly — it doesn’t surprise the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy or all of the districts that are looking at 
tax hikes and fewer teachers because of this NDP plan — but 
should it surprise anybody in this Assembly that that minister 
wasn’t even in the same area code as the question because he’s 
embarrassed by his own tenure as the Education minister and by 
his budget that looks like it’s going to result in 50 fewer 
teachers, 50 fewer teachers in southeast Saskatchewan? 
 
Here’s what that member had to say on Weyburn radio with 
respect to the issue of education in southeast Saskatchewan. He 
says, and I quote: 
 

I guess one has to kind of wonder what their game plan is 
and if it is in fact anything other than just cheap 
Saskatchewan Party politics. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was the only answer this minister had for the 
parents, the teachers of this school division that are going to be 
crushed by this lack of plan. This from this NDP government 
with respect to education. If that minister wants to answer the 
questions, fine. Will he explain to the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy how their students, how their school system, will be 
better off under this NDP plan that means 50 fewer teachers in 
southeast Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The leader of the Sask Party should in 

fact leave his cheap Sask Party politics somewhere else. 
 
It was interesting to note that on Tuesday night while the 
members of this Assembly were continuing to work on our 
provincial budget and we were continuing to work to drive 
forward a way to find equalization money for Saskatchewan 
people, he was in Ottawa trying to find money for the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I think that’s a very interesting and telling point. And this is 
exactly the reason he’s raising this issue in Weyburn today. 
He’s not raising the fact that there were millions of more dollars 
for education in other parts of the province. He wasn’t talking 
about what it is that his plan is in terms of percentage increases 
for education. All it is, is just an attempt for him to raise his 
profile in a by-election. 
 
The simple fact is that this budget and that successive budgets 
have increased education spending. We have record spending 
now in education. In the last 10 years there’s been a 40 per cent 
increase in education spending, and in the last 10 years that 
party has consistently voted against those budgets. And they 
voted against the increase again this year. It is nothing but 
cheap Saskatchewan Party politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask members, I would 
ask and remind members that . . . Order, order. I’d ask and 
remind members that they’re not to refer to those who are 
absent or present within the Chamber as was in the previous 
remarks. And we’ll continue with oral questions. The member 
from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is 
right about one thing. This party, this Saskatchewan Party will 
vote against their plans that will result in 50 fewer teachers in 
southeast Saskatchewan. We’ll vote against his plan that’s 
going to cause property tax hikes in Weyburn and Estevan, in 
the city of Regina. We’ll vote against a plan that results in the 
Sun West School Division, which includes Biggar and 
Rosetown, saying there’ll be 15 fewer teachers in that division. 
 
You bet we’ll vote against that kind of plan, Mr. Speaker, that it 
will damage the education system in the province of 
Saskatchewan and put still more weight on property tax to fund 
an education system that is currently obviously underfunded by 
this government. 
 
Does the minister have a specific answer for the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy or Biggar or Rosetown or southwest 
Saskatchewan or Regina why they should accept from him, why 
they should accept from him higher property taxes and fewer 
teachers? Does he have an answer for them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — My question is: does the Leader of the 
Opposition have any credible plan to provide a detail to this 
Assembly on what it is he’s actually seeking? Have they in any 
of their speeches told us what they think the education funding 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

should be? Have they stood in this Assembly and said anything 
other than, give my riding or riding X, Y, or Z more? No. 
 
And why is it? Because it is nothing more than a paper-thin 
veneer of cheap Sask Party politics from a leader who is 
attempting to curry favour and distract from the fact he drove 
out of this Assembly a capable member — although I didn’t 
agree with her politics — a capable member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy because she did not agree with his leadership. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget provided $67 million 
worth of property tax relief for farmers. It provided record 
education spending. It provided record health care spending. It 
provided record spending in terms of highways. It provided 
record tax cuts. And what did that member of the opposition 
do? Stood and voted against it. That’s a case again of politics 
before principle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, because of the 
arrogance that we see from that minister, because of the fact 
that he’s more interested in his own leadership campaign and 
his advertising commercials than he is about providing proper 
funding the education in the province of Saskatchewan, because 
of the fact that The Nipawin Journal says, “School taxes [to] go 
through the roof,” because of the fact that the Kindersley 
Clarion says, “Sun West . . . will see tax increase, [and] teacher 
cuts,” because of this government’s plan costing teacher 
positions in southeast Saskatchewan, and tax hikes there and in 
cities like Regina, because of that, soon and very soon he’ll see 
another brand new Weyburn-Big Muddy Sask Party member in 
this House temporarily on this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — What is his answer? Is his answer to teachers and 
school boards, who have the same concerns that we do, that 
they’re also playing cheap politics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — So now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
have the admission from the Leader of the Opposition that this 
is nothing more than a cheap political stunt aimed at trying to 
curry favour in a by-election. 
 
This argument would have more credibility if that Leader of the 
Opposition could stand in this House and tell us today how 
much more money it is that he would seek for education. If he 
could tell us today how it is he squares it with their election 
promise to a frozen health care spending and vote against a 
budget with a 10 per cent increase. If he could stand in this 
House today and tell us why it is he’s more interested in 
fundraising for the Saskatchewan Party while he’s in Ottawa 
than trying to find money for equalization. It would have some 
credibility if that member had any credibility and actually had a 
plan. 

The simple fact is, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have increased 
education spending in the last 10 years by 40 per cent despite 
the fact there’s 25,000 fewer students in the system. We’re 
committed to public education. We’re committed to it 
throughout the province. And the amalgamation, the foundation 
operating grant reforms, and our provincial budget support that. 
It is unfortunate that the Leader of the Opposition can’t get past 
the cheap politics and do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. As the 
Leader of the Opposition has just outlined, despite the Minister 
of Finance’s assurances to the contrary, school divisions across 
this province are being forced to hike property taxes. 
 
In the Southwest School Division taxes are going up between 4 
and 18 per cent. In the Prairie South School Division taxes are 
going up between 7 and 15 per cent for most residents; in the 
Chinook School Division taxes are being hiked between 2 and 
38 per cent. And Weyburn property taxes are going up 50 per 
cent. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, will the Learning minister finally 
admit that the amount provided in this budget is not enough to 
cover the increased cost of education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There is sufficient money in this 
budget that the taxes in Weyburn — in the old Sunrise Division 
— should not have gone up. The taxes in Estevan should’ve 
gone down. The taxes in Moosomin should’ve gone down. 
Understanding that in the other three divisions they should’ve 
gone up. 
 
But what is interesting is that the board did not exercise its 
ability to use a three-year phase-in. There was not the decision 
on the part of the board to exercise the tools available for it. But 
the simple fact is, whether the members opposite care to admit 
it or not, there is enough money in this budget that the tax line 
could’ve been held in the old Sunrise Division and there was 
sufficient in this budget to deal with the education needs of our 
kids. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Speaker, earlier the Premier 
travelled to Birch Hills to announce that education property 
taxes would finally be reduced. Well so much for that 
commitment. This government’s decision to underfund the 
basic costs of education is hitting taxpayers right in the pocket. 
As an editorial in the Weyburn Review points out, this decision, 
quote: 
 

. . . ignores the reality of present day Saskatchewan, and 
will end up hurting some students, and worse, hurting rural 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

land-owners, the very sector of the population who can 
least handle any increase. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the same editorial notes, quote: 
 

The government has the funds . . . to mitigate such a tax 
increase instead of downloading it to the local board to do. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, why is this government failing to fully 
fund the cost of education and forcing school divisions to hike 
property taxes instead? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to be very clear now. Is it the 
Sask Party’s position that the province should be funding 100 
per cent of the cost of K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education? Because that is just what the member advocated, is 
that there should be a fully funded provincial share of 
education. Despite the fact that he stands in this House and 
votes against a $67 million tax cut for farmers. Despite the fact 
he voted against record spending in education. Despite the fact 
that he has said nothing in terms of what his party’s plans are in 
terms of education funding today or into the future. 
 
This is nothing but more cheap Sask Party politics aimed at 
trying to deal with a failing campaign of theirs in the Weyburn 
by-election. It is time for the members opposite to start to put 
the principles, to start to put the interests of the people ahead of 
the interests of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, teachers and school board officials 
across this province really didn’t much appreciate the arrogance 
of that member when he was the minister of Learning and they 
surely don’t appreciate it any more now that he’s the Finance 
minister. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the simple reality is the increased cost 
of funding of educational programs have not been met by this 
Finance minister’s budget and at the end of the day people 
across this province understand what is happening. An editorial 
in the Tisdale Recorder sums it up nicely, and I quote: 
 

Kind of makes the government’s promise to further take 
on the burden of paying for education look like just 
another promise they made . . . about this topic — 
Amalgamation will save everyone money. 
 
So, when will we see the savings? 

 
Again, Madam Deputy Speaker, when is this government to 
own up to the fact that they have not fully funded the extra costs 
of education and instead are driving those costs on to property 
tax payers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there has 
been a 40 per cent increase in government funding to our public 
K to 12 education system in the last 10 years despite the fact 
that there has been a 25,000 student decline. More money per 
student is being paid in. We have fixed the equity in the system 
so we no longer have an education system that the rich being 
able to provide a system 25 times better than those in the poor 
ridings. 
 
It’s interesting, it is interesting and telling that we have the 
members opposite today standing up and talking about the 
situation in an oil-rich area, not standing up and talking about 
what we’re doing to improve education in our North or in our 
inner cities. They seem to have forgotten about the social 
compassion. 
 
Why, Madam Deputy Speaker, have they forgotten about the 
social compassion? Because it is all about the politics before the 
principle. It’s because there’s a by-election today that is going 
on because the Leader of the Opposition drove out the member 
for Weyburn out of the caucus, out of the legislature. And that 
is why today you hear this ballyhoo of complaints from the 
Leader of the Opposition and his party — because it is about 
politics before principle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Selection of Chair for Review 
of Post-Secondary Education 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I read 
with interest of plans by this government to conduct a 
comprehensive review of post-secondary education including 
the issues of accessibility and affordability here in 
Saskatchewan. However, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was left 
wondering why a member of the government caucus was 
appointed to head that review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was it felt that this arrangement was the best 
way to conduct such a review? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier of the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well let me say this, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. There is a considerable difference between this 
government caucus and that opposition caucus. In that 
opposition caucus, Madam Deputy Speaker, any member who 
does not toe the caucus party line is no longer part of that 
caucus. In that caucus members are prohibited, we’re told by 
the former member of Weyburn, from expressing the views of 
their constituents. In this government caucus, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, each and every member is playing a valuable role in 
the shaping of public policy, in the delivery of good public 
services. 
 
I have selected the MLA from Regina Elphinstone to lead this 
review because of his abilities, because of his commitment to 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

post-secondary education, because of his understanding of the 
institutions, because of his relationship with students. The 
member from Regina Elphinstone, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
will provide a significant review for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan students and Saskatchewan families. That’s why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Deputy Speaker, you know, that’s a 
very interesting answer from the Premier. Because on page 4 of 
a document dated April 21, 2006 titled external 
accessibility/student financial assistance review, 2006 for 
internal departmental discussion only, states clearly and I quote: 
 

An external-to-government review panel could either be a 
single chairperson or have representation from a number 
of important areas of the sector. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier or his minister: why was this 
recommendation for an external person to head up the review 
completely ignored? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the goal, the 
goal of this work is to ensure that Saskatchewan young people, 
in fact Saskatchewan people of all ages, have access to the 
educational opportunities that will prepare them for their 
futures, their careers here in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
want to ensure that no one is being left behind, that no one is 
being denied those opportunities because they cannot have the 
financial means or other accessible questions to get that 
opportunity. That’s the point. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe that when we enter this 
legislature, we enter here to make change, we enter here to 
shape public policy. I have extreme confidence in every 
member of the legislature that sits on the government benches. 
The MLA from Regina Elphinstone will lead this review and 
will bring forward recommendations. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, while I’m on my feet I think it’s 
about time that somebody over there, somebody . . . I was 
waiting patiently in the question period for the Leader of the 
Opposition to get up and explain to us, explain to us, how it is 
that he went to Ottawa to raise money for the Saskatchewan 
Party but didn’t do much for Saskatchewan people. Was he in 
Ottawa, Madam Deputy Speaker, to meet with the Prime 
Minister on equalization or was he there to raise money for the 
Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we just heard 

the Minister of Finance accusing us of playing politics with a 
topic, but we’ve had a fairly good game of politics played by 
the Premier and some of his ministers just in the last few 
answers. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, having a member of the government 
caucus head this review is certainly the easiest, most politically 
expedient to conduct a review of this type. And it is certainly 
the way the minister can exert the most direct political control 
over the process. However, Madam Deputy Speaker, it might 
not be the most effective way to conduct a review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this review is being headed by a government 
member and its completion is timed just before the next 
provincial election. Once again it appears important decisions 
are being skewed by political considerations. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, will the minister undertake to once 
again review the April 21 draft terms of reference and 
reconsider the possibility of appointing a Chair that is not a 
member of the NDP caucus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I understand 
why that member doesn’t understand the role of a member of 
this legislature because they’re never given roles like this, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. In fact they’re driven out. They’re 
driven out of that caucus if they have a role that does not agree 
with the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s just review a little history 
here. Let’s just review a little history in this province. We had 
the now Minister of Agriculture, as an MLA, do a report on 
ethanol development in this province, as an MLA. What do we 
have today? We have a leading position in Canada with a 
mandate . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I have been 
recognizing the debate to be fairly spirited but I am now having 
difficulty hearing and other members are trying to debate across 
the floor. So I would ask the Premier to finish his answer, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Deputy Speaker, members in 
this government caucus have given leadership on a number of 
files — be it ethanol, be it addictions, be it immigration, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and I could go on with my list. Each 
and every one of them has resulted in effective public policy. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I happened to be present 
yesterday over at the University of Regina where there was a 
large number of students, a large number of people from the 
various educational institutions of our province. You know 
what, Madam Deputy Speaker? They were extremely pleased 
with the appointment of the MLA from Regina Elphinstone. 
They were happy. The students were happy, the institutions 
were happy. The only unhappy people in the province of 
Saskatchewan sit across from us in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
When asked yesterday why he was refusing to go through the 
mediation process in the case of the former Labour Relations 
vice-chairman, Walter Matkowski, the Labour minister 
responded that Mr. Matkowski’s term had expired. Yes, his 
term has expired but the minister is missing the point. Mr. 
Matkowski’s allegations of political interference deal with the 
period of time when he was still employed by the province as 
Vice-Chair of the LRB [Labour Relations Board], not since 
then. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, why is the minister refusing to go 
through the mediation process which Mr. Matkowski has 
suggested rather than going through the court system, which he 
seems to prefer? What is he afraid of? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ll be 
very clear. There was no political interference in the LRB. The 
term expired. 
 
Now this is simply part of the Sask Party’s long-standing 
agenda to undermine the LRB. The old leader over there said he 
would politically interfere with the LRB by altering the makeup 
of it. The current leader says he’d interfere by putting on his 
own political agenda. What’s old has now become new again, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. Nothing has changed. You know, this 
Sask Party is just not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
For the last week I have watched this Minister of Labour refuse 
to answer specific questions about the allegations of political 
interference at the Labour Relations Board. He refuses to 
answer questions in this Chamber. He refuses to answer 
questions in the rotunda during the scrums and during the redos. 
 
He says he can’t get into specifics because it could form the 
basis of a lawsuit, even if the questions have nothing to do with 
Mr. Matkowski’s affidavit. Any questions or answers, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, could actually form the basis of a lawsuit. 
 
Madam Speaker, the minister appears to be simply stalling, 
hoping he can actually go out into the rotunda and answer, no 
comment; we’re in court. Madam Deputy Speaker, since the 
minister refuses to answer any questions, refuses to take any 
responsibility, provides no leadership, will he do the sensible 
thing and simply resign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Labour. 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s be clear. 
You know the Sask Party over there has said they would 
politically interfere with the LRB by firing every single 
member. And it was the Sask Party, Sask Party leader who said 
he would change the LRB’s mandate and impose his own 
political agenda, a growth agenda. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, no one was pushed out of their 
job. The term was completed in full. There was no political 
interference. You know, and they love to use this term, fair and 
balanced. Well how is terminating every single member on the 
LRB fair and balanced? And how is it, quite frankly, dragging 
the name through . . . another civil servant through the mud fair 
and balanced? 
 
Well you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, one day they say one 
thing and the next they do exactly the opposite. They’re just not 
credible at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
We certainly are going to grow this province as soon as we get 
rid of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s not just 
that this minister is refusing to answer questions . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m asking members to 
allow for the respect and have the question placed to the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there is lots of 
energy on this side of the House, and there’s lots of energy in 
this province to get rid of the anchor we have on this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister 
really doesn’t seem too bothered about the serious nature of 
these allegations of political interference. He refuses to conduct 
a full investigation within his department. He admits he’s 
confused, and on that part, Madam Deputy Speaker, we all 
agree with that assessment. He refuses to go through the 
mediation process, claiming there is no dispute and no need for 
mediation. He claims no dispute, but he still wants to go to 
court. 
 
Again, will the minister resign . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to go to the 
question, please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the question: 
again, will the minister resign so the Premier can find someone 
prepared to resolve these allegations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve 
said it over and over again. This is a clear agenda about 
spreading seeds of doubt. 
 
You have a member who would fire every member of that LRB. 
You have someone from the old guard talking about how they 
would change it. You have a member talking about a growth 
agenda of the LRB, someone who truly doesn’t understand the 
role of what the LRB. Over there, this is an opposition that 
flip-flops every day on this issue, doesn’t know what they’re 
talking about. They’re just not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister of Aboriginal 
and First Nations affairs. 
 

First Nations and Métis Fund 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
About two years ago, the Premier made a commitment to 
establish an economic development fund specifically for First 
Nations and Métis people, and I was pleased to announced 
today that we have kept that commitment, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Northern Affairs and the member from Regina 
Rosemont were able to join me at this very exciting 
announcement, and I also want to recognize the role that they 
played in assisting our government in developing that fund. 
 
We have established the First Nations and Métis Fund to help 
create economic opportunities and jobs for First Nations and 
Métis people in Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to say that we have 
worked very closely with the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations as well as Métis organizations to make this fund 
a reality. We appreciate their hard work and support on this 
initiative. I also want to acknowledge the very good advice we 
received from vice-chief of the federation, Guy Lonechild, who 
was very helpful in his assistance as we put together this 
program. 
 
This fund will stimulate our economy by strengthening the 
participation of First Nations and Métis people. It will also help 
provide meaningful employment for this growing segment of 
our population. 
 
Madam Speaker, Crown Investments Corporation is committing 
up to $20 million for the fund over the next four years. The 
fund will make investments of between 1 million and $3 million 
in new or expanding businesses which are majority owned or 
controlled by First Nations or Métis people. The focus will be 
on projects in Saskatchewan’s key growth sectors: value-added 
agriculture, advanced technology, energy, mining, forestry and 
forestry developments, and manufacturing. In addition the fund 
will consider investments in Aboriginal-themed tourism. 
 
CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] will 
operate the fund, and Westcap Management Ltd. of Saskatoon 
will be the fund manager. Westcap will work with First Nations 

and Métis organizations including the Saskatchewan Indian 
Equity Foundation and the Clarence Campeau Development 
Fund to identify potential deals. Madam Speaker, we are 
pleased that both SIEF [Saskatchewan Indian Equity 
Foundation] and CCDF [Clarence Campeau Development 
Fund] are very supportive of the First Nations and Métis Fund. 
They see it as complementing the work that they are doing. 
 
The First Nations and Métis Fund will also complement two 
programs announced by our government last year. The 
Department of First Nations and Métis Relations is 
administering the First Nations and Métis economic 
development grant program which was announced in October. 
This program will provide up to $5 million in grants over the 
next five years. 
 
In November CIC joined with Saskatchewan’s credit unions to 
establish the Entrepreneurial Foundation of Saskatchewan and 
the Saskatchewan Entrepreneurial Fund. The foundation 
provides business services and advice, while the fund will make 
investments of up to $1 million in new or expanding small 
businesses. The Entrepreneurial Fund is aimed at all 
entrepreneurs but especially at young, rural, northern and First 
Nations and Métis people. 
 
Madam Speaker, the First Nations and Métis Fund is a welcome 
and much needed source of additional financial support for First 
Nations and Métis people and businesses in our province. We 
look forward to working with First Nations and Métis people to 
help them achieve success. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I 
would like to take a moment to thank the minister for providing 
me with a copy of his statement just a few minutes before we 
convened. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that there needs to be a 
greater participation in the economy of First Nations and Métis 
people. Currently, employment levels of Aboriginal people 
drastically trail non-Aboriginal people in this NDP 
Saskatchewan. This is totally unacceptable, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We believe that for Saskatchewan to move to the next level, our 
province needs to ensure participation in the economy of First 
Nations and Métis people. They need to be fully at the table 
when discussions are taking place on how to create the best 
economic climate to ensure the future success of our great 
province for all people. As our leader has explained on a 
number of occasions, a Saskatchewan Party government would 
include First Nations and Métis people as equal and vital 
partners in all economic planning through Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believe that government should never 
take an equity position in any private business. Picking winners 
and losers in the economy is not advantageous to the economy 
as a whole, and this NDP government’s past record of 
investment has been dismal. They have demonstrated many 



May 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

examples of poor judgment and huge money failures. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government already has the Métis 
Development Fund, the Saskatchewan Indian Equity Fund, the 
Aboriginal Employment Fund. And now they’re going to 
develop yet another government department that will dictate 
who Aboriginal people can do business with and how their 
business will be run. 
 
It’s time to stop controlling First Nations and Métis people and 
to start respecting them as equal and full partners in our 
province’s economy. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to 
accommodate the good work of the policy field Committees on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure as well as on 
Human Services, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:45.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1612 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1613 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
 Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
 Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1613 
 Bill No. 63 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1613 
 Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1614 
 Bill No. 59 - The Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1614 
 Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1614 
 Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
 Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
 Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
 Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 The Value of First Aid and Emergency Training 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
 Milton Lake Lodge Wins Award of Excellence 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
 Speech and Hearing Awareness Month 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1619 
 Meet the North 2006 Conference 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1619 
 Northern Education Programs Are Vital to the Future of Northern Saskatchewan 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1619 
 Regina Rescue Mission Fundraiser 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
 



 

 Saskatchewan Party’s Economic Policy 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Effect of Government Policies on School Divisions 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1622 
 Selection of Chair for Review of Post-Secondary Education 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1623 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1623 
 Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1625 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 First Nations and Métis Fund 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1626 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1626 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


