






















































Hansard: April 24, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 45B  MONDAY, APRIL 24, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1305 
 April 24, 2006 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, good 
evening. We’ll call our committee to order. 
 
The item before us is the estimates for the Department of 
Agriculture and Food and the first item is central management 
and services (AG01). I would invite the minister to introduce 
his officials and if the minister has opening remarks to go ahead 
and make those opening remarks. I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
would like to introduce officials from the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. To my right is Doug Matthies who is the 
deputy minister. Immediately behind me is Hal Cushon, 
assistant deputy minister. And to Hal’s right is Jacquie Gibney, 
assistant deputy minister. And in the back row next to the 
Minister of Justice is Karen Aulie who is the director of the 
corporate services branch. We also have with us, next to Karen 
in the desk over is Stan Benjamin who is the general manager 
for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
And we have other officials in the back row. Starting on the far 
side is Shawn Jaques, manager of customer service for the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. And then Rick 
Ashton, and Rick is the acting director of the lands branch. Next 
is Travis Sulewski who is research economist with policy 
branch. And on this end behind the bar is Dave Boehm who is 
the director of financial programs branch. 
 
And I have no opening comments other than to say I think we 
have a very good, strong team here who will try and provide 
full answers to any questions that the members opposite might 
have. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. Just a reminder to the 
minister and to all members to be standing when you’re 
speaking, just intended to be a friendly reminder. And I 
recognize the hon. member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate you 
reminding the minister to stand because I was about not to. So 
thank you for both of us. 
 
I just want to start off by welcoming all your officials here 
tonight, Mr. Minister. And with that I would just like to pass it 
over to the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood who has 
some questions to start it off. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This Committee of 
Finance setting is somewhat different than our other 
committees, and I guess we all, all members have a little 
difficulty adapting to the proper procedures. 
 
However, Minister, I believe it was last summer you were at a 
tentative meeting of all the Ag minsters in Canada including . . . 
I’m not sure if the federal minister was there in Alberta. And at 
that time, there was a communiqué issued. I believe the meeting 
took place in July. And one of the communiqués that was issued 
as a result of that meeting was, I think it said that all ministers 
of Agriculture in Canada had signed the memorandum of 
understanding whereby they had committed to developing a 
program or at least investigating the feasibility of a program of 
alternate land use services, the ALUS [alternative land use 
services] concept. And I believe you were one of the signatures 
to that memorandum of understanding. 
 
It’s my understanding that some provinces, particularly 
Manitoba, have moved a long way on this issue. Manitoba has a 
pilot project that will be centred in one of their RMs [rural 
municipalities] whereby, that they’ll be running this year. The 
purpose of the pilot project, as I understand it, is to evaluate the 
issues and the problems that are involved with the ALUS 
concept. 
 
And the ALUS concept, for those people who may be watching 
this evening, entails the principles of paying landowners for the 
environmental and ecological goods and services that they 
provide to society. 
 
I think most people in this province and in this country like to 
see wildlife out on the land, whether that be deer or ducks or 
songbirds, and wildlife of course needs habitat. And the 
principle of ALUS is to reward those landowners who are 
providing wildlife habitat, who are good stewards of the land 
looking after riparian areas and watershed areas so that all 
communities have good, clean, drinking water. 
 
But up until now the landowners are the ones that have all the 
costs. And really, other than the enjoyment of seeing wildlife on 
the land and those sorts of things, they really have no rewards. 
And the ALUS principle talks about rewarding landowners and 
farmers for the environmental goods and services, and I would 
like to know where Saskatchewan is on this piece. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank the member for the question. 
Certainly we have been, at the federal-provincial-territorial 
ministers’ meetings, talking about the alternative land use 
programs, really trying to get a sense of how those programs 
might be structured, how they might work. And two of the 
provinces have undertaken limited pilot projects, Manitoba and 
Prince Edward Island, and we continue to monitor and evaluate 
with them to get feedback about how the programs are 
developing. 
 
And I think the other element that is very important is to look at 
the changes that are happening in Europe as well, and we’re 
seeing in the European Union more of a move to structuring 
programs, whole-farm programs and programs around the use 
of the land, the stewardship of the land and . . . so these are very 
interesting in terms of where we might move in the future. 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

What it means in those situations is that other support programs 
have been cut back as they look at moving ahead on alternative 
land use strategies. 
 
So at this point we need to continue to monitor and evaluate the 
programs, and we will continue to see what the impacts are on 
WTO [World Trade Organization] and trade in terms of 
providing supports for farmers through those programs. 
 
Really I think a lot of it has to do with the sense of what it is 
that the transfer of wealth is about. Is it about stewardship? Is it 
about preserving natural resource? And a lot of that is being 
worked out, as well as process, through these pilot projects. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, have you received 
proposals or a proposal for a pilot project here in 
Saskatchewan? It seems to me with Saskatchewan having over 
45 per cent of the arable land that one would think that 
Saskatchewan — and particularly in view of the ongoing farm 
crisis, particularly in the field crops, the grains and oilseeds 
sector — that this would be . . . I see it as a program that would 
certainly benefit the environment, but it also would have real 
benefits or could have real benefits to our producers. 
 
As I said earlier in my comments, currently producers have all 
the costs associated with providing wildlife habitat, for looking 
after the watersheds. And they really don’t get any real benefits, 
and I’m talking about financial costs. It does cost producers 
more in their operations to leave pockets of wildlife habitat in 
their cultivated fields. And it just seems to me that we could 
marry these two benefits, the environmental benefit and perhaps 
providing another income stream to our producers through this 
program. 
 
And I would hope that we in Saskatchewan would be on the 
forefront of this. You indicated that Manitoba and Prince 
Edward Island have pilot projects. I understand that there is a 
group of individuals in Saskatchewan that would be very 
interested in partnering to have our own Saskatchewan pilot 
program. And I understand, I believe, that there has been some 
representations to you and your department on this pilot project. 
And I would just like to know to what extent these proposals 
have been put forward and what your response has been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you. I appreciate the 
member’s perceptions on how an ALUS might work. And at 
this point in terms of producers in Saskatchewan, basically what 
has happened is they’ve talked about the concept. They’ve 
asked us to explore concepts, and at this point we’ve met with a 
number of groups and had discussions about concepts. 
 
The department has asked APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan] now to come forward with 
proposals that are beyond the just simply concept and idea stage 
and make a presentation to department officials. We’ve also met 
with Delta Waterfowl which is also talking concepts. 
 
So certainly the discussions are ongoing, and we’re trying to get 
a sense of — through evaluating the pilot projects and the 
discussions about concept — where people might want to go 
with this. But we also need to get a more in-depth sense, and so 
we’re asking APAS to come forward with their proposals. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Minister, I understand that the RM of Colonsay 
. . . and I’m not sure if that’s the actual RM name but the RM 
that surrounds the Colonsay area. I believe the council there is 
willing to put $50,000 towards a pilot program, and I 
understand you mentioned the Delta Waterfowl Foundation. 
That’s the organization that seems to be one of the major 
players in this whole ALUS principle, and they were one of the 
driving forces in Manitoba. 
 
So if we need to have at least a model as to how to set up a pilot 
program, it seems to me we only need to look a bit to the east 
and our neighbours in Manitoba where an RM, in concert with 
the Delta Waterfowl Foundation and other interested players, 
met with their provincial minister and I’m not sure . . . I believe 
there perhaps may be some federal money involved, but their 
project is up and running this year. 
 
And I understand that there was some fairly in-depth 
discussions about getting a Saskatchewan pilot project running, 
and I’ve been told that they were met with less than enthusiasm 
by some of your department officials. And I think that’s a 
shame. This is an area that we really need to move forward on. 
 
And as I said earlier in my comments, the grain and oilseed 
sector of agriculture is in a crisis mode. We’ve seen that for the 
last five to six years if not longer, but it’s really reached its 
pinnacle of crisis in the last 10 to 12 months, and it seems to me 
we’re at a crossroads where we need to look at a new direction 
for this industry that is the backbone of our province and that 
industry which this province was developed on. 
 
And it just seems to me that we need to be a little bit more 
enthusiastic and a whole lot more aggressive in looking at these 
various ideas and concepts that are out there. And I would urge 
you and your officials to, instead of being roadblocks and 
naysayers, to be much more supportive and move forward with 
this whole project. 
 
And it seems to me, I think people in other provinces, 
particularly in Manitoba and PEI [Prince Edward Island], have 
the right idea where we need to run pilot projects to work out 
the details as to how a larger program may run and to discover 
those problems because I am sure there is problems with every 
program, a new program. So it seems to me it’s hugely 
important that we have a pilot project in this province, not only 
in Manitoba and PEI. And then furthermore I understand that 
other provinces such as BC [British Columbia] and Alberta 
seem to be further along down that road to embracing this 
concept and coming up with their own pilot projects. 
 
And I would like to have your comments, Minister, on what I 
have just said. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think as we look at the overall 
stewardship of land, as we look at the issues of support for the 
industry, we need to evaluate a wide range of possibilities. And 
certainly there is recognition that many farmers in terms of their 
stewardship are hosting significant wildlife on their land. 
 
I think it’s also important to know that we have over three 
million of our 7.8 or more million acres of Crown land, over 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

three million that has protected habitat for wildlife as well. So 
within our own structures, there is also certainly a fair bit of 
environmental stewardship that is being managed that is vitally 
important to the biodiversity of the province, to the health of 
our provincial environment. 
 
Along with that we have also through the APF [agricultural 
policy framework] got about . . . oh let’s see. We’d be about 39 
to $40 million in APF funding for environmental farm planning. 
And it’s not exactly the same as what’s going on in terms of 
ALUS, but it is also very, very important in terms of making 
sure that we have the best environmental stewardship available. 
And to that end we’ve now had somewhere 5 to 6,000 farmers 
who have taken part in the environmental farm planning 
workshops. 
 
So we are certainly concerned about the environment, and we’re 
also working on the issues of providing funding, long-term 
funding for care of the land which we do through our Crown 
programs as well. 
 
In terms of running a pilot project and you’ve asked a couple of 
times, we believe that in some senses we’re further ahead of 
other provinces in terms of our work on land use and 
environmental farm plans. But in terms of pilot project at this 
point, we’re open to proposals, open to discussions. 
 
And, I mean, from what I see of the interactions, interrelations, 
if there’s somebody who’s got a proposal — Colonsay RM 
[rural municipality] or someone else who’s got a proposal — I 
am quite sure that they would be met with welcome by the 
department, asked to provide further information. And certainly 
as I said, APAS will be coming to present a proposal to the 
department in the near future. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you mentioned a couple of things in the 
whole area of agriculture and environment. And what I am 
sensing and what I see happening is this is the new direction, 
that we may be going down the road with agriculture in that we 
are taking these two areas and we’re melding them together and 
both areas can benefit if we do this properly. 
 
The alternative land use is one part of that. The biofuels is 
another part of that. This whole area of climate change and 
dealing with CO2 in our atmosphere in removing that, farmers 
can play a significant role in that whole area. And I believe 
other areas . . . You mentioned earlier that other areas of the 
world — Europe in particular, I think — they’ve moved a long 
ways down that road. I understand in the US [United States] 
that there is movement down that area. 
 
Because frankly, the consumers of and taxpayers of our country 
and farmers themselves are really not happy with the current 
state of affairs, particularly in the grain and oilseed sector of our 
agricultural industry here in Canada. And the cash bailouts, 
emergency payments are short-term, stopgap measures that 
really, I think, when . . . and many farmers will agree with that. 
We really haven’t solved any problems. We’ve just simply 
delayed those problems. 
 
And now, we’re at a point in time where we need to find some 
real solutions. And I think melding the environmental aspects 
and agriculture together instead of them being at loggerheads as 

they have been perceived in the past, I think we can move those 
two areas together and have real benefits to both agriculture and 
the environment. 
 
And things like the ALUS program will bring, if it’s done right 
and if it works the way the people that are putting it forward, 
and I have no reason to believe . . . I think it’s a good concept. 
It’ll bring additional revenue streams to those people on our 
farms so that they won’t have to depend on all their revenue 
coming from the sale of their commodities because we have 
seen in the past that the consumers of this country and of this 
world aren’t prepared to pay what is needed to the producers to 
sustain them on the land. So we need to look at alternative 
sources of revenue and this being one of them. 
 
So simply, I would urge you and your officials and I would urge 
you, Minister, to make it very clear to your department officials 
that this is something that Saskatchewan needs to move on 
because, even though you have said that you don’t think there 
has been any stonewalling within your department, I have had 
individuals tell me that that in fact is the case. That when they 
discuss this concept of ALUS with some of your officials the 
reply they get is they quote, we really don’t think it’ll work that 
well here in Saskatchewan. And I’m not convinced — and 
many producers, including APAS, are not convinced — that 
that in fact is the case. In fact they are convinced that this is a 
real opportunity for our farmers in Saskatchewan — not only 
our farmers, all citizens of this province. 
 
So having said that . . . And as I said I would like to urge you to 
give this a high priority in the department’s list of priorities, 
that we need to move on this, and we need to move on it fairly 
quickly because the clock is ticking, and we are running out of 
time. Not so much time in getting the principles down and 
getting the projects up and running, but running out of time as 
far as losing many producers if we don’t solve the cost price 
squeeze on our farms. And I believe this may be a piece to that 
puzzle. 
 
Having said that, Minister . . . Well perhaps I’ll give you an 
opportunity to respond, and then I’ll cover another issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I appreciate that because I 
think it is important to know that there are many aspects to the 
concepts that have been put forward and certainly I would 
expect, in good faith, that department officials would engage in 
discussion, active discussion with people who are putting 
forward concepts and proposals. 
 
But overall we have clearly, as a department we have in our 
budget presentations in fact talked about continued 
investigation into ecological goods and services programming. 
We have in many, many forums engaged in discussion and been 
working with farmers and farm groups in terms of the need to 
be responsible environmental stewards. So that work is 
ongoing. 
 
And you know maybe in the back and forth of discussion that 
happens, maybe somebody felt that they were not getting 
exactly a warm welcome around a particular idea or part of an 
idea. That can happen in any kind of a dialogue where people 
are being real with each other. And so that could easily happen. 
But the reality is that we are working in the area. We are very 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

clearly monitoring. 
 
You talked about a number of other areas where we have been 
working renewable fuels basically in terms of development in 
this province. We’re out ahead of most of the country in terms 
of the movement on renewable fuels with our mandate with the 
plants that we have up and running, ones that are scheduled to 
be up and running soon — like the Husky operation and others 
that, though unannounced, are well on their way towards 
announcements. So we see, we see some really good moves in 
that direction. 
 
We see good moves in terms of biodiesel. We’ve got a task 
force that will be presenting very soon, and they’ve been doing 
a lot of work meeting with a wide variety of players. And 
always the focus as we’re working on these projects is, how can 
we see a better return to the primary producer? And I think 
that’s essential in so much of what we’re doing. 
 
I mean we can see very clearly how, though primary producers 
are producing a good quality commodity that’s moving 
throughout the world, that has demand, they’re not the ones 
who are getting the return. And so there’s a lot of work going 
on about how do we make sure that farmers are getting the kind 
of returns that they should be getting whether it’s in a 
development with biofuels or further along in the bio-economy. 
 
Really the question and the work that is going on is to try and 
make sure that this very vital part of our Saskatchewan 
economy is moving along successfully and the people engaged 
in farming are getting an appropriate return for the work that 
they’re doing in producing goods and as well as being good 
stewards. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is agreed. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
appreciate the co-operation of the minister and the opposition in 
allowing me to take just a moment to introduce some guests 
who have just moved into the Speaker’s gallery to join us here. 
 
These folks, Mr. Chair, are members of the minister’s advisory 
committee on the status of the artist. And they are people who 
have been giving great, serious deliberation and consideration 
to what it takes in our province to make this a vibrant place for 
artists to be able to display and share their talents and also make 
a living at the same time, all of which are noble objectives for 
our province of Saskatchewan. And they come from many of 
the disciplines of the arts and have been working hard for 

several months, in some cases for several years, to this 
objective. 
 
And I just would like them . . . I appreciate very much . . . I had 
a chance to meet with them earlier. I appreciate their taking an 
interest in this accountability exercise in our parliamentary 
democracy, and I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
show them appreciation for their work on the committee, but 
also for the talent that they bring in making Saskatchewan a 
vibrant place to live and work and raise a family. So thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, one of the . . . 
another area, the issue that I’d like to raise with you is the area 
of agroforestry. I believe last year when we discussed this 
whole issue, I raised this issue with the Minister of 
Environment, and he said that your department was the lead 
department on this issue. Then it was in the Speech from the 
Throne, there was a very definitive statement about converting 
10 per cent of Saskatchewan’s arable land to agroforestry, and I 
believe it was in the next 20 years. 
 
However, Minister, I looked for some reference to agroforestry 
in this year’s budget and, unless it’s in the fine print, I really 
didn’t see anything in this year’s budget specifically aimed at 
agroforestry. Minister, we’ve had . . . I’ve discussed the area, 
this whole issue of agroforestry and some of the proposals that 
the past . . . the former federal government and some of the 
plans they had for this industry five or six years ago. And to 
move 10 per cent of arable farm lands — we’re talking about 
three to four million acres — into agroforestry, it’s not a simple 
task. There’s some pretty significant issues to be dealt with and 
one of them is replacement income and developing markets and 
that sort of thing. 
 
So, Minister, I wonder if you could summarize where 
agroforestry is currently and what is going to be done on that 
particular file during this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you for the question. I 
think it’s important to know that in government we don’t 
operate in particular silos and that certainly there is interest in 
agroforestry in Environment, Agriculture, and Industry and 
Resources. Industry and Resources, however, is the lead partner 
in the agroforestry development, and so that question would be 
best asked of Industry and Resources. 
 
That said, we see some tremendous possibilities. I’ve been to a 
couple of meetings of people, farmers and others, exploring 
agroforestry possibilities in the province. And there are some 
farmers who are going ahead, are doing woodlots, doing some 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

development of their shelterbelts, expansion of shelterbelts, and 
looking at some of the potentials for higher value wood 
production, and so there is certainly exploration going on. 
 
The forest centre is doing a fair bit of work in terms of 
exploring what the possibilities are. And so basically if you are 
looking for numbers through Industry and Resources, through 
forestry centre, you would find probably where the initiatives 
would be more direct and would be . . . Certainly through that 
forestry centre and the department, you’ll see where the lead is 
taken. But both Environment and Agriculture are also keenly 
interested and working with them to try and may sure that with 
this industry there really is potential and trying to make sure 
that that potential is reached. 
 
[19:30] 
 
We’ve had international consultations, people in to speak to 
some of the agroforestry groups, and they’ve put forward some 
very, very interesting ideas about how agroforestry has been 
developing over many, many years in Europe and the kind of 
products that they are producing. So of keen interest but I think 
you’ll have to wait till the Industry and Resources estimates to 
get more detail on that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, the term is agroforestry which 
implies that we are turning some of our . . . and as the Speech 
from the Throne said, taking 10 per cent of our arable acres, 
farm acres, farm land and putting down to forests, primarily 
fast-growing hybrid poplars. I guess my question to you is what 
level of involvement in the agroforestry objective that was 
outlined in the Speech from the Throne, what level of 
involvement you and your department have in this whole issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Again I’ll just say clearly that we 
don’t operate as silos. We do have support people, agrologists, 
who are working with the agroforestry centre and working in 
consultation. They are consulting with farmers as well. And if 
you’re looking for any line in our budget that would be 
supporting it, you’d find about $100,000 that would go towards 
support for the forestry centre. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, it just seems to me that if you and 
your government is serious about this initiative that it would 
seem . . . I would at least think that your department would be 
much more involved in this. What we are looking at, as I said 
earlier, is taking 3 to 4 million acres over time and taking that 
land out of production and planting trees on that land. 
 
Well I have some experience with planting trees. I did work for 
a time at the shelterbelt centre. We planted the shelterbelts on 
our own farm. I know that even in the forest fringe areas it takes 
at least probably 10 . . . a minimum of 10, more probably 15 to 
20 years to grow trees that have some market value. 
 
So it would seem to me that in order to accomplish what you 
and your government have set out to do that we would require 
some sort of agriculture programs to aid in that transition. If 
you take a farm that’s in the forest fringe area or other areas of 
the province who are looking at converting significant acres or 
a significant percentage of their farm to agroforestry, there is a 
loss of income from that area on their farm. 
 

There’s also added costs. You just don’t plant a trees and then 
come back in 15 to 20 years and harvest them. They need to be 
maintained. Weed control needs to take place — all those sorts 
of things. 
 
And it would seem to me that we need to have some transition 
programming. And that was part of the federal proposal that 
was put forward to this province. And we’re talking in terms of 
billions of dollars to make this happen. You mention $100,000 
from your department. Perhaps there’s more money in Industry 
and Resources, and perhaps there’s some more money in 
Environment. But in order, in my mind at least, to make 
something significant happen in this whole agroforestry file, we 
need to have some dedicated funding within the budget, not 
only for this year but for multiple years. 
 
And so again I would urge you to move forward on this file 
because again that is something that is another stream of 
revenue that could come to farmers, landowners, which is 
another piece to solving the cost input squeeze that our 
producers are currently under. And so therefore I’m suggesting 
that you and your department get much more involved in this. 
And then perhaps you could give us an indication as to how 
many people within your department are working on this file; 
have you got a special unit set up within the department to 
move this piece forward; provide us with some detail as to what 
level of involvement your department has in this file. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well again I will point out to the 
member I appreciate the enthusiasm that he has. And I know 
that certainly if we provided the kind of funding that he and 
some of his colleagues on the other side indicate is available for 
every project that’s going along, our budget would be more like 
14 billion rather than seven. But let’s be clear. As I said this is 
not an area where Agriculture is the lead, but we do have 
agrologists who work in our business development centres who 
are working with farmers who are interested in this. 
 
But let’s also, before we let the enthusiasm carry us away, let’s 
also take a look at some of the significant things that are 
happening in the forest industry today — not just in 
Saskatchewan but across the world where we are seeing some 
dramatic changes in terms of the forestry industry. 
 
The pulp industry is in trouble across North America as cheaper 
pulp is coming on from other markets. And so there are changes 
that are happening within the industry, and one has to be . . . 
When I say one, I mean I think a responsible government has to 
keep eyes wide open, not to just a narrow area but to the whole 
of the picture of where forestry is going, what needs to happen 
in forestry. And some of the changes that have happened from 
outside that are impacting on Saskatchewan today do impact 
where we’re going, the speed with which we’re going at 
developing particular programs. 
 
That said, we do fund through Agriculture and Food a certain 
portion of the forestry centre work. Plus we do have agrologists 
who are advising, and there is funding provided through 
Environment and through Industry and Resources. The question 
I think that sits before all of us as we look at trying to develop a 
more profitable agriculture industry in Saskatchewan is, where 
today is the federal government in terms of its planning? What 
are they going to be putting into the overall picture of 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

development to help make this industry more profitable? Today 
we don’t know that. We hope that we will see more enthusiasm 
and interest in helping develop the sector from the federal 
government as well. 
 
But what I can say is that, of the funding that is available 
through our department, we hope that that and we expect that 
that is being used responsibly, not only there but in each of the 
areas that we are responsible for. And as I say, though I 
appreciate the member’s enthusiasm for the idea, I think we 
have to remember that there are some pretty huge demands 
today that have to be met broadly across the industry, and we 
try and keep that in mind as well when we’re looking at where 
the precious resources can be put. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I’m looking at a brochure that was an 
insert in The Western Producer two or three months ago. I 
believe it was in one of the issues of The Western Producer in 
this current year so it’s you know, as I said, two or three months 
ago at the most and it’s entitled Agroforestry: A Growing 
Trend. And interestingly perhaps it may have been in other 
papers, but it was in The Western Producer, one of the 
publications that have very wide distribution throughout the 
farming community. 
 
And it talks about your government’s agroforestry initiative, 
and it talks about economic benefits, more jobs for the rural part 
of Saskatchewan, an increase in skilled labour needs for rural 
areas, diversified local economies. It initially outlines the 
objective that was outlined from the Speech from the Throne. 
And it talks about the economic, environmental benefits and the 
social benefits, and it encourages producers to get involved in 
this industry and to investigate it and to explore the 
opportunities. 
 
And I guess maybe this is a question that perhaps maybe the 
Premier could answer later on when we do the executive 
estimates that he will be responding to, but it just appears to me 
that just its very name, agroforestry, there’s an agricultural part 
to it and there’s a forestry part to it. And we’re not talking about 
the forest sector of our province and the forestry industry that is 
in the northern part of our province or at least in the Prince 
Albert and Hudson Bay area. We’re talking about planting trees 
on farm land, and it seems to me that agriculture should play a 
fairly significant role for the reasons I outlined earlier. 
 
I mean, if you’re really serious about making this happen, we 
have to develop the transition programs and deal with those 
issues because this is a long-term venture. If producers go down 
this road, they won’t see any income. They’ll have all the costs 
associated with growing the trees and maintaining them, and 
they won’t have any income for at least probably 15 years or 
more. 
 
So I guess my question to you, and perhaps it’ll be asked later 
on to the Premier, if you weren’t serious about this agroforestry, 
why did you have it in the Speech from the Throne? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think it’s important for the 
member to know that there is a great deal of seriousness about 
the agroforestry and the development potentials that there are 
through agroforestry. I think it’s also important for the member 
to acknowledge, as I have said a couple of times now, that there 

are at least three departments that are engaged on this front and 
portions of budgets from each of them. 
 
But we’ve also got, through the forestry centre, some very 
knowledgeable people who have been at work with producers 
and encouraging those producers to explore the possibilities for 
themselves. We got the agrologists who work in our business 
development centres who are working with farmers to try and 
help them get a better sense of what to do. And we have had 
Robin Woodward and Doug Currie from the forest centre come 
and speak to our senior management in the department about 
the way of moving forward in this whole industry and the kind 
of things that are essential today so that we can have a strong 
agroforestry industry in the future. 
 
And what they emphasized was the importance of research and 
development today to make sure that the products that we’re 
encouraging people to grow will have a good return. And to 
make sure that there are industries that will take those products 
and develop them further. 
 
And so, it’s not divorced from the rest of the forestry industry. I 
mean, there are elements where these things are intimately 
connected. 
 
I think the other thing that it’s important to know is some of the 
other work that’s going on in terms of economic development 
— significant work in terms of conversion of wood product, 
biomass product to syngas [synthetic gas] and then to ethanol; 
some tremendous work going on in the northeastern part of the 
province. 
 
So there is a lot of work. There is a lot of enthusiasm. There is a 
seriousness about it. And there is activity that’s going on, that’s 
staged, their investment that is being made. And I think the 
member just needs to look broadly and will see that in fact there 
is a serious commitment here, and it’s being worked out. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I certainly realize that this is 
certainly a myth, that this is a file that not only pertains to 
Agriculture. It pertains to the other departments, and I will be 
pursuing this issue with ministers of the other departments. It 
just seems to me that perhaps from my vantage point that it 
would seem that perhaps your department could be somewhat 
more proactive in this area. 
 
But having said that, I would like to turn to another issue that I 
would like to raise with you. Back on February 24 of this year, 
your assistant deputy minister wrote the executive manager of 
the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association. And the gist 
of the letter was that their request for additional funding to 
maintain their programs was declined. As you know, and I’m 
sure many members of this Assembly and many citizens of this 
province would know or at least I’m sure have heard of the 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association. And particularly 
people in the agricultural industry are very aware of the good 
work that they have done. 
 
The Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association is an 
association of mostly farmers and other people who see the 
value in their work. And their sole source of independent 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

revenue, as I understand it, is through membership renewals and 
sales. So in order for them to do meaningful work, they require 
additional funding. And they were able to obtain some 
additional funding both from the federal government and the 
provincial government, but both those sources of funding came 
to an end in the last fiscal year. 
 
They put together a proposal and submitted it not only to your 
department. They submitted it to the Department of 
Environment to provide the extension capability to farm 
producers for them to be fully informed as far as this whole area 
of sequestering carbon and entering into agreements with 
aggregators and large . . . [inaudible] . . . to store the carbon in 
their soils. 
 
This is an issue that the Soil Conservation Association has been 
working on for a long time. I would say without a doubt that 
they are the number one agency as far as knowledge and 
experience, and they’ve developed a number of ideas and 
concepts to deal with this issue. And as a result of the 
downsizing of your department, I don’t believe your department 
has the capability to provide the information and extension 
work that is needed to make our farm producers fully aware of 
the benefits, but also of the liabilities and the pitfalls in this 
whole area. 
 
So when their funding ran out, they put a proposal into both the 
two departments and, Minister, on February 24 they received a 
letter of rejection. And I would . . . and for the life of me, I can’t 
understand why your department would not find some 
additional funds. We’re at the risk of losing six of their 
long-term agrologists which would enable them to do much of 
the good work that they are doing. And for some reason you 
didn’t see the value of the work that they’re doing, and 
therefore they were turned down. And, Minister, I would like 
you to explain why their request for funding was declined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I think it’s very important 
to acknowledge the tremendous work that the Saskatchewan 
Soil Conservation Association has done over a significant 
number of years in the province, certainly a lot of work in 
educating, informing around zero till. And I think there is some 
very important factors that I think it’s important for us to pass 
on to the member opposite. 
 
First of all, we have over the years only provided very modest 
funding to the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association. 
Over the last three years . . . three years ago it was . . . 
indication was given that the funding was phasing down. Last 
year we gave $25,000, and I think, you know, that’s had an 
impact. We have also provided office space for free for the Soil 
Conservation Association. And I think what is most important 
to understand is that the bulk of the financing for the 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association came from federal 
government, and that funding was cut. 
 
The funds that were provided by provincial government were 
not enough to maintain or retain the structure as they had it and, 
as I indicate, there was a period over which we had talked to 
them about phasing down the funding and had been doing so, so 
that last year’s funds were just $25,000. Now as early as this 
morning, we had some indication that the federal government 
may have come through with six months further funding to 

allow them to continue their operations for that period. And I 
suspect over that period there will be some evaluation going on 
as to whether or not there will be continued funding. 
 
The issues around carbon sequestration, certainly we’ve worked 
very closely with them. We’ve put significant pressure on the 
former federal government to deal with some of the, I think, 
some of the key issues around carbon sequestration. 
 
The federal government seemed to be insisting that there be a 
business-as-usual clause in the agreements they were working 
on. That business-as-usual clause would have meant that 
farmers who had been doing best practices, zero till, 
sequestering carbon for years, would really get no benefit for a 
significant portion of the sequestration that they had already 
done. Now that could have led to some significant negative 
consequences and might also have led to some problems in 
terms of farming practice so that they might qualify by bringing 
land on stream later on. 
 
So there were some real key issues that were coming up that our 
department worked together with the Soil Conservation 
Association around. It’s also important to know that we do have 
people within the department who continue and first of all 
acknowledge that the largest part of the work was done by 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association. 
 
But we do have department people who are working in the same 
area who were working with them and received significant 
benefit from the work that the SSCA [Saskatchewan Soil 
Conservation Association] undertook over the years. So we 
really appreciate that they have done a tremendous job over the 
years. But we also acknowledge that our small portion of the 
funding could not have kept them whole, could not have kept 
even one of their agrologists whole. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you’re correct in that the federal 
government did come through with some interim funding which 
will keep their organization and allow their organization to keep 
their staff in place and do the work that they have been doing 
for the next six months. After that, they will again be in the 
same situation where they will be seeking sources of funding to 
carry on with their work. And I think their work is very 
important at this point in time. 
 
I know there is some uncertainty as to where the federal 
government is going with the whole area of Kyoto and those 
sorts of things. But having said that, this issue of climate change 
is not going away. It’s here to stay. Even in the United States, 
who isn’t a signator to the Kyoto Protocol, they have a system 
in place or are working on systems to pay landowners, farmers 
to store carbon in their soils. In fact there is the carbon 
exchange in Chicago. It’s a commodity exchange where carbon 
is traded and that sort of thing. 
 
So this is an issue that whether or not we stay with the Kyoto 
Protocol or whether we move away from it, it’s a long-term, 
ongoing issue. And I think we need to make sure that we are at 
the table and involved in the development of the protocols that 
are required to . . . so that our producers receive maximum 
benefit from any commercial transaction that takes place in this 
field and also that they are not taken . . . or do not fall into the 
traps that can also come along with this issue. 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

It is a fairly complicated issue, and we really need to have 
someone out there who is knowledgeable in this issue, 
explaining it to our producers, and making them aware of, as I 
said earlier, the benefits and also the liabilities and pitfalls. 
 
As an example, I guess, of the activity out there, there are at 
least two or three or more companies that have been and are 
currently, I understand, aggregating blocks of land for carbon 
storage. And there’s one or two companies out of Alberta, and I 
understand that as of early March that another company here in 
Saskatchewan has been set up to do that very thing. At least if 
the information given out by the corporations branch is correct, 
it says in the nature of business is aggregating carbon credits. 
 
And it’s a bit troubling, Minister, when I look at this particular 
company and how, when it became an entity . . . and frankly the 
shareholders in this company . . . As I indicated, the letter of 
rejection from your department was February 24. The letter of 
rejection from the Department of Environment, I believe, was in 
early March. 
 
Minister, there was a numbered company, 596000 
Saskatchewan Ltd., that has been in existence, according to the 
information, since 1999. In May 2005 it was . . . it says under 
event of history, it was struck off the registry I believe. But 
however February 28, 2006, right in between the timeframe for 
the two letters of rejection, this company was resurrected, and it 
was changed to a new name, and the name is C Green 
Aggregators Ltd. And, Minister, do you know this company, 
and do you know the shareholders in this company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — A number of things that I’d like to 
address for the member coming out of your comments. 
 
First of all I think it’s important to look at what we do have 
available today. Certainly as I’ve indicated we have expertise 
within the Department of Agriculture and Food, but there is also 
significant expertise in the Department of the Environment, in 
Industry and Resources, and SaskPower in terms of the issues 
around climate change, environmental protection, and also 
specifically around the issues of carbon sequestration. 
 
It’s true that there have been a number of groups of aggregators 
around trying to pull together and pick up carbon credits, 
wanting to trade them on the open market. One of the problems 
is that there are no international rules around the trading of 
carbon credits at this point. And with those rules not being in 
place, much of the aggregation work that is being done is being 
done clearly on speculation, and there are some risks involved. 
Nobody knows what liabilities there are for the people who 
engage in that, who commit carbon credits. There are certainly 
risks and liabilities there that, in our discussions with the soil 
conservation association and with our departmental expertise 
that say there really needs to be some caution taken on that 
front. 
 
What I will say is that we are also waiting to see what comes 
down in the federal budget. Will they be providing additional 
support beyond the six months interim that has been 
announced? And if so then the soil conservation association 
may want to put forward some proposals. There’s potential of 
funding through the ADF [Agricultural Development Fund], the 
Ag Development Fund, if there is need. But certainly we do see 

and respect, we see the value and respect the work that the 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association has done over the 
years and the levels of expertise that their agrologists have in 
these areas. 
 
But I think it’s . . . Just to flag one more time, there needs to be 
a lot of caution, given that there are no international rules 
around carbon credits, trading carbon credits. Yes there is 
speculation, and there is sales on open market, but there are 
risks of liability as well. And so we hope the people really, 
really are aware and, you know, have caution. 
 
[20:00] 
 
As far as a particular aggregator who might be involved, no I 
don’t . . . I could probably find out, but I don’t have that 
knowledge here today. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you have made 
a good case for why we need to have organizations like the soil 
conservation association fully functional and in operation to 
provide the information that is required. As I mentioned earlier, 
with the downsizing in your department, the extension function 
is minimal, particularly on an in-depth issue like this. This is 
not something that producers can have a discussion over the 
telephone. They need to attend meetings, have printed material 
before them and those sorts of things. 
 
Now you’d said that you weren’t aware of who the principals 
are in the C Green Aggregators. As I’d indicated earlier, this 
company was renamed and resurrected, I guess, from its sleep 
mode, I guess, that it was put in last May. And coincidentally 
perhaps and maybe I’m assuming perhaps it’s just a 
coincidence, it was resurrected right in between the time the 
two letters of rejection were received. As I said, it’s called C 
Green Aggregators Limited and the principal, the director, at 
least the . . . yes, the director is one Reg Gross. And I thought 
perhaps you may have been aware that this company was 
formed. 
 
Is that just a coincidence or did Mr. Gross have some 
knowledge that the average citizen wouldn’t have because one 
of the activities that the soil conservation association had 
proposed to do was to set up a company for this very purpose of 
aggregating carbon credits with the best interests of farmers 
involved? And now, we have another company that’s set up. 
And I don’t know. Perhaps they have the best interests of 
producers involved, but they may not have. And it just seems to 
me this is too much of a coincidence, but perhaps it is, and I 
would appreciate your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the best of our knowledge, it’s 
coincidence. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a 
couple of questions for the minister, and it’s related to the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program. And 
there’s an awful lot of questions from the producers with 
respect to the CAIS program, and they’re having a very difficult 
time getting answers. Well I would suggest it’s not only the 
producers that are having difficulty getting answers. I sent a 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

letter to the minister on March 30, and I do not have an answer 
to that letter as yet. So I guess it’s prompting me to ask the 
same questions in the House. So to the minister, one is I’d kind 
of like to know his departmental policy on answering letters. As 
I say, this was sent on March 30. 
 
But my question is going to be on the structure change 
adjustment initiative related to the CAIS program. And the 
question that producers wanted to know, is this a federal or a 
provincial initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as the member will know, this is 
a federal-provincial program. It is designed through agreements 
with the federal government and the provinces. And so the 
structure of the program is in the agreement. 
 
With regard to structural change adjustments, which are a part 
of the program, clearly that process is designed to keep pace 
with changes in farm size, really structural adjustments that 
farmers will make. And we have felt, and not just felt but we 
have seen through the evidence that this is one of the 
components that is not working well, that it was very, very 
difficult to keep pace with changes that producers were making. 
And we have been pressing for a more workable and easier, 
more straightforward process that would deal with structural 
change because farmers are changing the size of operations, 
either up or down, and the structural adjustment should help in 
terms of adjusting the reference margins according to the 
structural change that the individual farmer has made. 
 
With regard to letters, we try to maintain a minimum 
turnaround time of two weeks through the minister’s office. But 
when there are technical questions involved — either to the 
minister’s office or to the department — when there are more 
technical questions involved, particularly when they demand 
interaction with the CAIS administration, it can take 
substantially longer for those interactions to take place and for 
us to get the kind of substantial responses that some of the 
letters are asking for. But we do try and maintain a minimum 
two-week turnaround time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know the 
CAIS program is federal-provincial, but specifically the 
structure change adjustment, is that a federal initiative, or is it a 
joint initiative, or is it instituted solely by the province? Or is it 
every province has the same, or is it done by this province, this 
province only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The structural change adjustment 
program is national program. It’s the same basically across the 
country. In our case we have a federal administration. The 
administration handles the process, and with federal 
administration it is that, that portion that is handled, handled by 
that administrative body. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, an awful lot of the issues 
and problems you identified is because of the structural change 
adjustment, and I know it’s creating an awful lot of hardships as 
I identified in my letter. 
 
But another question that’s come up, and it’s a constant 
question, is about historical margins and issues associated with 
historical margins. How are they derived is one portion of it. 

And how can or why can historical margins use negative 
margins in planning when producers are not allowed to use 
negative margins? And historical margins, my understanding 
from the producers, is done by the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It wasn’t clear from the question 
whether the member was talking about just the general margins, 
how they’re derived. But I’ll go over both that plus the 
constructed margins. 
 
The general margins are based on Olympic average, five-year 
Olympic average, where the high year and the low year are 
dropped and that then provides the reference margin. But there 
are also margins that are constructed that sometimes will be for 
new people coming into the industry or who are seeing 
structural change and those are margins that are . . . You look 
for a benchmark per unit and on that basis you’re constructing a 
new margin for somebody. So if the member could clarify 
which it is that you’re looking for, that would be helpful. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I’d be glad to clarify. It’s on 
historical margins, and it’s in the structure change adjustment 
format that’s put out. And I understand that historical margins 
are developed by the province, and I forwarded a copy of this 
with my letter to the minister. 
 
For an example, in this particular case it goes back for five 
years and my understanding is it’s done by the province, and it 
says right at the top of it, historical margins. And it relates to 
some things that are very, very difficult to understand. For an 
example, on a forage basket in this particular case in 2002 they 
had a negative margin, a negative margin that figured in to their 
whole structural change adjustment. And the province is using a 
negative margin in this particular case. And that was what the 
question was. How can negative margins be used by whoever 
established this historical margin, vis-à-vis a producer that’s not 
allowed to use historical margins or not allowed to use negative 
margins? 
 
[20:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Given the information from the 
member’s letter, I think we’ve got focus on where the question 
is. So if you are looking at a constructed margin and you have a 
negative margin where the return is below what the farmer 
would have expected to get, below what it cost him to grow that 
particular crop, then you’ve got a negative margin. And this is 
calculated by the federal administration. 
 
One of the problems . . . And we’ve asked the federal 
government to try and address this issue because it creates 
anomalies then in terms of your structural adjustment. And that 
is that where you’ve got a negative margin and the farmer 
increases the size of the operation, it can decrease the reference 
margin and vice versa. Where they decrease the size of their 
operations, it can increase the size of the reference margin. 
 
So we’ve asked the federal government to address this. And I’m 
told that where they see it, where they’re made aware of it, they 
do try and make adjustments for the anomaly. And it becomes, 
I’m told, increasingly complex with the number of operations, 
the mixture of operations that a given farmer has. So it’s one of 
those areas where there is significant complexity and where we 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

have certainly been pressing for a change. And as I say, where 
the federal government is made aware of these anomalies, they 
do try and adjust for them. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
want to start tonight by going into the CAIS program and the 
additional funding or the base funding that you’ve put in. And if 
I understand the budget right here and I’m reading it properly, 
we have a base funding of $98 million again this year. But I 
can’t find anywhere where the additional funding will be. And I 
guess my question is, will you be putting in supplementary 
funding or additional funding for the CAIS program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think the member needs to look at 
the CAIS program overall and look at what we have been 
doing. What our figures allow for is full funding of ’03, ’04, 
and ’05. 
 
The member will notice that we committed to the full funding 
of ’04 and ’05 in last year’s overall budget. But what we are 
committing to at this point is to the base funding of 98 million 
and to reviewing — given whatever the numbers might be by 
the third quarter — reviewing what those numbers are. And as I 
have indicated on numerous occasions, I have every expectation 
that whatever the need and the demand is that, as we have in the 
past, we will meet that in the future. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess especially 
because we’re dealing with estimates here I find it odd that you 
wouldn’t . . . Last year I believe it was $159,000,100 additional 
money that you had to put in. And I can’t see that big of a 
dramatic change to this year. Grain prices are very low. 
 
Last year we had fairly high yields in many areas, but the price 
was very poor. This year . . . I mean our yields; I can’t see them 
being on a provincial basis much higher than they were last 
year. If we have an average crop, they’ll probably be the same 
or lower. I would say you’re probably going to need that much 
money again. 
 
Why don’t we put that money up front? It’s only an estimate 
that we’re putting in, but why don’t we include it in the budget 
when we first come out with the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well first of all I think it’s important 
and I would ask the member to look at the numbers and 
recognize that the 159 million that is referenced is the funding 
for two years. It includes ’04 and ’05 — full funding. And 
that’s the additional funding that was put in. So when we are 
looking at this, we first of all have moved the agenda ahead 
about six months by putting the ’05 funding in last year. And 
we are, as I say, we don’t know what the numbers are going to 
be on CAIS yet. The federal government provides some 
estimates, but we’ll have a much better idea by the third quarter, 
and we will, as I say, I have little doubt that we will fully fund 
that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Will you, Mr. Minister, then be providing 
supplementary estimates in our fall session? We have the short 
session in the fall. Will we see such a thing at that time? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think again let’s just do a quick 
run by the history. July we announced the full funding for ’04. 
And then it was in the fall that we moved the agenda ahead 
when we re-evaluated, and we were able to announce the full 
funding for ’05. So for this coming year, our commitment is to 
have re-evaluated by the third quarter and there is every 
possibility that that timing might work out with fall session as 
well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So can the minister give me the breakdown 
then. If last year’s $159,000,100 was for two years, what was 
the breakdown for 2004, and what was the breakdown for 2005 
then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The incremental funding breaks down 
like this. For ’04 it’s an additional 75 million and for the ’05 
funding eighty-four two. And so that’s where you get your one 
fifty-nine two. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So say for an 
example this fall that we have to come up with a shortfall of the 
same as last year, say roughly $80 million. Where will that 
money come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think as the member knows that 
there are certainly a number of factors that will influence what 
is available in the fall. I mean ultimately, whatever revenues, 
excess revenues, might come in, it’ll ultimately be handled 
through the General Revenue Fund, will be through that fund of 
course, dealing with issues like forest fires as well. 
 
So I think basically, we look at it, we say okay; you’ve got the 
overall numbers for ’04-05. We’ve got a sense of where this 
might go, but we’re going to have to re-evaluate a number of 
things, and that will be also what the impact of the new federal 
budget will be and any changes we see in program. 
 
Now I think we’ve been alerted, and clearly Minister Strahl has 
said that we’ve got case for now, but there may be some 
adjustments. Well we don’t know that; that’s what we’re living 
with and so once we’ve got those numbers, we’ll certainly be 
dealing with this in as judicious a manner as possible. 
 
And I think it’s also important to remember the timelines in 
terms of beginning to put in applications and when the due 
dates are. The applications for this year are not due . . . 
personal, I think, is June 15, and corporate, June 30, ’07. So 
we’re really well ahead of the time frame at this point. 
 
I think I would like to take this time . . . I’ve been advised that 
that was last question, so I’d like to take this time to thank my 
officials for the work that they do, to thank members opposite 
for their thoughtful questions, and appreciate the time that 
we’ve been able to spend on these estimates. Thank you very 
much. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — I would move we report progress. 
 
The Chair: — It’s been moved that we report progress. Is that 
agreed? 
 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. We will take a short break until the 
Minister of Health and his officials are able to present 
themselves within the Assembly. And thank the Minister of Ag 
and Food and his officials for their time this evening. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — The estimates now before the Assembly for the 
Department of Health are on page 82 in the Estimates book, 
subvote estimate (HE01), central management and services. I 
would ask the minister if he could please introduce to the 
Assembly the members of his department with him this 
evening. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I’m very pleased 
to be able to introduce the members of the department who are 
here. Immediately to my left is John Wright, deputy minister. 
Directly behind us, Lauren Donnelly, assistant deputy minister; 
Bonnie Blakley, executive director, workforce planning branch. 
 
To my immediate right is Max Hendricks, assistant deputy 
minister. And sitting behind him is Ted Warawa, executive 
director, finance and administration branch. Also in the room 
and sitting behind us: Rod Wiley, executive director, regional 
policy branch; Bert Linklater, executive director, regional 
accountability branch; June Schultz, director, medical services 
branch; Leslie Grob, assistant to the deputy minister; and Gina 
Clark, intern student with the department. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. To the subvote, I 
recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. I’d like to start off with 
the questions a constituent concern, but it certainly is a concern 
that many people that are on waiting lists have. 
 
And this particular situation as I’ll outline is a letter written to 
me from a Mr. Dan Chudyk and concerns himself and his son 
Kyle who are waiting to have an operation done on their noses. 
And, Mr. Minister, this gentleman, Dan Chudyk, wrote me 
because of the concern over the timelines and the delay in their 
operations. 
 
His son Kyle was seen in December 2003 by a specialist, a Dr. 
Gore-Hickman, in Saskatoon. And at that time they were told 
that he was on a 24-month waiting list for this operation. And 
they were quite concerned about that, but so be it. It was not a 
life-threatening procedure so that they accepted that. 
 
Their concern was that this 24 months would take this young 
fellow right into his grade 12 exams and graduations in the June 
2006. At 24 months . . . So in January 2006, 25 months later, 
they had not heard any news about the operation so they 
contacted their specialist Dr. Gore-Hickman’s office, and they 

were told that anyone diagnosed in December 2003 is now on a 
28-month waiting list. 
 
Early in April 2006, which is 28 months, they still had not 
heard anything and again contacted the doctor’s office, and 
there they were told that they are now on a 30-month waiting 
list. So this takes their son to June 2006. Of course, that 
coincides with the son’s final exams and graduation and so 
they’re quite concerned about that and especially when it’s a — 
well, like they say — a 30-month waiting list for a day 
procedure, they find unacceptable. 
 
And so just a general question, Mr. Minister, is about . . . I 
mean, a 24- or a 36- or a 30-month waiting list for a medical 
procedure seems to be totally unacceptable, at any rate. And I 
would also like you . . . I will send a letter, this letter, over to 
you, Mr. Minister. If you would look into the situation on their 
behalf and see if there’s anything can be done to speed up this 
waiting list and get their procedures done in a more timely 
manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I appreciate the 
member sending over the letter. It’s useful to have the letter in 
front of us, and of course I will correspond in that regard. But 
for the sake of the record here let me indicate a couple of things. 
 
First and foremost we are talking about the ENT positions — 
ear, nose, and throat specialists. Saskatchewan has always had, 
for the sake of my colleague here from Indian Head-Milestone, 
I’ll say a challenge in recruiting and retaining the ENTs within 
the system. 
 
That having been said, two things going forward. Number one, 
the department has requested of the Saskatoon Health Region in 
particular to, during ’06-07, bring forward a plan to deal with 
the longer waiting lists for the ENT specialties. This is one 
specialty area where we do have long waiters. 
 
Secondly we have been making significant progress in regards 
to our longer waiting lists. I can report to the House today that 
over the last two years, and thanks to the attention that’s being 
paid to waiting lists, we have almost cut in half the waiting list 
for all procedures in the province that are 18 months and over. 
We still have some ways to go. As you can see, 50 per cent isn’t 
100 per cent of 18 months and over. But that’s significant 
progress in cutting that in half in the last two years. The ENT 
situation is a part of that reduction of the longer waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate you 
looking into my constituent’s concern because, as he has noted 
in the letter, that he has never had to gone to the point of asking 
an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for any help. 
And he takes it quite serious that it’s been such a long time that 
he has to ask for help in these matters. 
 
Just a general comment. It seems that when we’re looking at 30 
months waiting list for this procedure on these two individuals 
— there are other procedures that we hear about on a regular 
basis — I think it’s just unacceptable for people to live in 
discomfort that may restrict their ability to work or certainly 
lifestyle to wait on a waiting list such a long time. 
 
I certainly wish you well, and I hope you can do something 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

about moving these, reducing these waiting lists. But again I 
just have to say that when people out there that are waiting on 
these waiting lists, it’s a very, very long time when they’re 
looking at more than two years to get a procedure done. 
 
But thank you. Hopefully you will contact this gentleman. And 
please let me know what the outcome is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I will certainly do 
that. 
 
I was just reviewing some additional numbers with regards to 
the longer waiting lists. And I think I should put on the record 
in that period July to December 2005, which is a period when 
we were taking a significant look at the long waiting lists and 
increasing the number of surgeries that were taking place within 
the system, 84 per cent of patients who had surgery July to 
December 2005 received their procedures within six months, 
and 93 per cent received it within the year. That means 7 per 
cent of people who were scheduled for these types of elective 
surgeries, 7 per cent of them were outside that 12-month period. 
 
We want to be bringing all of those within 12 months and then 
work on reducing that even further on the elective side. It’s 
going to require a little bit of work in addition to recruiting 
specialists and surgeons, anesthetists, and other operating room 
folks, but increasing our ability to manage the existing 
operating rooms in the province and perhaps expanding the 
capacity within the province. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Chair, and good evening, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
As you may be aware, as you likely are aware, there is a fairly 
significant problem with a shortage of physicians in the 
southwest part of the province. I’m speaking specifically of the 
Cypress Hills constituency because the problem seems to be 
maybe more acute there than other areas of the province. 
 
The community of Shaunavon is probably short at least two 
doctors. The community of Climax would like one full-time 
doctor. There are no less than two from the community of 
Maple Creek that are in need of being replaced there. There’s 
two in the community of Leader. And the community of 
Eastend was without a doctor until just recently. They’ve signed 
a contract for an individual to come to the community to start 
practice sometime in the next few months once immigration 
hurdles are cleared. So out of those half dozen communities, 
we’re probably short close to a dozen medical practitioners 
when you add them all up. 
 
So I guess the question that arises, Mr. Minister, as a result of 
the current set of circumstances is, does the department have an 
active human resources plan that is specifically dedicated to 
recruitment of doctors? 
 
[20:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much and appreciate the 
member’s patience while I consult to make sure I’ve got the 
numbers right. We’ve got a budget that we’re dealing with the 

estimates on in the Chamber today in committee, a budget that 
the government is very proud of, additional money into health 
care in the province, a significant amount of which is in human 
resources. And of course recruitment and retention issues are 
human resource issues within the system. 
 
I’m very pleased to say in answer to the member’s question . . . 
there’s a couple of things I will say and I’m pleased to say them 
all. But I’m very pleased to say that this particular budget 
recognizes the significant needs that the system has for 
recruitment and retention of physicians. $500,000 has been set 
aside in this budget to set in motion a process that will create a 
recruitment and retention agency for the province. The 
recruitment and retention agency was one of the 
recommendations in the action plan for the health workplace 
released in December 2005. That action plan indicated the need 
for additional professionals within the system, and physicians 
are a significant part of that. 
 
The regions have told us that of course it is a competitive world 
that we are recruiting physicians in, a competitive world that the 
regions are struggling with to attract to one particular part of the 
province or another, and the regions have asked the province to 
assist them in that regard. Our response has been to assist or to 
begin the process of creating a recruitment and retention 
agency, and I believe this will be very helpful in the big picture. 
 
Secondly, we have $2.2 million in this budget specifically 
targeting the recruitment of internationally educated medical 
graduates, and also this budget targets primary care initiatives. 
And of course in your corner of the province, primary care 
initiatives are very important to ensure the delivery of health 
care over large areas. This budget contains $3.9 million in four 
new primary care projects of which there are at least several on 
the drawing board for your corner of the province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I guess the response you gave is enough to elicit quite 
a number of other additional questions. The first question that 
would come, I think, is a result of . . . The answer you just gave 
is, you’re talking about a process that is now established for the 
ongoing recruitment and retention agency. So, Mr. Minister, 
can you tell us where we’re at in that process? How far 
downstream are we? Where are we at, and when can we expect 
that agency to be up and running? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I’d like to answer 
the member’s question with a bit of a preamble by adding to my 
previous answer about physician recruitment and retention 
simply because there are initiatives in this budget that go 
beyond this that I think should be on the record to begin with. 
And while I’d indicated in my original answer some of the new 
dollars, I did not indicate the extent of the additional dollars that 
flow through that are being expended in this year, but have 
previously been there and are continuing to be there in the 
current budget. 
 
For example, the new money under physician recruitment 
actually is only a part of a $26 million physician recruitment 
and retention budget that is having some success. In December 
2005, the end of the year, the calendar year just passed, there 
were 1,728 physicians licensed in Saskatchewan compared to 
1,626 in the year 2000. That’s a 6 per cent increase in 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

physicians over this period of time that we have been actively 
engaged in recruitment and retention initiatives. 
 
Some of those recruitment and retention initiatives include 
specialist bursary programs, specialist enhancement training 
programs, specialist physician establishment grants. Also on the 
rural and regional side, we have a family medicine residency 
bursary program, a rural practice establishment grant, a regional 
practice establishment grant, an undergraduate medical student 
bursary program, rural practice enhancement training program, 
specialist re-entry program, rural emergency care program, 
locum service — basically rural relief, weekend relief program 
— rural travel assistance program and rural extended leave 
program. 
 
These, in addition to a number of other programs, have been 
worked out in conjunction with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and, as I indicated, are having success at increasing 
the number of physicians practicing in the province. That 
having been said, I readily acknowledge that we still have 
considerable amount of work to do in attracting and retaining 
physicians, specialists, and other professionals into the 
province. 
 
Specifically to answer your question, we have a telephone 
number in place. Today? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We are 
in the process of putting a telephone line in place right now for 
recruitment and retention agency. We are gathering data of 
vacancies and needs from the regions, and it is our expectation 
that the agency itself will be up and running by this fall. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Chair. The list of programs 
the minister recited in his answer was quite extensive, and if I 
heard correct I would say at least half of those are dedicated to 
providing greater medical capacity in rural Saskatchewan. And 
the numbers of active doctors you indicated is up by nearly 100 
over the last five years. But it doesn’t seem, anecdotally 
anyway, it doesn’t seem that we have the level of medical 
capacity in rural Saskatchewan that we’d like. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that there’s more 
doctors practising and you had put into place all of these 
programs for rural medical practice, are we succeeding there? 
Anecdotally I would suggest we’re not. But can you give us an 
indication, Mr. Minister, how we’re doing in rural 
Saskatchewan? I think that’s a very important question in light 
of the numerous vacancies that I have in the constituency of 
Cypress Hills, and I’m sure that that situation is replicated 
throughout many rural constituencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I’m tempted to 
simply tell the minister that I’ve heard the anecdotes. I’ve been 
in the coffee shops around the province, and I’ve heard the 
stories. But I’ve also been in communities where the shortage is 
very real, that in this particular piece of land, serving the people 
that surround that or live within that piece of land, there’s a 
need for a physician. 
 
On a more practical perspective, looking at the entire province, 
the programs that we put in place are indeed having some 
success. The number of family practitioners in rural 
Saskatchewan have increased. The number of specialists, 
system wide, have increased. And the active rural family 

practitioners, from March 2001 to March ’06, the numbers that 
I have in front of me have certainly increased from 211 to 234. 
So anecdotally we can pinpoint areas — and we’ll certainly be 
doing so now with the recruitment agency’s work — of 
working with the health regions to identify those areas of the 
province where recruitment needs are the greatest. We will be 
able to take that anecdotal evidence of there’s a need here and 
target that for filling. 
 
On a practical level province-wide, we know the programs that 
we’ve developed in conjunction with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, that those programs have value and are working 
and can be used in conjunction with the message we send out 
through the recruitment agency to attract additional family 
physicians to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate that there’s a lot of work that has to be done to 
compile those figures and bring the information into one cogent 
document. 
 
You mentioned earlier that the department is currently in the 
process of seeking information from the regional health 
authorities to what they know to be their professional 
requirements, their doctor requirements, and so forth. When you 
have that information, is that kind of information that will be 
made available to us, to the public generally? 
 
And I guess the other question I want to ask while I’m sort of 
on this topic is, from your knowledge now, from the viewpoint 
of the department at this particular juncture, would you say that 
the situation that we’re experiencing in Cypress Hills with 
anywhere from eight to a dozen doctors that we’re short right 
now, is that an aberration? Is that a unique situation? Or is it 
typical of many other rural areas? 
 
[21:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. Again I appreciate 
the questions, and I thank the member for patience while I 
gather as much data to be as concise and as specific as possible. 
 
Two parts to the member’s question, the first one about public 
knowledge. I think that it is important to recognize that human 
resources, whether we’re talking about physicians or other 
professionals, is a constantly changing circumstance. Whether 
it’s retirements or people whose family have circumstances that 
require them to move — illnesses, vacations, maternity leaves 
— any number of factors could influence whether or not there’s 
a vacancy or an additional need created within a specific area. 
 
All of the data with regards to the regions is accessible in one 
form or another and certainly would be accessible through the 
recruitment agency because we are actually advertising those 
positions centrally and seeking people to fill those positions. If 
people don’t know about them, of course, how can you know 
that you want to be there? 
 
Secondly, the primary health care initiative falls both within 
directions from Sask Health but fits needs set out by the 
regional authorities, regional health care authorities’ workforce 
plans, and therefore that planning information is also available. 
But it will of course change as circumstances and needs change 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

within the region. So I hesitate to say that on any given day I’m 
able to provide a complete status report on vacancies around the 
province. But that data will certainly be accessible in one form 
or another. 
 
The second thing about . . . is it an aberration in the Cypress 
region? As I indicated before, recruitment and retention is an 
ongoing matter within this province, within the other provinces, 
within many of the states in the United States. There is a 
physician, nurse, pharmacist, technologist shortage in most 
jurisdictions in North America. Some areas have, at a given 
time, a greater vacancy rate than others and again for any 
number of reasons that may be unique to that part of the 
province. 
 
But also on any given day, we can point to just about any region 
in the province and point to a community where there has been 
a shortage — or is a shortage — for which the regional health 
authorities and now the province are actively recruiting to fill. 
In my own area, the town of Turtleford on Highway 26 has 
expressed a desire for assistance within Prairie North Health 
Region for recruiting to fill a vacancy at the hospital in 
Turtleford. 
 
Those pressing needs of the community are there to be 
addressed, and now we have additional tools to help the 
regional health authorities to address those needs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
issue of recruitment seems to be widely misunderstood, I would 
believe or I would suggest, as a result of some of the 
experiences that communities in Cypress Hills have had 
recently in their efforts to find doctors to fill the vacancies that, 
you know, plague their communities. And if I understood your 
answer correctly, the new recruitment and retention process that 
you’re going to put in place is going to play an active role in the 
future. But I also am led to believe that as it stands now, each 
regional health authority is responsible for the recruitment 
effort within their district. 
 
But what I’m hearing from the communities is that they feel — 
and I think you maybe alluded to it in your comment about 
Turtleford — that each of these individual communities feel 
that they are being obligated by the regional health authorities 
to undertake the recruitment efforts on their own. 
 
So would you lay out for us, as clearly as possible, who has the 
responsibility for undertaking recruitment of doctors for these 
rural practices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much. The 
workforce action plan, workforce action plan released in 
December 2005, which made the recommendation with regards 
to the establishment of a recruitment agency, certainly 
recognized that the current practice of regional health 
authorities having responsibility for recruitment and retention 
didn’t take into account the different sizes, unique 
circumstances that each of the regions found themselves in. 
 
When we were consulting on the plan, we recognized that some 
of the smaller RHAs [regional health authority] were 
significantly challenged to do the same type of recruitment and 
retention work that the larger RHAs were able to do. Take into 

account the cost of advertising, attending recruitment fairs, 
website development, lack of a central place for collecting 
applications, that sort of thing. This sort of called for a 
centralizing of the process. 
 
So to answer your question, with the programs and the 
financing that the province has put in place, regional health 
authorities have basically had the responsibility to do that 
recruitment. So when the Cypress workforce planning process 
had to include a piece on recruitment and retention, they were 
on their own to do that. Sask Health negotiated tools for them to 
work with. Now Sask Health will help to centralize that process 
and provide them with greater assistance. Does that answer the 
member’s question? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, it answers my question partially, 
and I guess that’s part of the problem with this particular topic 
because the further we go into it, the more questions there are. 
Does the minister envision the recruitment and retention agency 
that is hopefully up and running by this fall? Is it the 
expectation or intention of the government, of the department, 
that it will take the leadership — it will be the primary source 
for recruitment and it will be the centralized agency for 
recruitment purposes — and the applicants that it receives as a 
result of its advertising will be funnelled out to the different 
RHAs for their particular needs and desires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. The department, 
Saskatchewan Health, has taken a leadership position in this 
regard to create the agency to provide the support and tools. 
The regional health authorities will continue to manage their 
plans. Regional health authorities will continue to, well, 
develop their plans and manage them, but there now will be an 
additional tool that takes into account the resources and efforts 
on a province-wide basis to assist them in the work that they 
need to do. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Given that model, Mr. Minister, what role will 
be played by the communities? If the community of Eastend is 
need of a doctor again when the community of Leader is 
recruiting is two doctors, what’s their role going to be? And 
will it be as extensive as it has been in the recent past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much. I’m a very 
strong believer in community involvement, whether it’s in 
health care, education, economic development. I’m a strong 
believer in community involvement, participation from people 
within a community in assisting the people of a community 
realize their potential. 
 
The regional health authorities I believe serve this purpose. We 
have individuals from throughout the region, representing 
different areas of that region, who sit together, who are 
collectively making decisions. There’s a consultative role that 
the regional health authorities perform. They meet in different 
locations throughout the regions. 
 
And I believe that the communities have to continue doing what 
they’ve done and participate to the greatest extent that they feel 
they can in the development of regional health authority plans 
and in the rollout of those plans through the communities. 
 
[21:15] 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

So I don’t know if I’m addressing the question directly because 
I don’t know what role a number of those communities in the 
area that the member is referring to, what role they’ve played in 
the past. I’m assuming that those communities have been 
actively participating and would simply encourage them to 
continue to do that because it’s the role of the regional health 
authority to consult, develop their plan, and deliver that plan, 
again in consultation with the communities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, from 
my experience, recently it would seem that the communities are 
the agencies that have taken primary responsibility for the 
recruiting. They have put together local committees and have 
gone and advertised, have accepted the responses to their 
applications, have taken the applications to the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons where they’ve been vetted for 
appropriate credentials, and given the results of that vetting. 
Then they’ve gone and approached the two or three or four 
candidates that seem appropriate and have undertaken 
negotiations to see if somebody would be prepared to take up 
the opportunity to the community. 
 
And if that’s the way it’s going to be, I think it needs to be 
clearly understood by the communities that they have the 
primacy. It’s their obligation first and foremost to undertake the 
recruiting effort on behalf of their community. If they get some 
kind of supportive help from the regional health authority or 
there’s some indication from the RHA of the type of doctor they 
might want of some specialization or other, that’s okay. But 
somebody has to say to the community, look, you’re 
responsible. The RHA is just going to kind of help support this 
effort, but they’re not going to take the lead in this effort. I 
think that would save a lot of time and a lot of frustration on the 
part of . . . 
 
It’s still going to be difficult to recruit adequate numbers to 
rural Saskatchewan, but if these communities know that it’s 
their responsibility, then I think we need to decide that and say 
so tonight because that will help them get their initiatives for 
recruitment underway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. Again I thank the 
member opposite for his additional information on the activities 
within the communities. And I do want to express my 
appreciation to the communities that have been actively 
engaged in this recruiting process. But I do stress that while I 
welcome and encourage communities to continue to do that 
work, the primary responsibility for recruiting within a region is 
the responsibility of the region itself. And the region’s 
development plan would indicate to communities where 
collectively there’s a sense of the need to develop a primary 
care facility, need to develop a — I don’t think we are doing 
much of it anymore — single practice or dual practice physician 
location. 
 
It’s a number of things that are very important in the 
development of a human resource plan within a region. The 
region has the responsibility to do that, should be consulting 
with and working closely with the communities. 
 
There’s no doubt that when an area has been identified as 
having a vacancy that requires a filling, that all of the support 
and effort that can be brought to bear, participation from within 

that community is of great benefit. The agency and the province 
are now serving to centralize and assist in that process, 
providing opportunities to take the needs of the province as a 
whole beyond that which the individual regional health 
authorities can do on their own. 
 
It’s like trying to attract business to the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s hard for the province or somebody in Regina 
to say this business is best suited for Biggar or Kerrobert or 
Colonsay. Colonsay, Biggar, and Kerrobert may all believe 
that’s very important for them to be there. But if the province 
has set the parameters that allows that business to find this 
province attractive, if a physician finds the province of 
Saskatchewan attractive, then it’s up a particular region or a 
particular community to then attract that individual to that 
region for this particular purpose. 
 
So there is a central role that the agency plays. There is a tool 
box role that the agency plays. Ultimately the human resource 
planning and the recruitment and retention responsibility 
continues to lie with the regional health authorities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
think you’ve explained more or less how you believe the 
recruitment and retention process needs to work. But I didn’t 
hear from you clearly what it is that the regional health 
authorities are obligated or expected to do as part of their 
mandate in the recruiting process. 
 
I think the communities of Cypress Hills have found it very 
frustrating dealing with the regional health authority because 
they assume that they have a responsibility or an obligation in 
this recruiting process but the advertising and the coordination 
and the interviewing has all been done by the community. So if 
the RHA is the agency that is obligated with this responsibility 
as you outlined, what are the things they actually have to do? 
What are they required to do to assist in this recruiting process? 
Do they have budgets specifically dedicated to this? Do they 
have people specifically dedicated to it? Are they expected to 
act within a timely manner, in a timely manner if in fact the 
doctor that’s being recruited for this position fits their overall 
human resource plan? What exactly can we expect from the 
RHAs as part of this process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I want the member 
opposite to understand when he’s talking about the agency 
itself, that the agency is designed to play both a leadership and a 
supportive role for the RHAs. The agency itself assists and 
broadens the scope of what the RHAs do. But the RHAs 
themselves will have . . . In fact to answer the supplementary 
questions that were part of the overall question, the answer is 
basically yes to all of those pieces. 
 
The RHAs have got budgets. They’ve got staff related to human 
resources and recruitment and retentions. They are seeking to 
fill vacancies in a timely manner. The RHAs take the job of 
filling their — particularly because that’s what we’re talking 
about — physician vacancies very seriously. 
 
The system is built, even the primary care model is built around 
an active participating physician. So putting some resources 
forward at the RH level, the human resources, administration 
and in fact pulling the plan together is something the RHAs take 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

very seriously. 
 
That having been said, we’re near the end of a transition period 
whereby you may remember — it probably is no more than 10 
years ago, maybe just a little bit beyond that — a lot of 
recruiting in this province took place by the physicians 
themselves. If they were retiring or they wanted someone to 
assist them, the physicians would, you know, make the calls. 
And people in the community would get around to support, 
bringing the new doctor into the community. A lot of that has 
changed over the last 10 years with younger graduates having a 
bigger world to move into, adding to the stress that the system 
feels with regards to physician recruiting. 
 
That’s why the primary care model has developed — not only 
in Saskatchewan but in practice right across Canada, and not 
just in rural parts of Canada but within an urban environment as 
well — primary care clinics, the multidisciplinary team 
approach to ensuring that people have access to care that’s not 
necessarily delivered by a single physician and in some cases 
that care not delivered by a physician directly. 
 
So in answering the member’s question, the regional health 
authority continues to have the resources and leadership and 
supportive tools from the province to do recruiting and retention 
based on the consultative plan that they put together for the 
region as a whole. When that plan is put into place and 
communities are interested in facilitating and participating in 
that planning process, they’re a welcome partner within the 
piece. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Indian 
Head. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. I’m going to have to butt in 
here, so I can get a few of my questions in. I think they 
probably could have gone back and forth until midnight and 
maybe that would be all right, I don’t know. But it’s past my 
bedtime at midnight. 
 
So I’d like to first of all thank all the officials for being here this 
evening. I have a number of questions, some of them leading 
off of what my colleague from Cypress Hills was talking about, 
and that would be recruitment and retention. 
 
But what I want to ask is, we met again, we met today — as the 
minister of Post-Secondary Education, I believe, met — with 
this group of medical students that came from the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan]. And their request was looking at 
student to resident ratio of instead of 1:1, 1.2, and that the 
whole reason being is to try and keep some of the students here 
in Saskatchewan so they don’t go out of province to finish their 
education, to keep them here because they felt there was a 
shortage. 
 
So I would be interested in what the minister’s response is to 
moving from a 1:1 ratio to a 1:1.2 ratio. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I appreciate the 
question. Earlier today the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment had mentioned to me the meeting that took place 

with students. I had indicated to her then, and I will indicate to 
those who are watching tonight and for the record, that this is a 
matter that we are taking a look at. 
 
There are differing opinions out there, and we’re trying to find 
the right balance. The students have asked for a change in the 
ratio. It’s the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The SMA has asked us to take a 
look at a change in the ratio as well. Yet we have others who 
have expressed the need to stay within the 1:1. 
 
This is an interesting issue. We think that there is value in 
changing the ratio. We just want to make sure that we sort of 
square the circle, as they say, and act after we’ve had a chance 
to assess all of the information. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you for that. I’d be interested to 
follow this line of questioning a little bit further. Just learning a 
little more of it today and hearing the students talking about 
some of the other jurisdictions, because that was my question is, 
how do other provinces deal with this? What are the ratios in 
other provinces? And they said as high as 1.6:1 in British 
Columbia. 
 
I then asked, you know, how does it sit with the SMA and the 
other organizations throughout the province and regarding also 
the health districts? And according to the students, they listed 
off a number of organizations, more than I could list off, but a 
number of organizations that were in favour of this. You say 
that there are organizations that are hesitant and aren’t so sure 
this is the route to go. I’d be very interested in knowing what 
the rationale is for that, what those organizations are saying, be 
great to know who those organizations are. 
 
But if that isn’t forthcoming, then what is the rationale of those 
organizations or the department not to move on this as quickly 
as possible? Because it does deal with the very issue that the 
member from Cypress Hills was talking about. Recruitment is 
one thing, but retaining who we have trained is another. And 
this is a large step, I would suggest, to that very piece is 
retaining who we are training. 
 
So I guess my first question is, what is the argument as to not to 
move to this from the organizations that you had mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much again, and I 
appreciate the request to elaborate on the answer because I think 
it is important. One of the other sides of this story, one of the 
other associations that have provided us with some information 
are the . . . it’s the association of faculties, Canadian Faculty of 
Colleges of Medicine. Sorry, I can’t even read my own writing 
here. 
 
The rationale essentially is that there is a tendency for grad 
spots to be in the specialties and less in family medicine. In a 
province like Saskatchewan where we are looking to recruit and 
support medicine in rural parts of the province, we need to 
make sure that we’ve got the balance between family medicine 
and specialists. There is no doubt we do need specialists 
retained in this province as well. It’s finding that balance that’s 
critical. 
 
And as a result of that, we’re reviewing the requests which we, 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

as I said earlier, tend to believe has some value, with the 
cautionary approach that the Association of Canadian Faculties 
have suggested to us and not wanting to move too quickly. That 
may, in fact, cause us more problems in rural Saskatchewan and 
not fix some of our problems in rural Saskatchewan, which is a 
focus that we’d like to stay on. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s an interesting answer because we 
had that very same discussion earlier this morning with the 
students. And they were saying that — and again this what they 
had to say regarding that very issue — that although a number 
of years ago that was perhaps more the case that pre-grads were 
going more into the specialty area and not as much into the 
family medicine, but what they’ve said, over the last two years 
especially, is that at least 40 per cent of the students were 
choosing family medicine and 60 per cent in the specialty 
which is the mix that I think most provinces were trying to 
strike. 
 
The other thing that was interesting when we look, kind of just 
talking and questioned a little bit more, the opportunity, if you 
went to a 1.2 ratio, is that those residencies that you are adding 
— that’s 20 per cent increase — could be targeted towards 
family medicine. In other words, if that’s where we’re finding 
shortages in rural Saskatchewan or all of Saskatchewan but in 
particularly rural Saskatchewan, if you targeted those students 
coming out into residency spots, under residency spots that are 
targeted towards family medicine, you would then have a better 
opportunity of not controlling but directing grad students into 
areas that we feel that we’re short. 
 
And I think that was the very point. So that if you feel that 
you’re short in a certain area, this is an excellent opportunity to 
move people into, whether it’s family medicine or if it’s a 
certain specialty, but in this case, family medicine, which they 
said the numbers are increasing with students going into that 
area. But this would be another way of enhancing that. So I 
would be interested in your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much for 
requesting elaboration on this. I think that there may be a bit of 
anecdotal evidence that students bring forward in terms of the 
numbers. We’ll have to take a look at the numbers that they 
were presenting and how the pieces all fit together. 
 
Saskatchewan currently already reserves 40 per cent of our 
spots for family medicine. There’s the reserve component that’s 
created there, and of course Saskatchewan recognizes that we 
have a better chance of retaining our people if they’re 
Saskatchewan born and raised, if they’ve got some ties to our 
communities. So this is one of the reasons why we are looking 
at this. We’re taking it serious. We don’t want to close the door 
on the issue. 
 
And in fact I can probably argue that we have moved in that 
direction already with the creation of four new IMG 
[international medical graduate] spots and two specialist 
re-entry spots. It’s an additional six over and above the 60 spots 
that already exist. So six out of 60 is sort of 10 per cent. 
 
In any case, we’re not closing the door on the issue. We are 
trying to understand the arguments and finding the balance 
that’s just right for Saskatchewan. The students make a good 

argument. We feel that there’s some value there, and we’ll 
continue to look at this. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think there’s one final question in this 
area, and we’ll move to something else. But you had mentioned 
that there are 60 seats, and you’ll be moving to 80 in the future, 
so you’re going to have to increase the number of residencies 
automatically. 
 
But going to 1.2 at this point, starting now, would start to build 
towards that capacity that is going to be needed in the future. So 
I’d really suggest then . . . I mean I don’t know all the ins and 
outs of it either, but it just made an awful lot of sense that you 
would start building towards a building capacity now so that 
you can meet the demand in a few years when the seats are at 
80 and there’ll be that many looking for residency spots. So just 
a final comment before I move to another subject. I don’t know 
if the minister wants to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just a repeat of my answer previously. 
We haven’t closed the door on this. We’re willing to look at it. 
The program offers us opportunities to look at it and to make 
some changes should the balance work. So we’ll continue to do 
that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well we will be certainly looking forward 
to hearing from the department on the progress in this area. 
 
What I want to move to now though is some of the issues that 
we have been raising in this House in a little different 
atmosphere over the last couple of weeks and especially the 
issue that came up today regarding the case that was raised in 
question period. And there are a whole lot of questions around 
that, and I think that’ll probably eat up most of the time that we 
have left. 
 
But the one question to begin with is, could you please explain 
to me the policy of the department as far as paying for 
out-of-province medical care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for that question. 
There’s no doubt as we’ve learned today that there is some 
confusion amongst members of the public, in fact members of 
this Chamber, about what the policy is with regards to 
out-of-province care and financing. 
 
[21:45] 
 
Let me make this as simple as possible for the record. There 
are, for all intents and purposes, only three areas where prior 
approval is deemed necessary for . . . There are only three 
circumstances in which prior approval is deemed necessary for 
payment. Almost all health care services are available without 
prior approval outside of the province of Saskatchewan in 
hospitals, etc. The three areas that I’m talking about, you do 
require prior approval are MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], 
bone density scans, and cataract surgery. 
 
There is a very specific policy in this regard when we’re dealing 
with those three areas where prior approval from the medical 
services branch is required. The request for the procedure must 
be submitted by a Saskatchewan specialist. The request must 
demonstrate that waiting to receive the service in the province 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

could be potentially detrimental to the health or well-being of 
the patient and also that the patient is unable to gain access to 
the service in Saskatchewan within a required time frame. In 
certain circumstances when a patient has been referred to an 
out-of-province specialist, that out-of-province specialist may 
request prior approval for an MRI as part of his or her clinical 
investigation, and in most cases those are approved by 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So that is interesting. I don’t believe very 
many people including myself knew that was the case. So any 
person that is on a waiting list here in Saskatchewan that says, 
no this is way too long for me, can just go out of the province 
without any approval. 
 
And I guess the other issue that came to mind when you were 
talking about that, we’re talking about out of province; what 
about out of country too? So you know we probably have 
reciprocal agreements with other provinces, but when you start 
travelling out of province, quite often it can be down in the 
States. So maybe I’ll ask that question first before I get into the 
different examples of people waiting on lists and going out of 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m very glad the member asked that 
particular question because I realized that I did neglect to use 
the words within Canada in my response to him earlier. So add 
to my response that medical services are covered by 
Saskatchewan Health within Canada, with the exception of the 
three areas that I talked about. But any service requested or 
received outside of Canada must be done so with approval of 
the medical services branch. So only within Canada is the prior 
approval not required except in the three instances in which I 
had outlined. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So for example in the case that was brought 
up today with baby Paige, when they went to Edmonton there 
was some, you know, wondering whether they needed prior 
approval. They absolutely did not need any prior approval even 
though, I guess, one . . . well I guess maybe I’ll correct that 
then. In one case they did look for a bone density scan, but there 
were many other tests being done. So I mean they’re going to 
Edmonton, and they’re going through a battery of tests, and one 
of them happens to be a bone density scan. That wouldn’t have 
been covered, but they would be fully covered for everything 
else automatically without asking any questions of the 
specialists, the GP [general practitioner], or this government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much. I’ll speak in 
very general terms because I still value the privacy of the 
individual patient and the family. I do not have the approval to 
speak about the specifics of the case that occurred today. 
 
There’s a difference between a nuclear bone scan and a bone 
density scan. They are different procedures. Nuclear bone scans 
are completely covered. Stollery Hospital in Edmonton is part 
of our normal referral process, our reciprocal agreement with 
the province of Alberta, all of that stuff. A bone density scan is 
done primarily for osteoporosis purposes, and it is not covered. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So we don’t have to talk about particulars; 
we’ll use a hypothetical. A person that just didn’t seem to be 
getting the treatment or the satisfaction that they wanted and 

they had a crying child for, you know, a number of days and 
weeks, should know or we should be able to tell them 
automatically, if they’re not getting the treatment they want 
here in Saskatchewan or they think is satisfactory, should 
automatically or can automatically go out of the province, no 
questions asked. And it will be covered, their medical expenses 
will be covered. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think one of the things that we have to 
keep in mind is whether you’re in Saskatchewan or elsewhere, 
specialists generally act on the referral of a physician. A patient 
in Saskatchewan deals with their family physician who will 
refer them to a specialist in Saskatoon or, if that specialist is not 
meeting their needs, that physician has the ability to refer to 
other specialists and those other specialists fit them into 
whatever schedule that they are working with. 
 
So it’s very important for Saskatchewan residents to continue to 
work with their family physicians — the first line of contact for 
their or their children’s health. And basically, on those types of 
referrals, the circumstance that the member opposite outlines, 
perfectly correct. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So in a situation that we’ve just witnessed 
today with perhaps the fact that there was no specialist available 
to see this person, this child, they should either wait a couple of 
weeks or three weeks to see a specialist here in the province or 
get out of the province and get care immediately, which is the 
case that happened in Edmonton and there should be . . . there 
was no questions asked. They don’t have to go through any 
prior approval from this government. 
 
I think you can go back to different cases, whether it was the 
one last week where a person was waiting 12 weeks to see an 
oncologist. I guess the next thing that we would say then is you 
should go and see if you can’t get in and see an oncologist that 
much quicker in another province. Because when you’re twice 
the national average, for example, first visit to an oncologist, 
maybe we should recommend that they be out of the province 
and see one quicker. Just as in the case today, they went out of 
province to Edmonton to see a specialist and saw that specialist 
within 24 hours as opposed to the three-week wait that they 
were suggested to have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I see we’re running close to our time 
here. I’ll try to be brief, but I’ll also try to be as full in my 
answer as I can, not only to help the member opposite but all of 
those who are listening or read this report later. 
 
Let us keep in mind that the case that we’re referring to today 
. . . none of us know all of the details or the circumstances that 
affected that particular case. That’s why I’ve asked the deputy 
minister, working with other professionals in the field, to do a 
full investigation and report back to me on what it was that took 
place there. 
 
Whether or not the services that the family in Humboldt 
required were available in Saskatoon or in Saskatchewan or 
whether they were required to go out of province is a part of 
that investigation. Were those services available here, were they 
available in a timely manner, and how was that information 
communicated . . . is something that we will be examining. 
 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

On oncologists we must remember again that oncologists are 
very much specialists. Even in Saskatchewan, you don’t knock 
on the door of an oncologist and say I need to see you; can you 
fit me in? There’s still a referral process that occurs. And on 
oncology, just as in these other matters, we have reciprocal 
agreements with the other provinces. We will cover 
out-of-province care. Often cases it’s more expensive than that 
which is delivered in the province of Saskatchewan. But we 
have agreements, and we will pay for that care. When we’re 
dealing with oncologists, they are specialists, and there is a 
physician referral required. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think, you know, we don’t need to get 
bogged down with specifics at all whether it’s a case that 
happened today or what happened last week. I think the very 
principle of this whole issue is that, if you don’t feel that you’re 
getting the service you need or are willing to wait to see the 
specialist, I realize you just don’t go knock on a specialist’s 
door. But if you don’t feel that you’re getting the service you 
need in a timely manner, automatically you can go out of 
province if you feel you can get into a specialist in a different 
province quicker. 
 
The case today . . . And it doesn’t have to be that case; it can be 
a hypothetical case where a person is waiting longer than they 
think that they think they should to see a specialist, can go out 
of the province without any questions asked. And that’s the 
question. We don’t need to get into the specifics of the case 
today. It’s just a simple yes or no. I can go out of province. If 
I’m the one that has to wait three weeks to see a specialist and I 
think that’s too long, I can automatically go to another province 
and request hopefully to see a specialist in a more timely 
manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In the interests of clarity, the answer is 
yes, except MRIs, bone density scans, and cataracts. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is passed. This committee stands 
adjourned. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
[22:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report progress and ask for leave 
to sit again. 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. I recognize 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:01.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1305 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................1305, 1314 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1305 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1312 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1308 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


