


















































Hansard: May 09, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 56A  TUESDAY, MAY 9, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1557 
 May 9, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker is not present today to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, today I present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
Cypress Hills concerned about the condition of Highway 18. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, today’s petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Maple Creek, Eastend, 
Piapot, and Cypress Hills Park. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to present a petition to fund Avastin. Madam Speaker, 
the signatures on this petition are concerned that forcing 
patients to pay for this drug is an example of two tiered health 
care. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Madam Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from a 
number of communities including Esterhazy, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, and Martensville. And I am pleased to present this petition 
on their behalf. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of 
funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition appears to be signed from 
individuals all from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have 
petitions today with citizens concerned with the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Wadena, Bruno, 
Saskatoon, Colonsay, Watson, Humboldt, Regina, Annaheim, 
and Muenster. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d like 
to present another petition from citizens who would like the 
cancer-curing drug Avastin fully funded. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
people across Saskatchewan who are disappointed that 
Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island are the only provincial 
jurisdictions that do not have a dedicated children’s hospital. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners live in northeast Saskatoon on Gray 
Avenue, Hogg Crescent, and Hurley Way. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the highway 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

conditions of Highway No. 3: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road to 
No. 795. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from 
Maidstone, Delisle, Livelong, and Thunderchild First Nation. I 
so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The 
petition I have today is with the people concerned with the 
government’s lack of funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is signed by the good people of 
Saskatoon and Hudson Bay. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
rise in the House today to present yet another petition regarding 
autism spectrum disorder This petition deals with the 
recommendations made by the Committee on Human Services 
that were made representations to the Minister of Health. It calls 
for: 
 

Continuing to provide intensive behavioural intervention and 
other therapies for as long as an individual’s lead medical 
professional deems them to be required and to increase the 
early diagnosis of children with autism spectrum disorder and 
to encourage and support autism-related research in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so present on their behalf. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 42, 65, 67, 638, 639, 644, 
and 669. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before guests are introduced by 

members to the Assembly, I would like to introduce to you, on 
behalf of Mr. Speaker, members that are seated within the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
We have ambassadors from three visiting countries today. And 
I would ask that they would stand as I read their name and be 
known to the members of our Assembly. Her Excellency, Romy 
Asquez de Gonzalez of Panama; His Excellency, Robert Hanz 
Tippenhauer of Haiti; His Excellency, Nabil Ali Mohamed 
Barto of Jordan. 
 
A number of tours have been arranged for these ambassadors by 
an ad hoc group of business people and community leaders, 
including a visit to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] training facilities and the Ozonator and others 
throughout the province. 
 
This trip serves to introduce the ambassadors to Saskatchewan 
people, culture, technology, and businesses with a view to 
fostering an appreciation and affinity that will undergird future 
relationships. 
 
Accompanying the ambassadors are, and I would ask them to 
stand as well, Robert Montgomery, assistant director, Christian 
Embassy, Ottawa; James Ginther, Leadership Ministries 
representative, and Glenn Dynna, president, MuniSoft Regina, 
as well as host families in Regina here with them that have 
opened their homes to the ambassadors while they’re on their 
visit to Regina. 
 
I’d ask all members to give our visiting dignitaries a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you Madam Speaker. And as well 
as joining in to welcome the ambassadors to Saskatchewan 
from far way, from not quite so far away we have a group of 
visitors from Rosetown, Saskatchewan, and I’d like to introduce 
them to all of my colleagues here in the legislature. They are the 
grade 8 students from the Rosetown Central High School. If I 
counted correctly, I think there’s 46 of them and they are 
coming here as part of the Rosetown Central High School’s 
annual program to bring grade 8 students to Regina and tour the 
legislature. 
 
Madam Speaker, the teachers that have accompanied the 
students include Miles Bennett, Tana Brown, Ken Boyd, 
Michelle Weinhandl and Todd Weinhandl. And as well there 
are a couple of chaperones: Novalee Heatherington and Joan 
Sinclair, and the bus driver is Dave Brigham. 
 
And I’ve met Dave before. I understand he has a big new bus 
and he’s used that to bring them down. I also know that he is 
the brother-in-law of the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
And I think the reason why he hangs around with a lawyer is 
because he also, besides having a bus, has an illegal driver. 
However I know he just uses the illegal driver on the golf 
course because I’ve seen him use it there, Madam Speaker. 
 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

It’s my pleasure to welcome all of these students and those 
who’ve accompanied them to the legislature. I look forward to 
meeting them later in the day over a box of juice. Madam 
Speaker, would everyone please welcome the grade 8’s from 
Rosetown. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s with a great deal of pleasure that I introduce to you 
and through you to all colleagues in the House a 10-member 
study delegation that are here in Saskatchewan from Namibia. 
 
Madam Speaker, this group is part of the 
Saskatchewan-Namibia partnership and today I would like to 
welcome our Namibian partners to Saskatchewan. And they’re 
here to work on three twinning projects with Saskatchewan 
Learning and the Saskatchewan Literacy Commission. 
 
The study tour is focused on curriculum development in public 
education, grade 1 to 12, community-based early childhood 
development program, and distance education. The delegation 
will be with us for the next two weeks and will be visiting a 
number of our province’s early childhood centres, schools, 
post-secondary institutions, and communities. And they’ll share 
with us their expertise and experiences in delivering programs 
and services in remote and sparsely populated areas in a country 
that has many remarkable similarities to Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like the members to please 
give a wave as I introduce them. First off, we have Mr. 
Benestus Kakujaha, Mr. Wynand Diergaardt, Mr. Cornelius 
Hess, Ms. Ursula Gawanas, Ms. Francina Soul, Ms. Indileni 
Daniel, Ms. Hildigonda Kruger, Ms. Alina Amukushu, Ms. 
Isabelle Fourie, and Ms. Loide Kapenda. 
 
And also joining the group from Namibia is Dr. Margaret Lipp 
who runs the Literacy Commission here in Saskatchewan and 
works very hard on this partnership program and does 
wonderful work here in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m very 
pleased to have the delegation here. And I hope we have a great 
deal of information sharing and a lot of work done over the next 
two weeks, and both Saskatchewan and Namibia will benefit 
from that. And please, I would ask my colleagues to welcome 
these delegates. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I rise and join the Minister of Learning in 
welcoming the Namibian study group to Saskatchewan. 
Certainly when you hear that your country is very similar as our 
province in remote and distance education challenges, that 
certainly I think that we not only can learn from you, but 
hopefully we have some things that we’re able to help you with. 
And at the end of the day, it certainly is going to be a great 
benefit to both of our jurisdictions and our people respectively 
that we have this opportunity to share and dialogue. 

So on behalf of the official opposition, let me extend our 
welcome to you as well in our province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members 
of the Assembly a group of 25 high school students seated in 
your gallery from the Punnichy Community School. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Wanda Grabowska, Ms. 
Betty Hryhor, and Ms. Teresa McNab. 
 
I had an opportunity to already visit with them, and we did talk 
about the operations of the Assembly. And they were 
particularly interested in question period. And they are 
expecting very precise and pointed questions to be raised by the 
members on this side of the House, and they are also expecting 
precise answers from government members. And I’m sure we 
will not disappoint them today. So I’d ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana and the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. 
 

Remembering Economist John Kenneth Galbraith 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, today I rise to 
pay tribute to influential, Canadian-born economist John 
Kenneth Galbraith, who died on Saturday, April 29 at the age of 
97. Dr. Galbraith was born in Iona Station, Ontario in 1908 and 
was educated at the Ontario Agricultural College and Berkeley. 
After completing his doctorate in agricultural economics, he 
enjoyed a lengthy career teaching at Harvard and Princeton. 
 
Galbraith wrote prolifically on economics, but he also wrote 
fiction and diplomatic manuals, particularly during his tenure as 
President Kennedy’s ambassador to India. He was the recipient 
of over 70 honorary degrees, the Order of Canada, and twice he 
was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom. 
 
Madam Speaker, even after his move to the United States, Dr. 
Galbraith referred to his home country as a model for the 
United States, noting Canada’s admirable record in caring for 
the poor and the elderly. He believed in the power of 
government to improve people’s lives. He believed in a system 
of progressive taxes and in public support for the arts, and he 
also supported public ownership. 
 
Madam Speaker, John Kenneth Galbraith was an economist, 
diplomat, and writer whose unconventional methods made him 
a distinct and influential thinker. His writings were rooted in his 
strong commitment to a socially pain-free, decently egalitarian 
society. And he displayed this commitment by making his work 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

accessible and interesting to the public as well as to fellow 
academics. 
 
Madam Speaker, Dr. Galbraith will be fondly remembered for 
his wit, style, and firm commitment to his principles. I would 
ask all members to join me in acknowledging his significant 
influence on politics, economics, and North American society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Charity Fashion Show in Weyburn 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Last Saturday night in Weyburn, Mojo’s Hair Candy and 
Reality Bites Clothing Company held their fourth annual 
charity fashion show. The show was held at the Connections bar 
and grill for adults and at the Connections banquet hall for 
minors. Along with the staff from the two private retail stores, 
there were 41 community volunteers acting as models. Over 
300 people attended this charity event and in excess of $3,000 
was raised for Family Place in Weyburn. 
 
Family Place provides support for families in need in the 
Weyburn area. Their support programs which assist parents and 
children that are at high risk and are vulnerable . . . one 
particular program is their Mini-Go program for 
pre-kindergarten youngsters. Family Place employs 20 people 
in delivering their programs. With limited support from the 
province, Family Place relies on strong support from the 
community. This year’s fashion show supported Family Place 
for the second year in a row. 
 
Susan Hagel, the owner of Reality Bites and the organizer of 
the charity fashion show, won the 2006 Woman Entrepreneur of 
the Year for Weyburn because of her business skills and her 
strong support for her community and organizations such as 
Family Place. Congratulations to Susan Hagel, Reality Bites, 
Mojo’s Hair Candy, and the community of Weyburn for their 
support of Family Place. 
 
And for the edification of the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
and her great concern as to who may or may not be a relative, 
Susan Hagel is a successful female entrepreneur, a builder of a 
better community in Weyburn, and my sister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cumberland, the Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs. 
 

Creighton Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council 
Celebrates 20 Years of Quality Service 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I recently had 
the opportunity to attend the 20th anniversary celebration of the 
Creighton Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council as part of National 
Volunteer Appreciation Week. The CADAC [Creighton 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council] Outpatient Centre is a 
non-profit health care organization that focuses on prevention 
programs for youth. The council works closely with local 

schools and community groups. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, CADAC’s board includes many 
committed, long-term members but none has served longer and 
is more dedicated than its director, Laurel Mackie. Laurel has 
worked with the organization since it began in 1986. She’s a 
leader in Saskatchewan addiction awareness week and the 
alcohol and drug services provincial working group promoting 
the development of the clinical programs for alcohol and drug 
services. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the CADAC Outpatient Centre 
provides services for a wide variety of addictions and is an 
excellent example of community-based care. Successful 
addiction programs like CADAC not only ease the sufferings of 
patients but also helps reduce costs of the health care system. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like congratulate the 
Creighton Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council for 20 years of 
quality service to the people of Saskatchewan and wish them 
continued success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Macoun Student Competes in National Writing Contest 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, I am delighted to tell you the accomplishments of a 
young constituent of mine. Beau Duckarmie is an 11-year-old 
grade 5 student at Macoun School. Through his school, he 
submitted a story for this year’s Canadian Schools Creative 
Writing Contest. Beau’s story was chosen to be included in the 
top entries by the Poetry Institute of Canada Young Writers, 
which is a great accomplishment because thousands of entries 
were received. 
 
Beau’s story, titled “Survival,” is the story of three pilots from 
New Zealand; their plane ran out of fuel over the rainforests of 
Burma while they were on their way to Saudi Arabia, and how 
they survived. His story will be published in The Monkey’s Tale 
and will be in the final competition to be judged this fall. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Beau calls himself a war historian. He 
orders and reads many books on World War II through a 
military book club and tracks locations on the globe. He is also 
studying piano and trumpet. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m especially proud of this young 
man’s accomplishments because Beau is my grandson. 
Congratulations, Beau, and good luck in the finals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 

Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of 
Saskatchewan Awards 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, the Association of Professional Engineers and 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

Geoscientists of Saskatchewan, or APEGS, held their annual 
awards banquet in Saskatoon over the weekend. These awards 
are held every year in conjunction with APEGS’ annual general 
meeting to celebrate exceptional professional achievements of 
their members. 
 
Madam Speaker, this year’s winners include Derrick Bellows 
who received the Brian Eckel Distinguished Service Award; Dr. 
Ding Yu Peng, recipient of the Outstanding Achievement 
Award. Mr. Barry Collins was presented the McCannel Award. 
The Promising Member Award went to Mr. Ben Voss. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Exceptional Engineering Geoscience 
Project Award went to Pavement Scientific International for 
their work in partnership with Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation and the Saskatchewan road builders on the 
mechanistic, full depth road recycling and strengthening 
system. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that the 
Environmental Excellence Award went to a constituent of mine, 
Ken Kelln of Kelln Consulting. This award is given in 
recognition of exceptional professional achievements related to 
environmental protection and preservation. 
 
Madam Speaker, I invite all members to join with me in 
congratulating the Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan and the award winners on their 
fine work and their many contributions to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Shaunavon’s Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
tell you about Mr. Gordon Speirs, this year’s Citizen of the 
Year from Shaunavon who has tirelessly contributed to his 
community in many ways. Born and raised right in the area, 
Gordon graduated from the Shaunavon High School in 1944 
and began a 45-year career in hardware and automotive supply 
sales. Besides operating the family business, Speirs Automotive 
Ltd., Gordon and his wife Shirley have raised four children and 
remain active members in the local United Church. 
 
Now to give an example of the impact Gordon’s volunteer spirit 
has made on the community of Shaunavon, here’s just a partial 
list of the organizations in which he has participated over the 
years. Gordon was a member of the volunteer fire department 
for 46 years, serving as a fire chief for 42 of those years. He 
was on the town council for 13 years and served in the capacity 
of mayor for three of those years. 
 
The rink board, recreation board, swimming pool, hockey club, 
school board, hospital board and housing corporation have all 
benefited from Gordon’s participation. So too have the chamber 
of commerce, the Shawnee Club, the Kiwanis Club, museum 
board, Pine Cree Park Board and the Rock Creek Golf Club. 
 
As an aside, Madam Deputy Speaker, when Gordon was asked 

if there was any organization he had not been part of, he 
pondered for a moment and replied, yes — the United Church 
women. At 80 years of age and ostensibly retired, Gordon still 
volunteers five days a week with the Hometown Club who help 
maintain the local recycling program, among other projects. 
 
Coincidently, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want, for the record, 
you to know that I’m not related to Gordon Speirs, but we 
should say that we would offer our congratulations to him on 
his recognition as Citizen of the Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for Community Resources and the member for Athabasca. 
 

Voices of the North 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Last week I, along with Minister of Northern Affairs and 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations and a very large 
and appreciative audience, had the opportunity to see Voices of 
the North. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Voices of the North is a production of 
Musqua Entertainment of Prince Albert. And since 1993, they 
have been providing Saskatchewan Aboriginal youth the 
opportunity to showcase their musical talents and to gain 
valuable experience in the entertainment field both as 
performers and on the production side. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Voices of the North received 
tremendously positive responses for their performances last 
summer at a variety of venues including the Canada Summer 
Games, and so no one was surprised at the incredible show they 
put on last Thursday night. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the evening featured Voices of the 
North show band — 10 of the finest musicians you’ll find 
anywhere and 12 performers ranging from age 11 on up — 
performing a variety of songs. Some were written by 
performers themselves; some were old standards, but all of 
them sounded great. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Chief Ken Thomas, the former chief 
of FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], Perry 
Bellegarde, and the current chief of FSIN, Lawrence Joseph, 
were some of the performers at this incredible show. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in particular I want to mention one of 
the performers, Dakota Caisse who is originally from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and who has family there. Dakota has a 
tremendous voice. He put on a tremendous show, and I know 
that the town of Ile-a-la-Crosse and all his family and friends 
are very proud of him. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to thank Voices of the North 
producer, Sheryl Kimbley, and all the performers and musicians 
for putting on an excellent show. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Funding Allocations for School Divisions 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Madam Deputy Speaker, this is 
an NDP [New Democratic Party] government that continually 
talks about respecting the autonomy of school boards, and yet 
the Minister of Finance yesterday was clearly telling them what 
they should be doing. He told them they shouldn’t be raising 
taxes. Yesterday he said this about the South East Cornerstone 
School Division which includes Weyburn, and I quote: 
 

They made a political decision on the board to replenish 
their reserves, and so be it. 

 
Does the minister really think they wanted to raise taxes in 
Weyburn and let teachers go? Does he think he left them with a 
choice? The only one hoarding money is the Finance minister 
who has socked away millions of dollars in his election slush 
fund for next year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, why is this minister blaming school 
boards for decisions they are making in the best interests of 
their students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, here 
we are with the critic for the opposition who stands in the 
House every day and is telling us what should be happening in 
these school divisions in terms of the numbers of teachers they 
should have, the number of schools they should have, the 
number of classrooms they should have, the mill rates they 
should set. This is what he is saying that we should be doing. 
 
And then he comes out today and he says, oh wait, but you 
shouldn’t be telling the school boards what to do. Clearly that’s 
just the domain for the Sask Party in terms of interference in 
local autonomy. 
 
When it comes to what this government says, what I said was 
clear: that there was sufficient money in this budget, that there 
was no need for a tax increase in Weyburn, and there was 
sufficient money for cuts in Estevan and Moosomin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Speaker, people are 
certainly tired of this NDP government telling them what to do, 
including school board officials. Don Rempel, the director of 
education for the South East Cornerstone Division, told the 
Leader-Post, and I quote: 
 

“It’s clearly inappropriate for a member of the legislature 
to comment on boards’ decisions” . . . 

That’s all we heard yesterday from the Finance minister about 
his comment on board decisions, and I quote: 
 

“That’s their choice to do it, but there was no need to 
increase taxes in the old Sunrise division (of Weyburn) or 
. . . any [other] increase in Estevan.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, why is he blaming school boards when he is the 
one who is cutting their funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Okay now let’s just bring the member 
up to speed in terms of where we’re at in this debate. Now he is 
saying, now again, that we should be interfering in the 
autonomy of the boards and telling them not to increase taxes. 
Or he is saying that we should be telling them to cut taxes. 
What is the position of that member on this? Does he want 
taxes to go up? Does he think that taxes should have been held, 
or what exactly is his and that party’s position? 
 
Our position is clear. There was sufficient money in the budget 
that taxes could have been held in Weyburn. They could have 
been cut in Estevan and Moosomin. And yes, they would have 
been needed to be raised in the other three divisions. There was 
sufficient money in the budget to do that. The member opposite 
ought to stop playing politics with this and let the boards get on 
with their business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Minister, the Finance 
minister wants to assume the directions of the school board and 
that there’s sufficient funds for them to operate. Unfortunately, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that is not what Lionel Diederichs, the 
superintendent of finance for South East Cornerstone, told the 
Leader-Post, and I quote: 
 

“We suffered a significant loss in provincial funding and 
there’s only one place to make that up” . . . 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if the minister does not want to admit 
what is obvious to everyone else in this province, Mr. 
Diederichs certainly points out, as the director of finance for 
that school division, that this government has let school boards 
down and now is telling them that in light of these decreased 
funding amounts that they still should be able to maintain taxes. 
That simply is impossible, Madam Deputy Speaker. Will the 
minister say what he intends to do in order to properly fund 
education in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me begin by reminding that 
member that he had the audacity to stand in this House and vote 
against record spending for education in this province. This is 
the same party that voted against increases in health care. This 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

is the same party that voted against increases in social 
assistance. This is a party that says one thing in question period 
and does something completely different when the rubber hits 
the road and it comes time to a vote. 
 
Let us remember this. There was sufficient money in this 
budget in Weyburn to make sure that taxes had held the line. 
They could have opted to phase it in over three years. There 
was sufficient money in this budget to cut the taxes in Estevan. 
He should ask his seatmate what she thinks about that. There 
was sufficient money to see that there was a tax cut in 
Moosomin. That was what was built into this budget and that’s 
what the members voted against. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

School Attendance 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, a year and a half ago 
the death of 11-year-old Delores Bird shocked the city of 
Saskatoon. Delores was a girl who roamed the streets of 
Saskatoon looking for a place to sleep. Again, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, she was only 11 years old. She was found dead from a 
drug overdose. 
 
At the time, the Kids Not in School organization estimated that 
there were 1,000 school age children in Saskatoon not attending 
school at all. Can the Minister of Learning tell us if that number 
is accurate and if not, what is the situation in Saskatoon today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there is a 
number of children that aren’t attending school on a regular 
basis. This has been an issue and I believe the case that the 
member raises is one that really brought it to the forefront. 
 
Previous to that, the Department of Learning has been working 
on a tracking system so that we can track children, and it brings 
into play the health records that are used as a basis. There’s 
been issues to deal with over privacy. A lot of work has gone on 
over the last year. The tracking system is up and running in the 
city of Saskatoon and we are hoping soon to have it spread right 
across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, at the time of 
11-year-old Delores Bird’s tragic death, the Saskatoon-based 
organization Kids Not in School was lobbying the government 
to develop a provincial tracking system for children, using 
Saskatchewan health numbers, as many of these children were 
most likely not registered in school at all. According to 
documents on the Department of Learning’s website, there is a 
student tracking program and it is designed to, and I quote: 
 

. . . assist those responsible for Kindergarten to Grade 12 

education in the province to identify children and youth 
who are of compulsory . . . age and are not participating in 
an approved . . . program. 

 
Can the minister tell us when this program was brought into 
being, how many children in Saskatoon are not in school at the 
present time, and what is the status of the program in Saskatoon 
today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, last session we 
amended legislation so that we could put the tracking system 
into place. As I previously stated, there is the pilot project that 
is running in the city of Saskatoon. It is running quite well. I 
haven’t heard any major complaints or major blips along the 
way. 
 
Our plan is, is that by this fall we will have it operational across 
the province. And I know the member opposite realizes the 
importance of ensuring that children are attending school. And 
that is one thing that through the department and through this 
program that we hope to ensure and better enforce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party’s crime committee has been meeting with police officers, 
community workers, and others involved in finding concrete 
solutions to the root causes of crime. They point to the link 
between children not going to school and a strong likelihood of 
being on the street and involved in gangs or prostitution. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our question is to this minister: what is 
she going to do about it? And how many children are not going 
to school today? Can this minister tell us what the student 
tracking program has found today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
really hit on an issue that is I know near and dear to me. We 
know that children need the benefits of school. Many of us who 
come from families where the expectation was that you go to 
school, we all enjoyed going to school, but that’s not the norm 
in many families in the province of Saskatchewan and other 
places. 
 
For many reasons the traditional education system may not 
work for some families or for some children. And there are 
many resources that have been invested in and working toward 
solutions for those people, whether it’s basic adult education, 
whether it’s alternative schools, whether it’s community 
schools, whether it’s the tracking system to make sure that 
young children are in school and do have that benefit to, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, early learning and child care — which 
this province has a plan to put in place to have a early connect 
with very young children in the province of Saskatchewan — 
because we know by all the research that’s been done in many 
countries, in many areas, that the earlier the contact is with the 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

child, the more successful the outcomes will be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the problems go 
beyond just the tracking system. It is clear from the minister’s 
answers she does not know how many children are not in school 
and is unable to tell us that. 
 
The second problem is, even if she did know how many of 
those children there are, who they are, she doesn’t have a 
solution for what to do with those children. Otherwise they 
would be doing it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this minister should be dealing with 
developing a comprehensive program to deal with children not 
in school. Madam Deputy Speaker, can this minister tell us how 
many children are affected by not being in school and what 
she’s going to do about it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, just for 
the member’s benefit — he may not have been listening — 
there are many programs that this government has invested 
money into. And the member can say, well what’s the number? 
What’s the number? Well do you know something, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? There is more than numbers involved in this. 
Children are more than a number. 
 
And we have to make sure that we have a variety of programs 
that provide the resources where needed and when needed. So 
that whether it’s young children, whether it’s early childhood 
learning, whether it’s early childhood development, whether it’s 
the ECIP [early childhood intervention program] program, 
whether it’s basic adult education, whether it’s opportunities 
through regional colleges, distance learning, community 
schools, alternative schools — Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
have done a number of things to access and to be accessible to 
learners, no matter what the age. And we will continue to work 
on those projects and develop projects that are more accessible 
and serve the needs of Saskatchewan learners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruitment of Endocrinologists 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Yesterday we learned that Saskatoon’s last remaining 
endocrinologist is leaving that city. 
 
Dr. Tammy McNab said that she wants to stay but didn’t want 
to be the last endocrinologist dealing with thousands and 
thousands of patients. Dr. McNab said she is pursuing an offer 
in Edmonton mainly because recruitment efforts in this 
province were moving at a snail’s pace. 
 

We’ve seen numbers of examples over the past months where 
recruitment and retention by this NDP government is less than 
satisfactory. Now that we have an unsatisfactory situation of 
having to fly endocrinologists into Saskatchewan to deal with 
some of the diabetic patients that we have. Mr. Speaker, that is 
absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is finding new endocrinologists for 
Saskatchewan such a low priority for this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And it appears that on family day in the Chamber here, 
having a question from Saskatchewan’s favourite uncle is most 
appropriate. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I fundamentally disagree with the 
context of the member’s question that in fact this would be a 
low priority, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
On endocrinology in this province, Saskatchewan Health, the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, the College of Medicine, 
and the Saskatchewan Medical Association are all co-operating 
to recruit one of the most competitive sides of the health sector, 
endocrinology. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, endocrinologists are in great demand 
across North America. We have been working very hard in 
conjunction with the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, with over 50,000 
diabetics roughly in this province and no endocrinologists in 
Saskatoon, they don’t find that really much of a joke 
whatsoever. Dr. McNab offered to find new recruits, offered to 
help recruit new endocrinologists so that she wouldn’t be left 
alone in this province. She offered to sit at tables at job fairs but 
was told that wasn’t necessary. She watched as possible new 
recruits lost interest in Saskatoon because people from this 
government wouldn’t return phone calls, wouldn’t explain the 
whole issue around recruitment and what was needed in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Dr. McNab asked why that recruitment drives weren’t 
conducted on a more aggressive manner. She was told that the 
efforts were usually ineffective and too expensive by the health 
district or by this government. 
 
Why isn’t this government working with the health districts to 
meet the demands that we’re seeing in the province? Demands 
of zero endocrinologists in Saskatoon is absolutely 
unacceptable. When will this government start taking an 
aggressive attack and recruiting professionals that we need to 
maintain the health care system that provincial residents 
demand? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The Saskatoon Regional Health Authority is taking a 
very aggressive position with regards to this situation. Not only 
does Saskatchewan Health, but also the Saskatchewan Regional 
Health Authority and the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
find it unacceptable to have no endocrinologists working in the 
city of Saskatoon. That’s why they’ve taken steps to deal with 
the situation in the interim. 
 
It would appear that there’s one endocrinologist that has been 
recruited. The Saskatchewan College of Medicine is working 
very closely with two others, Madam Deputy Speaker, with $42 
million currently in the pot for physician recruitment and 
retention in this province and a workforce action plan to deal 
with this issue. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is unfortunate, but the people who 
need to be charged with this are working hard to ensure that the 
situation doesn’t continue for much longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this situation is 
like a slow-moving train wreck. We knew that there was 
retirements. You could hear of departures. There’s a maternity 
leave happening, Madam Deputy Speaker. And this government 
has done nothing. When will this government set targets so that 
they can be measured and tracked? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And as we’ve heard in the past, the opposition’s 
rhetoric about doing nothing is not substantiated by the facts. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the criticism that he levels on 
Saskatchewan Health is criticism that would have to be shared, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, with the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and with the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are dollars earmarked to ensure 
that we have an active and aggressive recruiting campaign, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that has been successful in many of 
the fields in which we are recruiting, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
The number of physicians practising in this province today — 6 
per cent higher than it was two years ago. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the recruitment and retentions efforts are having some 
success. We will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly. 

Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. This morning the people of Saskatchewan learned that 
the former Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board is ready to 
consider arbitration or some other form of alternate dispute 
resolution. 
 
Mr. Walter Matkowski says he would consider other options 
like arbitration if this NDP government is interested. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, what action has the Minister of Labour taken 
to explore these other options since hearing about them this 
morning? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Well let’s review the facts again. Mr. Matkowski was selected 
through an open competition for a five-year term. He completed 
his five-year term. It’s expired. And there’ll be another 
competition for another five-year term. 
 
But you know what? We’re talking about political interference 
in the Labour Relations Board. Let’s talk about what the Sask 
Party would do. You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, just last 
spring the member for Thunder Creek said in this Chamber, and 
I quote: 
 

No amendment . . . should be considered unless the 
government is willing to remove all current members of 
the Labour Relations Board and reappoint a full board . . . 
 

So last spring the members opposite were calling for every 
member to be fired of the LRB [Labour Relations Board]. And 
today they seem to be suggesting that if you’re appointed to the 
LRB your term should never expire. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is so typical of the members 
opposite. They say one thing one day and another the next. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s look at what 
this Minister of Labour has had to say lately. First of all he said 
that Mr. Matkowski’s allegations were without merit. Then he 
said there was no political interference in the LRB but refused 
to produce the deputy minister. Then he allowed his deputy 
minister to talk about a conversation with Mr. Matkowski but 
refused to go into any details. Finally he said that there would 
be no investigation because he didn’t want one taking place 
while a court case was on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Matkowski is willing to consider alternatives 
in order to get to the truth. Why doesn’t the minister want to get 
to the bottom of this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

Speaker. I guess they want me to just keep on repeating this. 
There is no political interference. Mr. Matkowski’s term 
expired. 
 
But, you know, if they want to keep talking about political 
interference in the Labour Relations Board, well let’s just do 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker. Just yesterday I understand that 
in a scrum with reporters the Leader of the Opposition, the 
Leader of the Sask Party, clearly stated, if he had his way the 
LRB would have a, and I quote, “a growth agenda.” A growth 
agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
understand the job of the LRB and the work that they do. The 
LRB is an independent, quasi-judicial board that settles disputes 
that arise out of The Trade Union Act. It is not a board to 
minister a political agenda for a political party. It is not that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Madam Deputy Speaker, to say anything 
different is indefensible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Deputy Speaker, over the noon hour 
we learned that the Provincial Ombudsman is willing to 
investigate these allegations of political interference in the 
Labour Relations Board. An Ombudsman investigation would 
be open and impartial. An Ombudsman’s investigation would 
find out whether Mr. Matkowski’s allegations have substance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently all the Ombudsman needs is some 
indications from the minister that he should get involved in this 
matter. Mr. Speaker, what has the minister done since 
discovering the Ombudsman would be interested in helping to 
resolve this matter without a lawsuit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve 
stated it many times and I’ll say it again. There was no political 
interference at the Labour Relations Board. Mr. Matkowski 
simply, his term has expired. 
 
Now I’m going to tell you another thing the member from 
Thunder Creek said last spring about those on the Labour 
Relations Board who complete their terms. And I quote: 
 

. . . it’s obvious to any member of the public that people in 
any job must leave their duties when . . . their mandate 
expires. 

 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, his mandate expired. And I’ve 
got a question for the members opposite: when will they quit 
their political agenda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Labour seems to forget that 
Mr. Matkowski has alleged that the LRB . . . his position on the 
LRB, he was asked to resign that position last summer. That’s 
what Mr. Matkowski is alleging, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it appears once again this minister is 
rejecting all reasonable avenues for an investigation into 
allegations of political interference. Everything suggested is not 
good enough for this minister. Once again this NDP 
government seems to want a lawsuit; a lawsuit — as in the 
Hillson matter — they may lose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thankfully the Provincial Ombudsman does not 
need the government’s permission to conduct an investigation. I 
have here a letter I am sending, asking the Ombudsman to 
conduct an investigation into allegations of political 
interference. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, will this minister at least agree to 
co-operate fully with the Ombudsman’s investigation regardless 
of where it may go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
I find this very interesting. The Sask Party keeps spouting off 
about a need for fairness and balance in our labour legislation. 
And yet the opposition, the Leader of the Opposition, goes on 
record declaring war on working people here in Saskatchewan. 
How is that fair and balanced? 
 
And then we hear the member from Thunder Creek says that 
every member of that board should be fired. And yet, and yet 
again they drag another name of a civil servant through the 
mud. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, they say one thing one 
day, and another the next. They’re just not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Deputy Speaker, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, has asked leave to introduce guests. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and 
thank you, colleagues. In the west gallery, Madam Deputy 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

Speaker, today are some guests of mine that I’d like to 
introduce. 
 
First of all, Mr. Derek Froese, Derek has been working with me 
in the Premier’s office for some time now. I think it’s the first 
time I’ve had an opportunity to introduce Derek to the 
members. But with Derek today, I’m very pleased to be 
introducing his wife, Inna. Inna is still a relatively recent 
immigrant to our nation and to our province from Ukraine. With 
Derek and Inna today are Derek’s mom, Barb Froese, who 
farms near Laird. Derek’s dad — Barb’s husband, Wilmer — is 
seeding as we speak. And also we’re very privileged to 
welcome today, to the Chamber, Derek’s grandparents, Ed and 
Mary Roth. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome these guests to our 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 
2005. 
 
Madam Speaker, the main purpose of Bill No. 12 is to improve 
consumer protection and strengthen trust and confidence in 
Saskatchewan’s marketplace. Consumers face a marketplace 
that is constantly changing as a result of introduction of new 
technologies and increasingly more complex and sophisticated 
products and services. Consumers are increasingly paying in 
advance for products and services. This places consumers at 
increased risk of incurring financial losses. 
 
Madam Speaker, today’s Bill provides for comprehensive 
changes to Saskatchewan’s consumer protection legislation. It 
covers a broad range of goods and services and sets out new 
rules regarding agreements that involve future performance, 
delivery, or payment. The Bill includes new requirements for 
agreements regarding personal development services, such as 
health and fitness clubs, talent and modelling agencies, sports 
and dance studios. It also sets out new rules for travel club 
contracts and agreements that are entered into over the phone or 
by mail. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill was introduced in the Assembly on 
November 16, 2005. The Bill was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services after first reading to allow 
members of the Assembly to discuss the proposals in the Bill 
and to provide the public with an opportunity to make 
submissions and to provide advice on the issues raised by the 
Bill. The Standing Committee on Human Services held public 
hearings on the Bill on February 20 and 22, 2006, and tabled its 

report on the Bill on April 28, 2006. 
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the members of the 
committee for their diligent and extensive review of Bill No. 12 
and for their report. I would also like to express my 
appreciation to the presenters who appeared before the 
committee and the individuals and organizations that provided 
written submissions to the committee. 
 
The committee made a number of recommendations in its 
report. In response to these recommendations, I will be 
proposing some House amendments when the Bill proceeds to 
committee. I will discuss those amendments in the context of 
the relevant provisions in the Bill. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill adds four new parts to The Consumer 
Protection Act. The first part sets out new rules for future 
performance contracts. An agreement is considered to be a 
future performance contract if the delivery or payment for 
goods or services is not made in full at the time the contract is 
entered into. Most future performance contracts involve 
consumers paying for goods or services in advance of delivery. 
The Bill provides for improved disclosure to ensure that both 
parties to the agreement have the same understanding of the 
agreement. It requires future performance contracts to be in 
writing and to contain prescribed information. The Bill also 
provides that a consumer may cancel a future performance 
contract if the supplier does not make delivery or begin the 
services within 30 days after the date specified in the contract. 
 
The second part of the Bill sets out new rules for personal 
development services contracts including fitness club contracts, 
gym memberships, modelling and talent contracts, diet program 
memberships, martial arts, sports, and dance programs. The Bill 
applies to personal development services contracts for which 
payment is required in advance of the services being provided. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Bill provides consumers with a 10-day 
cooling-off period during which they may cancel the personal 
development services contract without any reason. The 
cooling-off period is aimed at curbing high-pressure sales 
tactics and allows consumers to reconsider their purchasing 
decisions. 
 
In its report, the committee recommended that the cooling-off 
period be reduced from 10 days to 7 operational days. I accept 
the committee’s recommendation and will be proposing an 
amendment to the Bill in committee to change the cooling-off 
period for personal development services contracts from 10 
days to 7 business days. 
 
Over the years, a number of consumers in Saskatchewan have 
suffered financial loss as a result of fitness clubs going out of 
business. Since 1986 there have been nine bond forfeitures 
involving fitness clubs under The Sale of Training Courses Act. 
In six of these cases, the bond was insufficient to pay out all the 
claims made against the bond. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Sale of Training Courses Act has become dated and has 
increasingly failed to protect consumers. Most fitness clubs, 
dance studios, and modelling agencies are not currently licensed 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

in Saskatchewan because The Sale of Training Courses Act is 
not broad enough in scope to apply to them. 
 
While it is recognized that it is not possible to prevent 
companies from going out of business, the Bill attempts to limit 
the potential losses for consumers by restricting the length of 
the term of a personal development services contract to one year 
and requiring that monthly payment options be offered. 
 
With respect to the length of the term of personal development 
services contracts, the committee has recommended that 
contracts be made for a term of no longer than two years and 
that advanced payment for services not exceed one year. I 
accept the committee’s recommendation and will be proposing 
House amendments that adopt the committee’s 
recommendation. 
 
Madam Speaker, today’s Bill also provides that a consumer 
may cancel a personal development services contract by giving 
a supplier a notice of cancellation by any prescribed means. The 
committee has recommended that the means for the delivery of 
a notice of cancellation be set out in the Act and that the Bill be 
amended to provide that a consumer may cancel a personal 
development services contract by giving written notice of 
cancellation to the business by personal service, registered mail, 
or by any other means set out in the contract. I accept the 
committee’s recommendation and will be proposing 
amendments in committee to adopt this recommendation. 
 
The next part of the Bill pertains to travel club contracts. Travel 
club contracts are defined as contracts where a consumer, 
through a membership in a travel club or a vacation club, 
acquires the right to discounts or other benefits on the purchase 
of transportation, accommodation, or other services related to 
travel. 
 
Currently consumers who enter into travel club contracts do not 
have a statutory cancellation right. Memberships in travel clubs 
and vacation clubs are often marketed through high-pressure 
sales presentations. Many travel clubs entice consumers to buy 
lifetime memberships. Consumers may be discouraged from 
reading contracts or considering the details of the offer and 
frequently do not have the opportunity to seek third party 
advice before entering into such contracts and making 
substantial financial commitments. 
 
Problems that consumers frequently report with travel clubs 
include the inability to realize any savings particularly if the 
member does travel frequently and failure to receive benefits 
because the company goes out of business. Under the Bill, 
travel club contracts will be limited to one year, and consumers 
would be provided with a 10-day cooling-off period. 
 
With respect to travel club contracts, the committee has 
recommended that travel clubs be prohibited from requiring 
advance payment of more than a prescribed amount per year. I 
will be proposing House amendments to implement the 
committee’s recommendations regarding travel club contracts. 
 
The fourth and final part of the Bill sets out new rules for 
remote contracts. In essence remote contracts are agreements 
that are concluded by telephone, fax, or mail. Madam Speaker, 
Bill No. 12 would extend the protections that are currently 

provided in the Act for Internet sales, contracts to other forms, 
or remote contracts. 
 
For example the Bill would require businesses to disclose 
certain basic information to consumers and would allow a 
consumer to cancel a remote contract if goods or services were 
not delivered within 30 days of the delivery date agreed upon. 
In addition the Bill would allow a consumer to require the credit 
card company to cancel or reverse the charge if the consumer 
cancelled the contract and the seller failed to refund the money. 
 
In summary, Madam Speaker, this Bill is intended to update 
and strengthen Saskatchewan’s consumer protection legislation 
and to provide Saskatchewan consumers with the same level of 
protection that is provided to consumers in other jurisdictions. 
The amendments proposed in this Bill endeavour to strike a 
balance between the interests of consumers and businesses. 
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 12 be now 
read a second time. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is 
the first time that the public hearing process was used in the 
Human Services Committee, and I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank all of the presenters that made 
presentations to the committee. The committee worked hard to 
hear what the presenters had to say and to try and develop a 
consensus. There’s no doubt from the number of presenters and 
the nature of the presentations that were made that there was 
significant concern raised about the introduction of this Bill. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to give just a brief bit of 
background. The Saskatchewan Party had gone on record in 
months prior to this about the unregulated nature of travel clubs. 
Citizens in this province have lost many thousands of dollars 
when unregulated travel clubs had gone out of business. 
Criminal charges ensued. People were prosecuted and sent to 
jail, but there was no recovery for consumers as a result of the 
operation of some of the travel clubs. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the members of the opposition did not 
hear complaints from people that were using fitness clubs 
although it’s clear that members on the government side did 
hear complaints because they chose to regulate in that industry. 
 
The effect of this Bill was to try and deal with both areas of 
concern in one piece of legislation. The committee structure 
worked well to try and develop some compromises and do some 
trade-offs to try and meet the needs of both areas that were 
presenting. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s still the position of the opposition 
that the fitness clubs do not require any degree of regulation. 
The amount of money that has been lost by fitness clubs going 
out of business is relatively minimal. 
 
However having said that, the nature of the presentations were 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

such that we were able to develop some significant 
compromises and develop something that hopefully will be 
workable for the industry. They dealt with issues such as the 
length of term of the contract and how far in advance 
commitments could be made, the amounts that could be 
prepaid. That’s the area where there is vulnerability for 
consumers where large amounts of money are prepaid. 
 
Another area of significant concerns to fitness clubs was the 
method of cancellation and how cancellation could be made. 
We understand that this is going to be dealt with partly in 
regulation and partly in legislation. And we hope we have 
something where the consumers will be able to make their 
cancellations in an appropriate manner and have proof that their 
cancellation was received by the business without implying or 
imposing something that’s too onerous on the business. 
 
We’ve also agreed on reducing the cooling-off period, and that 
will have some significant benefits to businesses that want to be 
able to have longer term commitments and get on with doing 
business rather than have the spectre that a new member may 
choose to cancel or walk away during the first few days of their 
contract. The effect of a cooling-off period is that a consumer 
can use the facility with no cost to them for that number of 
days. If they choose to walk away or cancel at the end of the 
cooling-off period, the business is out that much money. So we 
have arrived at a compromise where that is somewhat reduced. 
 
We also have heard significant concerns about directors’ 
liabilities and the chill that it puts over businesses that may have 
had inadvertent or accidental non-compliance with the 
legislation. They could be facing substantial fines. It would not 
be a fine necessarily imposed on the business but on the 
directors as well. We appreciate that there may be times when 
that is appropriate, but it’s certainly a troubling aspect of this. 
We realize that a business going out of business or not 
continuing would not have directors’ liability, but there would 
be fines available and significant fines for some areas which is 
certainly something that may be an impediment or an area of 
significant concern for business operators. 
 
Nonetheless the committee worked hard and developed some 
compromises that we hope will work well. We are waiting to 
see what the House amendments that will be brought forth by 
the Minister of Justice and hope that those reflect the 
committee’s deliberations and the consensus that was arrived. 
We would like this to be something that, when it’s brought back 
to the House, can be supported unanimously by all of the people 
that participated in the committee. So we will be looking 
carefully at those when they come back. 
 
The biggest area of concern and the most troubling one was — 
and I mentioned earlier, Madam Deputy Speaker — is travel 
clubs. In Saskatoon there was a travel club that went out of 
business. People had deposited with the travel club many 
thousands of dollars from each individual. And when that travel 
club went out of business, there was massive amounts of loss. 
There was unfortunately no presenters on behalf of that 
industry, and we were not able to get a sense from either 
citizens that were affected by that, consumers that were 
affected, or by people that were in that industry. 
 
Our concern is that we’re going into an area where we’re 

regulating an industry where there has not been any input or any 
meaningful direction from that industry. In the end what was 
felt was best was that we would limit the amount of money that 
could be prepaid so that the amount of money that a consumer 
could lose would be limited by regulation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we look forward to seeing what 
happens when this Bill goes back to committee and what House 
amendments come forward by the minister. We are hoping and 
expecting that they will be consistent with that in the report, 
number five, that was prepared by the committee, and that 
everything will go forward. 
 
We are supportive of the process that was used. And I would 
like to encourage all members to consider that the policy field 
committee is the method of dealing with issues that may be 
contentious in the future. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 12, The 
Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 12, The Consumer 
Protection Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment 
Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 30 — The Film 
and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is the film 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

and video classification Bill. In earlier presentations by 
opposition members, we have made our concerns known about 
this Bill. 
 
We support what this Bill is trying to do. The purpose of having 
a classification system is so that parents and guardians, 
schoolteachers, are able to understand and have a rating system 
that is appropriate for video games, for films, and other such 
like. Unfortunately this Bill does not address the concerns and 
does not adequately deal with the issues that will come forward. 
There is a lack of understanding about the current state of 
technology and how games are played online and how local 
area network gaming takes place. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our concern is that there is a lack of 
consultation with stakeholders, specifically business owners in 
this province who operate local area network gaming. This is a 
business that operates somewhat like an arcade where people go 
and play online sports and games with people that are in other 
areas. The operators of those businesses have little or no control 
over what takes place with the machines that are there. 
 
While we’re supportive of what this Bill is trying to do, it does 
not necessarily work to try and deal with what might take place 
and imposes very substantial and perhaps grossly unfair and 
disproportionate penalties to the users. It is our understanding 
that LAN [local area network] operators have also had the 
opportunity to meet with the Minister of Justice and his officials 
so that they are aware of the concerns that take place. 
 
We understand that for video game distributors who operate in 
big box stores or normal video game retailers, this Bill does not 
cause a problem. They are dealing with over-the-counter boxed 
games that come with a label or a rating system on them. 
 
What we’re concerned with and what the operators of these 
arcades are concerned with is the ones where they are operating 
an online type of system. The mainstream operators that sell 
prepackaged games are not affected. But for local area network 
gaming this creates a huge problem because of the nature of 
technology that exists in today’s world. It’s the use of the 
Internet that makes sections of this Bill obsolete before it is 
passed. 
 
Operators allow users to play games that are downloaded from 
Internet on PCs [personal computer]. Many of these games are 
unclassified. They do not come from the usual mass marketing 
distribution channels. So this effectively will create an 
environment in these businesses where they’re forced to police 
each and every game operator or every console that’s in the 
business. 
 
This doesn’t mean, Madam Deputy Speaker, that these 
operators are not responsible for the content of the games that 
children and youth might play in their . . . [inaudible] . . . One 
of them, Matrix Gaming, requires signed consent forms from 
parents to allow children to play in their . . . [inaudible] . . . The 
Matrix Gaming Centre monitors the use of the Internet to 
ensure that no inappropriate websites or material are viewed. 
And perhaps more importantly, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
Matrix Gaming Centre is used on a regular basis by a wide 
variety of youth organizations such as Canadian Christian 
Youth Adventures, Big Brothers of Regina, and various youth, 

sports, and church groups for parties and for other fundraising 
activities. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The problem isn’t so much the fact that there’s regulation. The 
fact is that there is not a regulation or a method of classifying 
these games and this method of game play. The opposition 
certainly has no problem in wanting to ensure that only 
appropriate material is shown to minors or is prepared to minors 
for purpose of game play. But when you have unregulated ones 
that may be appropriate and there’s no source of identifying 
that, we’re putting these people in the position of being subject 
to a large fine. 
 
Unfortunately in this piece of legislation, Saskatchewan is 
proposing a maximum fine of $100,000 for violating this Act. 
Manitoba’s legislation, which is somewhat different than ours, 
has a maximum fine of $5,000. We would submit, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that the fine differentiation between the 
provinces is an indication that the fine proposed in 
Saskatchewan is disproportionate to what this Bill is trying to 
achieve. 
 
We have asked that the government review the concerns of the 
LAN industry, and we hope that the government has heard 
those concerns. We are prepared to have this Bill go to 
committee with the hope and expectation that the government 
may well consider some House amendments as this Bill comes 
forward. 
 
Our concern is that this Bill does not identify the needs and the 
problems posed by unclassified material. And it’s our hope and 
expectation that the government can look at some other 
jurisdictions and come up with something that is both 
appropriate and fair, and in dealing with the penalty, something 
that is proportionate to what takes place in other jurisdictions. 
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 30, The Film 
and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 30, The Film and 
Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 be now referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 30, The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Committee of Finance, I do now 
leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, the item 
before us is the estimates for the Department of the 
Environment. And I’d like to recognize the Minister of 
Environment and ask him to introduce his officials. I recognize 
the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much, and I’m pleased to 
be here with the continuation of the estimates from the 
Department of Environment. And I’m pleased to have with me 
as officials, Lily Stonehouse, to my left who’s the deputy 
minister. Behind her is Donna Johnson, the director of finance 
and administration branch. Beside her is Dave Phillips who is 
the assistant deputy minister of resource and environmental 
stewardship division. 
 
To my right is Alan Parkinson who’s the associate deputy 
minister of compliance and fire and forest division. Sitting 
beside him is Al Willcocks who is effectively the chief forester 
for our province. He’s involved with the forestry. And then 
behind Allan Parkinson is Bob Wynes who is the assistant 
executive director for the forest operations. And Bryan Ireland 
is two seats behind me, and he’s the vice-president for 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 
 
So these are the officials I have with me today. And I also have 
my colleague, the minister in charge of the forest secretariat, 
who may be available when we get to questions about forests. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, just recently a couple 
letters have come across my desk from, and specifically in my 
area, Kenosee park. And it’s regarding the alcohol ban that I 
believe is being implemented in the park this year. 
 
And of course, Mr. Minister, you’re aware of the fact that over 
the past number of years, the May long weekend has certainly 
been a weekend that especially the business community has 
looked forward to as they actually just begin the new camp 
season and look forward to a lot of activity in the park, look 
forward to business opportunities as families and young people 
come to the park for the weekend. Mr. Minister, could you 
explain to me the reasons for the ban, and how the ban will be 

implemented, and where it will be implemented? 
 
Now we’re all aware of what happened a couple years ago at 
Kenosee park. We’re aware of what happened just outside of 
Qu’Appelle at one of the parks there last year and the vandalism 
that took place, and I think that may be why the discussion has 
taken place regarding an alcohol ban. But I would like to know 
exactly what the intentions are of the ban. Where it will be 
implemented? Who it will impact? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much for that question. 
And I am pleased to have the opportunity to give further 
clarification about this. The alcohol ban will be in effect for all 
provincial parks and recreation site campgrounds in the 
province. It’ll take effect from May 18 to 22 of this year, 2006. 
It’s in effect in the campgrounds but it doesn’t include rental 
cabins, hotel rooms, private cottages, or commercial businesses 
that are serving liquor in licensed establishments which may be 
located in provincial parks or recreation sites. So it’s a 
broad-base ban right across the province in the provincial park 
system campgrounds. 
 
Some of the regional parks may have similar kinds of rules, but 
they will develop those themselves. But we have been in 
consultation with the regional park system as well, so that there 
isn’t an overflow of people from the provincial park system into 
their system. 
 
So I think that gives you a pretty good idea. It’s just for this one 
weekend. And it’s to address and point out very clearly that our 
parks are for families and for positive outdoor recreation, and 
that we don’t tolerate the kind of activity that’s happened the 
last few years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I think if I’m correct the letter that came from 
Kenosee park talked about what the park and what businesses 
has done last year to address what happened the previous year. 
And I believe there was a number of limitations especially on 
the age of individuals in regards to alcohol and who are allowed 
on the campgrounds. And from what I understand, actually 
Kenosee park experienced a very positive . . . had a good very 
positive experience in regards to park usage and the . . . really 
suppressing the type of activity that they’d experienced the year 
before. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we talk about alcohol, alcoholic bans in 
park sites, does that include family units? And I think the 
question in one of the letters talked directly. As campers come 
into the campgrounds and a lot of these campers will be using 
the campsites, and they’ll be coming in as families. But even 
adults, as they come in as families will probably . . . in a lot of 
cases there will be some alcohol. Does that mean that as they 
come into the campgrounds their camping unit is going to be 
searched? And if so, also, Mr. Minister, does that mean that 
adults or families will not be able to bring alcohol into the 
campsite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The method that we’re going to use on the 
ban in alcohol in the provincial campgrounds is that it will be a 
condition on the camping permit. So if there is alcohol in that 
campsite, whether it’s a family unit or other individuals, they 
will have breached their camping permit, and they will be asked 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

to leave the campground. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, Mr. Minister, if I 
understand you correctly then any family unit coming into the 
campsite, if there’s alcohol they will not be allowed. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is that one of the 
conditions of using the campsite in the provincial campground 
during this May long weekend will be that there will be no 
alcohol, and if there’s an infraction they will be asked to leave. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it seems 
to me that’s somewhat restrictive. Now I’m not a consumer of 
alcohol. And I don’t mind if there’s campers around, and the 
fact that a lot of families are there to enjoy the time and don’t 
consume alcohol. But I also realize that there are families where 
there may be some alcohol. And a lot of these families where 
there’s alcohol in the camping as a family unit have not really 
created the disruption in the parks. A lot of the alcohol activity 
has come from individuals and young people that have gathered 
to party. 
 
And it seems to me that we’re almost overstepping the area and 
the restriction, and I guess that’s the concern I have. If families 
are acting responsibly I do not believe those families should be 
penalized and that’s a choice they make. But I guess at the end 
of the day we’ll see whether or not this impacts negatively and 
in regards to families or individuals actually going out to our 
provincial parks on the long weekend. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another question and it was a concern that 
was raised this . . . just brought to my attention this morning. Is 
there a ban on quads in our provincial parks, use of quads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the proper way to describe it is that 
there are restrictions on the use of quads in provincial parks. 
There are some designated areas where they can be used, but 
there are many areas where they cannot be used. So people will 
have to inquire as to the appropriate places for their use. So 
they’re not banned, but they’re restricted as to where they can 
be used in the parks. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, the reason I raise 
that question is . . . The way it was presented to me today was, 
the understanding was that while you could be travelling 
through on No. 9 — you’re on highway property — you 
couldn’t whip off the property even into, say the village of 
Kenosee to fuel up your quad. 
 
And my understanding was that recently the community of 
Wawota had a quad rally. And they had to limit the amount of 
kilometres travelled on the rally simply because . . . to allow the 
quads to get back to the community to fuel up because they 
weren’t allowed into the park to the service station in the village 
to fuel up. And I don’t have a lot of information, but I was just 
asking the question in regards to that. And I may not have had 
information correctly. Or was it possible that people were not 
well enough informed as to what the requirements and the 
restrictions are regarding the use of quads? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m a little bit mystified by this 
question because my understanding is that you can access the 
community of Kenosee without going through the park. And so 
it more likely is an issue as it relates to that village of Kenosee 
or the provincial highway regulations which say that you can’t 
drive a quad on the highway unless it’s properly licensed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’ll do some more follow-up on that because it was I 
guess a bit of a surprise to me as well. That’s why I raised the 
question because I found it somewhat . . . Well I was just 
surprised about the fact that we would limit without basically 
having some guidelines that could be followed. So I’ll do some 
more follow-up and then we’ll proceed from there. So thank 
you very much. 
 
Mr. Minister, one final level of questioning that I would like to 
bring to your attention. And I believe there was some discussion 
last week in regards to water levels in the Qu’Appelle Valley. 
And the two lakes that are of particular importance in my 
constituency are Round Lake and Crooked Lake. 
 
Now I’ve had some contact with one of the chiefs of one of the 
reserves. Unfortunately we haven’t been able to get together for 
a public meeting to understand where this band is going. But 
has any progress been made in regards to Round Lake and 
Crooked Lake and putting blocks back into the dams and 
allowing the water levels to increase, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is yes, the 
conversations are ongoing as it relates to the First Nations and 
those particular lakes. And we are there as observers in the 
federal discussions or participants where necessary. But I think 
at this point, the discussions are continuing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, the discussions as they 
continue, is it your department’s estimation that we might be at 
a point that would allow for some of the blocks to be put back 
into the dams that would allow for at least an increase in the 
water levels in those two lakes as the water continues to flow 
from the west? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s the goal. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you said that’s the goal. Any time 
period? Any time frame? Is it possible that we may be able to 
see some water level increases even this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s possible. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, can we be a little more 
definitive rather than possible or goal. A time period? A time 
frame? Are we at that point where we would see a move, an 
actual placing back of some of the blocks to allow for an 
increase in water levels in those two lakes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think you’re basically asking the 
same questions that we were dealing with last week. And the 
overall issue relates to negotiations between the federal 
government and the First Nations around the historical damages 
related to these particular structures. So that’s where the main 
issues are being dealt with. Then it comes down to an issue of 
where the water line is, which then defines the boundary of the 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

First Nation as it relates to some of these lakes and the 
structures. 
 
And so those issues are ongoing. The issues where the province 
of Saskatchewan is involved relate to the forward or future 
issues which include then the management of the water lake 
levels. And at this stage you’re asking me questions about the 
negotiations which will form the base of a resolution of the 
issue, and that’s where the federal government has a better 
sense of this. 
 
All we’re pleased about is that the conversations are continuing, 
and the goal is to accomplish a return to more normal levels of 
water in both of those lakes. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
refer to a situation in the past on Black Birch Lake, and there 
was an application for a outfitter’s licence by a Mr. Baehl, 
B-a-e-h-l, from Lloydminster, Alberta. I understand that he was 
denied an outfitter’s licence. And I also understand from the 
letter from your department or from one of your officials that he 
was required to: 
 

. . . immediately cease occupying or using the site . . . 
remove all improvements and personal belongings that 
[referring to this Mr. Baehl] you currently have on the site 
prior to April 30, 2005. These improvements/personal 
belongings include: [a] garage, trailer(s), camper(s), 
tractor, wood splitter, fuel drums, truck box, gazebo, 
building materials, and other miscellaneous items. 

 
And the letter goes on to say: 
 

Upon removal of the aforementioned items, the site must 
be reclaimed to a state that is satisfactory to the 
department. 

 
I would just like to know the status of that situation and has 
these . . . has this order been carried out and has the site been 
reclaimed to its former state? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That particular case is not one where we 
have information with us today. I think the . . . As you’ve 
indicated an order was made for some things to be done. If you 
provide me with a photocopy of that then we can track it down 
or we can go and look through the records that we have, and I 
can provide some information as to the status later in the week 
if that’s satisfactory. But we don’t have that information with us 
today. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will send a copy of 
the letter over to you right now. I’d appreciate a response to 
that. 
 
Just on some more general questions concerning outfitting 
licence in particular on Black Birch Lake and Careen, could you 
tell me how many outfitting licence are approved for both of 
those lakes? And if you’re able to can you tell me who has the 
outfitting licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the specific information 

lake-by-lake here but I can say that the number of angling 
outfitters — which I assume the question relates to fishing — is 
that in the year 2005 there were 148 outfitters’ licences. In 2004 
there were 147; in 2003 there were 150. The last three years 
there have been about 150, 148 angling outfitters’ licences right 
across the whole province. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister, would you be able 
to supply me with the information concerning those two 
particular lakes when you supply me with the other 
information? And a more general question. Would any First 
Nations’ businesses would also be included in an outfitting 
angling licence or would that be a different type of description 
for the business that they carry on? And if so, could you also 
supply me with that type of information concerning First 
Nations as well as other outfitters’ angling licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’d be happy to provide that 
information for you. And as it relates to First Nations outfitters, 
there are some that would operate on the First Nation and they 
may not have a provincial outfitter’s licence. But there are a 
number of First Nations outfitting organizations that do apply 
and have official provincial outfitting licence. So we’ll try to 
obtain as much information as we can about that and provide 
that for you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, the situation has 
arisen and I talked to the Minister of Health about the type of 
refrigerant that the minister is, through an official, is mandating 
to be used in their chillers. And I have also been presented with 
some information that says that the HCFC-123 
[dichlorotrifluorethane] is probably the better refrigerant to be 
using versus the 134. And I guess my question to you is, have 
your officials been in discussions with officials from the 
Department of Health over the most effective and most 
environmentally friendly type of refrigerant to be using in large 
industrial-sized chillers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes, that we have been in 
contact with the Department of Health officials. And you’ve 
raised questions about The Halocarbon Control Regulations and 
both the HFC-134a [tetrafluoroethane] and HCFC-123 are 
allowed to be used in the chillers. They’re both listed in The 
Halocarbon Control Regulations as class 1 substances. Okay. 
Okay. So the ones . . . Okay. These are class II . . . Or they’re 
class III substances or class II substances, these ones. 
 
So the 134a, if I can use that shorthand, is a class III substance. 
The 123 is a class II substance. Any class I substances are being 
phased out. 
 
And I think the question is, well what is the information as it 
relates to this one that we have? The HCFC-123 substance, 
which is a class II substance, has an atmospheric life of 1.9 
years and ozone-depleting potential of .016 and a global 
warming potential of .019. 
 
Whereas the HFC-134 substance, which is the class III, has an 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

atmospheric life of 20 years, an ozone-depleting potential of 
zero, and a global warming potential of .285 so it’s a . . . These 
are technical comparisons. But as it relates to these particular 
substances, they’re both still allowed under The Halocarbon 
Control Regulations. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, as far as a recommendation to other 
departments, when we look at the total environmental impact of 
the two substances — and we’ll just shorten them up, the 123 
versus the 134 — have you got a recommendation? Or are you 
just merely providing the information that both refrigerants are 
acceptable? What is your government’s policy on the types of 
refrigerants that should be used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the department doesn’t make a 
recommendation between the two so that they are both allowed 
under the regulations, given that they’re class II and class III 
substances. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Hart: — So then I guess I’ll have to re-ask my question to 
the Minister of Health as to why his department has stipulated 
to the larger health regions that they should be switching over to 
the 134. I would have presumed that it perhaps had something 
to do with the safety and the lessening of damage to the 
environment. 
 
I am told — and I guess I would ask you and your officials to 
corroborate the information — that the 123 is much, it’s much 
more efficient. In other words you need less of it. You need less 
energy to achieve the same effects. And that’s why the global 
warming impact number is significantly lower for the 123 
versus the 134. 
 
You know, it just seems to me that perhaps . . . And which 
would then mean that if you need less of it and you need to run 
your chillers a shorter period of time, you’re also reducing your 
costs. It would seem to me that perhaps you should be making 
some recommendations, particularly in your capacity where you 
recently came from the Department of Health and then now the 
Environment minister. It seems to me that perhaps the 123 in 
the overall scheme of things is the better one to have, probably 
equally safe to the environment as the 134 and much more 
efficient. 
 
And I guess my question to you and your officials is that’s the 
information, as I’ve just related, that I’ve been provided with, is 
the efficiency of the 123 versus the 134 . . . Do you have 
information as to the efficiency, and is my information correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the simple answer is that I 
have the same information that you do. And the officials in both 
Health and Environment will be meeting with the officials from 
Trane, the company, and that they will continue to look at this. 
 
The classification of the substances is done by the 
manufacturers and the suppliers. And depending on the use, 
different products are the most appropriate. And they work 
together as an industry and as the people, the regulators, to try 
to make sure the best substance is used for the particular use 
that’s required. 
 

And some of the questions here relate to the chillers, and I think 
that it’s a kind of technical area where the various 
manufacturers and suppliers need to work together, with each 
other, and with the government officials to sort out which is the 
most appropriate substance for use here in certain equipment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, have you or your officials been in 
communication with the University of Saskatchewan over this 
particular issue? I understand that the University of 
Saskatchewan . . . and I’m presuming that they would have the 
resources on campus to make an informed decision as to the 
type of refrigerant used in their large chillers. They recently 
installed a very large chiller, and they are using the 123. 
 
And I’m presuming — although I haven’t talked to them — but 
I’m presuming that they are doing this because of efficiencies 
and the equal, I guess, small impact on the environment 
between the two. In fact I guess in the overall reading of things, 
unless we have a leak of the 123, it actually has a smaller 
impact on the environment. 
 
So just to rephrase my question, have you or your officials been 
in discussion on this matter with the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think that the officials have been 
directly involved with the University of Saskatchewan. It’s my 
understanding that the officials in this particular company have 
used the University of Saskatchewan and some of their recent 
purchases as an example of some new facilities that are being 
developed. 
 
And I think the important part to remember is that it’s 
manufacturers and suppliers — plural. There are a number of 
different groups that have different products. And one of the 
issues that you’re raising here is a group saying, well the 
particular product we now have is the best one for certain 
systems or certain places in Saskatchewan. That’s something 
that needs to be worked out together with the manufacturers, the 
suppliers, and the regulators. And those types of meetings are 
ongoing because that’s what happens in this particular area of 
business. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well I guess, Minister, what I would hope that I 
would hear from you is that you have capacity within your 
department to look at all the information that manufacturers are 
providing to potential purchasers — particularly purchasers 
within government — and to be able to analyze the information 
and provide a recommendation based on sound science. Do you 
have individuals within your department that have the ability to 
analyze this information and come forward with a 
recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, how this works is that 
we do have officials within the department that are in charge of 
working with these regulations. A substance like this is a 
substance which is used nationally and on a North American or 
international basis. And what is done is we will have specialists 
across Canada that work together. The provinces and territories 
work together around how some of these standards work. 
 
When new products come forward from an international 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

corporation like the one that’s being referenced here, those are 
then part of an overall discussion. And as the standards change 
and situations improve, then they will be used and included in 
the regulations that are there. That’s exactly why certain class I 
substances have been phased out. 
 
Ongoing discussions will go to class II and class III substances 
under this particular regulation. And there is a meeting 
scheduled with the particular officials who have been writing 
these letters and providing carbon copies to you which is the 
normal course when you have issues like this. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I presume you’re aware that there was a 
pretty significant leak of 134 recently at the General Hospital. 
My question to you is, what are the regulations that would 
apply to such an incident? Were your officials contacted? And 
if they were, what actions did they take to deal with this 
incident? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I am aware of the spill that happened 
at the Regina General Hospital. It’s a reportable spill under the 
spill control regulations, and basically a reportable spill is one 
that involves more than five kilograms of substance in a 
24-hour period. This matter is being investigated by the 
environmental protection people who are involved in this 
particular area, and they are treating it very seriously like they 
do all spills. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, just to provide a bit of information and I 
guess a comfort level, could you indicate the level of expertise 
and knowledge that the individuals who are investigating this 
issue have? What type of education, what kind of training, what 
kind of work experience these individuals would have so we get 
some sort of a sense of their ability to deal with this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We have people in this particular area 
who have, you know, chemistry degrees and are very involved 
and have education to understand the substances involved, and 
they have years of experience working in this particular area. So 
yes, we do have people that understand this and work at various 
kinds of spills that may happen across the province. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister, on 
this softwood lumber deal, I’m wondering now, have 
Saskatchewan signed on to the agreement at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s nothing to sign on to. It’s a 
federal jurisdiction, so it’s a federal agreement between the 
federal government . . . There are a number of clauses that 
specifically relate to individual areas of the country, but there’s 
nothing for us to sign on to. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Okay. Do we now know the terms and 
conditions of the deal? And what are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I thank the member for this question, 
and I will try to provide a simplified explanation of a fairly 
complicated agreement on one level, but fairly simple on 
another level. The basic terms of the Canada-US [United States] 
agreement on softwood lumber which was entered into on April 

27, 2006, the terms are as follows. 
 
First area is orders and deposits. The US will revoke all the 
various orders in their procedures on Canadian softwood 
lumber imports and stop collecting the deposits. It’s estimated 
at the time of the signing of the agreement, April 27, 2006, the 
US is holding about $5 billion in US dollars in deposits. Out of 
that 5 billion, United States will receive 1 billion, and the 
remainder will be distributed to importers of record — in other 
words, to the Canadian firms. 
 
The amount going to the United States, which is 1 billion 
dollars, will be divided like this. Fifty per cent of the money 
will go to the Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports. A portion will 
go for a joint initiative benefiting the North American lumber 
market. And the remainder to meritorious initiatives in the 
United States as identified by the US government in 
consultation with Canada. So effectively, about half of what 
will go to the lumber companies . . . presumably to cover some 
of their costs involved in the litigation. This is acknowledged 
that how that money is distributed won’t set any precedent for 
subsequent distribution of duties. 
 
The scope of the particular agreement, what products does it 
cover? It only covers the products that were subject to the 
orders. And the scope or the extent of this agreement will only 
be changed by mutual consent, although each party has the 
ability to make a claim around a change and then go and go 
through a dispute settlement process around that. 
 
What’s going to happen at the border . . . And basically what’ll 
happen is, there’s an export measure. And different regions of 
the country will have to choose between an export charge with a 
charge varying on the Random Lengths framing composite 
lumber price or an export charge plus the volume restraint and 
where both the rate and volume restraint will vary on the price. 
 
Now these are complicated words. Effectively what it means is 
you can choose to basically just have an export charge based on 
the price of lumber in the United States. And so how that works 
is that if the price of the lumber in the United States is over 
$355 for 1,000 board feet, there’s zero import charge. If it drops 
down to between $336 and $355, it’s 5 per cent. If it goes down 
to $316 to $335, it’s 10 per cent. If it’s below $315 US, it’s 15 
per cent. So you can choose that option if you’re, say, one part 
of the country — say Alberta or part of BC [British Columbia] 
or Saskatchewan. So this is an area where it’s going to take 
quite a bit of time for people to try to sort out what all this 
means and make choices. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The other option is that you can basically have an export charge 
and basically a quota. So if the price is over $355 US, there’s no 
charge at all. But when it starts dropping down again — the 
different levels are between 336 and $355 — the charge would 
be two and a half per cent plus a regional share of 34 per cent of 
the US consumption. In other words whatever US consumption 
is, the regional share would be a percentage of that 34 per cent. 
And then it goes down 3 per cent, 5 per cent . . . in other words, 
fairly complicated. 
 
The issue for Saskatchewan is of the 34 per cent share under 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

that particular quota system, our share has so far been deemed 
to be 1 per cent which is effectively half of what it was three or 
four years ago. And that’s a problem for our forest industry. 
 
So I’m not sure if you want me to go on. There are other issues 
around third country triggers, in other words surge mechanisms. 
There’s exceptions to this. There’s the ability to bargain and 
remove your forestry industry from all of the controls. The 
Maritimes aren’t included. Nunavut and, I think, Northwest 
Territories aren’t included. 
 
So there’s a whole number of other issues there, but I think that 
sets out the highlights for that agreement. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now as long as the 
price is above that, am I right that the quota doesn’t apply at 
all? So we’re okay. We’re . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. At present day prices there is no 
quota. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — And I’m wondering what per cent of 
Saskatchewan lumber goes to the USA [United States of 
America]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Before the year 2001, it was about 95 per 
cent of our lumber went to the United States. Now it’s between 
60 and 65 per cent. So in other words, what’s happened with the 
dispute that’s gone on with the United States is our producers in 
Saskatchewan have located other Canadian markets or markets 
offshore for Saskatchewan lumber. But traditionally the 
number’s been 95 per cent of the lumber went to the States. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Minister, could you inform me, the 
offshore countries who they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, effectively I don’t think there’s very 
much, if any, offshore. The real issue that would happen when 
the forestry dispute was on was that the small producers 
couldn’t afford to post a bond to ship into the United States. 
And so when we have that figure of 60, 65 per cent, when the 
dispute was on, that was effectively the very large producers 
were able to put the bond in and still maintain their export 
market in the United States. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Minister, I’m concerned with the forestry 
centre. We hear that part of the budget, the federal part of the 
budget, was cut. Are we correct on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Effectively 
the Canadian forest service cut their $300,000 contribution to 
the forest centre, which was their total contribution. We still 
receive $652,000 from the federal government, which comes 
from the, I think, the Forest Development Fund . . . It was from 
the Western Economic Development Fund, the WED fund. And 
I think that’s the one that our minister here in Saskatchewan, in 
the federal government, is responsible for. But practically the 
effect was to take a $952,000 contribution from the federal 
government and reduce it to 652,000. 
 
Now the thing also to remember about this is that this year we 
have a one-year extension on the original agreement around 
federal funding for the forest centre. And people have been 

evaluating it and looking at, well what would be the longer-term 
funding arrangements? And those conversations are ongoing 
right now. And whatever the result of the discussion is, using 
the evaluation of the kind of work that’s being done, will then 
be incorporated into the next federal budget. And our hope 
would be that they would see the long-term value of being part 
of the Saskatchewan forest industry through this forest centre 
and that we’d get stable long-term funding for this centre. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
cutting of this part of the budget now, will that affect any 
specific area of the forestry centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular funding in this year and 
other years was going into the Forest Development Fund which 
was a fund where the staff and others involved in forestry in 
Saskatchewan apply for funding for specific projects. So this 
one-time cut doesn’t affect any particular jobs directly but it 
does affect the ability to fund certain projects that were there. 
And that’s why we’re concerned that this money is gone, 
because it was the kind of money that was being used for 
research and development which is crucial for our forest 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — In particular I’m wondering how it will affect 
ag forestry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular funding was being used for 
forest ecology, forest fire ecology — what happens when 
there’s fires in the forests — and for agroforestry. Those were 
the two areas where this research money was being used. So it 
will have an effect on the ability to do further research around 
agroforestry. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. At the convention in 
Saskatoon that was just held, the Premier said that — and 
correct me if I’m wrong on this — that if the funding is not 
there, that the provincial government will take up funding on 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The whole area of agroforestry is being 
led out of the Industry and Resources budget so that’s where the 
budget issues around dollars that would go there. But the 
forestry centre and the forestry department in Saskatchewan 
Environment will provide technical advice and other practical 
advice. So the amounts budgeted for those people are still 
included and will continue, but some of the specific initiatives 
around this will come out of the Industry and Resources budget. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. So then there will be no cut in 
funding to the agroforestry program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think I can answer that question 
directly, Mr. Deputy Chair, because the money that was in this 
cut, the 300,000, was money that went into a research fund 
where then the people who were doing the research would 
apply to get dollars to do various applications kinds of issues. 
So the amount of research in agroforestry and in the other forest 
fire ecology issues will be $300,000 less than they were last 
year. But we’ll still be doing work in agroforestry and the 
initiative will be coming out of Industry and Resources. The 
technical work and supply of information and advice will 
continue to come from Saskatchewan Environment and the 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

forestry specialists. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. Will the provincial government be 
picking up to keep that forestry program . . . which the green 
initiative . . . how we’re going to get 10 per cent of our cropland 
into forest. Is the provincial government going to be picking 
that up to make sure that program keeps going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I guess I’ll have to answer it by 
saying it this way, that the work will continue that the province 
has been involved in. This particular area where the federal 
government has cut back has slowed down a number of the 
research projects. But it’s also the subject of the negotiation for 
the longer-term funding for the forest centre. And so the 
ultimate result as it relates to that fund will depend on the 
ongoing negotiations with the federal government. But the 
province’s commitment to continue to work on agroforestry 
will continue both in Saskatchewan Environment and in 
Industry and Resources, and where appropriate through 
Agriculture and Food because we all work together in this area. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But my question still 
is, will the government be putting more money in to fill that 
missing spot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as it relates to that particular 
funding, we will not take dollars from somewhere else and put 
it there because it wasn’t included in our budget. We didn’t 
know that this was going to be a gap until last week. 
 
But what we will continue to do is support the initiatives and 
work that we think is important. And as I said, we’re in ongoing 
negotiations with the federal government around long-term 
support for the forestry centre which we think is crucial for the 
future of the forest industry in Saskatchewan. And we would 
appreciate any help that you as a forestry critic for the 
opposition could provide in making sure that the people in 
Ottawa understand how important this is for all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve got a question 
now. When the building across from the mall where the forestry 
used to be in was vacated, who owns that building now? Is that 
still government building or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I need some better 
information as to which building you’re talking about. There 
are a number of buildings in that area, so if you could be very 
specific then I maybe can answer the question. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. I think it was a big Safeway store at 
one time, right across from the mall, and the forestry centre 
offices were in there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If I’m understanding correctly, you’re 
referring to what used to be the OK Economy building. And 
that building is privately owned and so presumably the owner 
would take whatever steps are necessary. But it’s not a building 
that’s managed by the provincial government. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here this afternoon, especially the 
forestry people that I believe have come from Prince Albert. I 
just want to piggyback a few questions on behalf of my 
colleague from Batoche in regarding the softwood lumber issue. 
 
In your comments to him you were mentioning about the duty 
that was held by the United States and that was going to be 
divvied up now. In your comment did you say how much 
money would be coming to Canada as far as duty funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. The total amount that was in that 
fund on April 27 was $5 billion, and the United States is going 
to keep 1 billion. So that leaves $4 billion that will come back 
to Canada to primarily the large Canadian producers because 
some of the smaller ones couldn’t afford to put money into that 
fund. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
Saskatchewan, is any of the Saskatchewan firms receiving any 
of that money and which firms will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m pleased to be able to answer that 
question, Mr. Deputy Chair. The estimated amount that will 
come to Saskatchewan is about $60 million Canadian, and most 
of that money will go to Weyerhaeuser, about 70 per cent. 
NorSask will get about 20 per cent, and then the remainder will 
go to Carrier and the Zelensky Brothers mills. So it’s primarily 
the larger operations in Saskatchewan will get that money. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With the new deal 
now that the federal government has just put forth, what is the 
Government of Saskatchewan, what’s their feeling in regards to 
the signed agreement, and how does Saskatchewan play a role 
in that signed agreement with the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to be able to try to answer 
your question. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, this may be a little bit 
longer answer as I develop this because what has happened is 
we have a few pages worth of the agreement which I described 
to you earlier. And now the actual negotiators, the lawyers, are 
sitting down to write the agreement and it’s going to take a 
number of months to do all of the fine print around all of these 
different rules. And we can’t answer all the various specific 
questions until that final wording is completed. 
 
Now one of the things that I can say on behalf of the provincial 
government and I think on behalf of all Saskatchewan 
producers and Saskatchewan people is that we’re very 
disappointed about the situation that we’re in as it relates to this 
agreement, and the minister in charge of the forest secretariat 
said that very publicly last week. So we’re disappointed and this 
is why. 
 
In the late ’90s our share of the export into the United States 
was somewhere between two and two and a half per cent of the 
total amount going into the United States. When the duties were 
put on to the lumber, many of our smaller suppliers didn’t have 
sufficient cash to pay the penalties to get their exports into the 
United States. The agreement takes the exports into the United 
States as of the last year and our share is down to about point 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

eight per cent of the total amount that’s available. 
 
We are trying to work with the federal minister in charge, Mr. 
Emerson, around correcting this particular issue. But part of our 
problem is, is that we will be competing with all of the 
industries across Canada for a share of that market into the 
United States. And as I described earlier, it’s a 34 per cent cap, 
if you use that kind of . . . when the prices drop below $355 US 
per 1,000 cubic feet of lumber. And so our share of that 34 per 
cent is just under 1 per cent as opposed to over 2 per cent, 
where we were five years ago. 
 
And we don’t know until we get all of the detail back around 
the technical agreement how that’s going to affect our 
Saskatchewan industry. It has effects given some of the other 
clauses in this, in how we actually even manage the forest, how 
we look at what we do with various parts of the industry. And 
so at this point, we’re disappointed. We’ve let the federal 
government know that and we’re going to have more 
discussions with them as we try to sort out what happens in 
Canada. 
 
But it appears that we have now an agreement with the United 
States that we have to work within and make sure that it has the 
least amount of damage to what’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
But at this stage, we’re quite disappointed by some of the rules 
that have been put in; not necessarily by the US, but between 
the provinces and territories of Canada. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well back in 1995 
or ’96 — I’m not sure what the year is — there was an 
agreement signed with the federal government with the United 
States, but there was only four provinces at the time that signed 
on to that agreement. It was Alberta, BC [British Columbia], 
Ontario, and Quebec at that time signed on. Saskatchewan did 
not sign on to that agreement; and for whatever reason, I don’t 
know. 
 
From what your comments are right now — that Saskatchewan 
is part of this new agreement that the federal government is 
putting through — if that’s the case, then Saskatchewan will or 
should be signed on to this agreement. Am I correct in saying 
that Saskatchewan will be part of this new agreement that 
they’re signing on to right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the answer to this one is quite 
simply that in the various complaints that were made through 
United States processes, in the most recent round of complaints, 
the province of Saskatchewan and our industry was added to 
those particular complaints so that the orders then applied to 
Saskatchewan. So we had no choice. I mean they — the 
complainants in the United States — included Saskatchewan in 
this round. 
 
Now some of it may have had to do with the fact that we 
actually were sending more lumber, that it was more of a 
concern to some of the US producers than it had been say in the 
early ’90s or the ’80s. But we had no choice about whether we 
were included or not. And when the agreement was entered 
into, it included all people who had been named in the US 
complaints. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So I take it from that then, Mr. Minister, 

that we are going to be signing on to this agreement as a 
province then. Am I correct in saying that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, you’re not correct in saying that. We 
are included in the agreement which is a federal agreement 
between two nations — between the United States and Canada. 
And because we were named in the various orders that put these 
charges on the exports into the United States, then we’re 
included in this agreement. We have no choice. There’s no 
signing on or signing off. We’re just there. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand 
that. But being that the four provinces in 1995 signed on to that 
agreement, it doesn’t make any difference now that we do not 
sign on — even though we’ve been named — in the fact that 
because of the amount of exports that we send off to the United 
States, wouldn’t it be to our benefit to be the fifth province to 
be signed on to this agreement and have some interest and some 
say in what goes on with this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the explanation is this. That 
in 1996 there was a negotiation and a settlement. And so the 
four provinces that had been named in those prior to that by the 
complainants in the United States entered into an agreement, 
and so it was signed and settled. 
 
This particular situation was not a settlement in the sense that 
all the provinces and the markets agreed. It was imposed by the 
federal governments on both sides. So there wasn’t any signing 
by forestry companies in the United States either. A lot of them 
don’t like this issue in the same way that many people on this 
side of the border. But it was very much something that was 
done between the national governments and they didn’t concern 
themselves directly in the same way. Whereas the agreement 
you’re talking about was an agreement between the province 
and the provincial industries and industry people in the United 
States. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I also have 
another situation that I need some clarification on and that is in 
regards to . . . Back in 2001 there was a contract signed between 
Renewable Resources and Environment management, a 
partnership agreement between the province of Saskatchewan 
represented by the minister of Environment and Resource 
Management — known as SERM [Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management] — and the Agency Chiefs Tribal 
Council which consisted of Pelican, Witchekan, and Big River 
First Nation. 
 
Now again in 2005, there was another agreement drawn up. 
And I’m reading from the Daily Herald, Prince Albert, 
Monday, November 7, 2005, and: 
 

In signing the agreement, the ACTC now has first right 
after Weyerhaeuser to all the burnt wood in 
Weyerhaeuser’s Forest Management Agreement, as well 
as the directive to establish a forest management plan . . . 
[for] all Saskatchewan Agriculture lands in the northwest 
— about . . . [290] hectares. 

 
This land in question, Mr. Minister, is this land known as 
occupied Crown land or unoccupied Crown land? 
 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The particular agreement that the 
member’s referring to is an agreement with the Agency Chiefs 
back in 2001 to work with them to develop a wood supply for 
some of the projects that they were doing. And that was the 
intent of it at that particular time. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Thanks for that, Mr. Minister. And 
you’re correct. What I’m wondering about is in the remark 
made that “. . . the directive to establish a forest management 
plan . . . [to] all Saskatchewan Agriculture lands . . .” Is this 
lands that have a lease on it or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It could include land that is leased for 
grazing purposes for example or some other purpose. Or it 
could be land that is not leased. So it includes both types of 
land. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Mr. Minister, what is the process if a 
person leasing Crown land for agricultural purposes, 
specifically maybe for pasture land, who has a 33 or a 50 or 
whatever lease term he has, and he has woods on that land that 
he wants to utilize? Is there a process in place that he can take 
that wood off that lease land where he pays taxes on? Can he 
actually take that wood off that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, it is possible to take the wood off 
that land. But he has to get a permit to take the land . . . a forest 
harvesting permit. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — In order with that then, Mr. Minister, he has 
to get a permit. He would get the permit then from SERM 
officials in order to remove that land. What is the conditions 
regarding removing that forest off that occupied Crown-leased 
land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the conditions would be that it’s 
an environmentally sound harvest of the trees. And if it’s on 
wildlife habitat protection lands, then it has to return back to 
trees. In other words, it has to be replanted and done in 
appropriate fashion. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Regarding my 
questioning, this is just leased land. And the reason I bring this 
up, because I’ve had many residents from in and around 
Leoville, Chitek Lake, Spiritwood areas that have leased land. 
It’s occupied Crown land that they have leases on. They’ve 
gone to SERM to get cutting permits. And after they got their 
cutting permits and had taken the wood out . . . And most of the 
wood was probably sold to Tolko, which was not worth a whole 
lot. But anyway they got the permits to do that. Now they’re all 
receiving bills in the mail from Agency Chiefs Tribal Council. 
 
And I have one here billing for timber removed from Crown ag 
lands within the Agency Chiefs Tribal Council traditional 
territory as per ACTC’s wood supply agreement with the 
Government of Saskatchewan. There’s a bill here for $11,600 
which is $1 per cubic metre of wood taken off that land. 
 
If the lessee of that land has gone through all of the rigamarole 
to get this permit to take that wood off there, and according to 
the agreement that was signed back in 2001 and now re-signed 

in 2005, does Agency Chiefs Tribal Council have the right to 
bill the individuals for land where the wood was taken off and 
sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is no. And there’s been a bit 
of a misunderstanding because we have received copies of these 
same bills in my office, and so officials have been working with 
the Agency Chiefs to clear up the understanding. But the 
original agreement was around developing some forest supply 
for activities by the Agency Chiefs, but it did not include this 
particular steps that they’ve taken. And so people are working 
to resolve it. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would the 
information then be provided to these landowners from Agency 
Tribal Council or will it be coming from SERM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The information will be coming from 
Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to this 
agreement that was signed, would it be fair to say that the 
leased land within the, I guess, Weyerhaeuser agreement which 
Agency Tribal Council have signed on to, the land that they 
would be utilizing would be unoccupied Crown land rather than 
occupied Crown land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Weyerhaeuser FMA [Forest 
Management Agreement] doesn’t include any occupied Crown 
land. It’s only unoccupied, if that was your particular type of 
question you were asking here. 
 
And then the Agency Chiefs have the ability to go and do some 
harvesting in areas where Weyerhaeuser has harvested. So they 
go and take out trees that Weyerhaeuser maybe hasn’t used, and 
they do it in a complementary fashion if I can put it that way. 
And that’s where the agreement was, to try to get wood supply 
for some of the Agency Chief industry. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that’s the 
route I was going. Many of the grazing people from that area 
are concerned because they don’t want to go and cut timber off 
their land after they get a permit through SERM and then find 
out that they will be billed for wood taken off that land because 
that land is occupied Crown land, not unoccupied. 
 
So thank you for your answers. I will turn it back over to the 
critic for Environment. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. Minister, I am 
looking at a publication that your department has put out and 
it’s entitled Saskatchewan’s Wildfire Management Strategies. 
And in this brochure there is a map which outlines the fire 
protection areas and areas that are observation zones and so on. 
It also indicates a number of locations, particularly north of the 
Churchill River, that they’re called the structural values. And it 
says that there are 473 of those locations I’m guessing. 
 
How many of those locations would be commercial operations? 
In other words, outfitting, fishing, and hunting operations. 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If the specific question is, as it relates to 
the many places across the North that are identified as priority 
spots, I don’t have the exact number here, and we don’t have 
that with us. It is something that we could probably get if the 
member’s interested. But practically, for it to be on that 
particular map, it is . . . include some of the residences, some of 
the fishing lodges, some of the businesses. And so that’s how 
the map has been developed. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, it’s not critical to our discussions 
today to have that exact number. But if you could forward it at a 
later date that would be certainly be satisfactory. 
 
I wonder, could you explain, as I understand it . . . I guess I’ll 
preface my remarks or my question with a few remarks. My 
understanding of the wildfire strategy for that area basically 
north of the Churchill River, other than the full-response zones 
which I assume are around northern communities, my 
understanding of the strategy is to basically observe the fires, 
and if they are endangering property and people, you have some 
procedures that kick in to help protect buildings and those sorts 
of things. 
 
I wonder if you could just explain what happens when a 
wildfire is threatening — let’s use a commercial fishing 
outfitting camp on a lake; let’s use that as an example — and 
just explain what happens when that fire is threatening a 
location like that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I thank the member for that 
question. And, Madam Chair, this particular question I think is 
about how do we respond when there’s a wildfire in the North 
that’s going to affect a particular residence or a particular 
fishing camp or business that’s there. And I’ll try to describe it 
in my lay language. I haven’t actually been there to see it 
myself. 
 
But effectively what happens is that when the fire is reported, 
it’s assessed, and there’s a sense then of how quickly the fire is 
spreading, where it’s going. And there’s a lot of information, 
both visual so you can see where the lakes or rivers or swamps 
are versus the forests, and there’d be an assessment by 
professionals from the air as to what is going on. 
 
As it relates to a particular camp, what may happen is that they 
will go in with sprinklers and pumps and try to wet down a big 
area around where the camp is, which is one level of protection. 
They may use fire retardant from the airplanes. They’ll come in 
and try to divert the fire another direction away from that 
priority spot. Obviously when they bring in sprinklers and 
pumps and things like that, they’ve brought in personnel to be 
working there. Some situations may have the ability to bring in 
equipment to create firebreaks which could be bulldozed or 
whatever in the forest or cut. 
 
But practically the assessment is done, and then the various 
tools and personnel that are available are used in the most 
appropriate combination to either put the fire out if they can or 
divert it away from a residence or a business. 
 
Mr. Hart: — But, Minister, the basic strategy though in the 
observations though is to let the fires burn unless they are 
threatening structures or commercial ventures. 

There was the incident or the fire, the Howes, Jewett Lake fire 
last summer that ended up destroying a number of privately 
owned cabins and so on in the forest. It threatened a number of 
commercial set-ups, fishing camps on some of the lakes in that 
area. I certainly received quite a number of calls from 
particularly, well, property owners — both people who owned a 
cabin out in the forest or people who have businesses in that 
part of the province — who were very distressed by the lack of 
response by your department as for as protecting their 
properties. 
 
And finally there was some response to some of the calls for 
help. And some, you know, property was prevented from being 
lost. But basically what these people were asking for is to 
review the whole strategy . . . well not so much really reviewing 
the strategy of fire management and letting wildfires burn, but 
perhaps providing more protection for that area north of the 
Churchill that is, you know, where we have a fairly high 
concentration of tourist visits and commercial fly-in fishing 
camps which you know plays a pretty significant role in our 
tourism industry. 
 
And so I guess my question to you, Minister, is, are you looking 
at perhaps reviewing the area of coverage as far as fire 
protection? 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So, Madam Chair, I will try to answer the 
member’s question. But I think the simple answer is that the 
firefighting people involved learn from every particular 
situation that’s going, and they continually are evaluating what 
happens as different events happen each year. 
 
And I think one of the things that’s part of the Saskatchewan 
Environment program is called FireSmart where people and 
communities are encouraged to think through what kinds of 
measures they can take to protect their community should a fire 
come to that area. And it also includes people who have 
recreational properties where there may not be people there all 
the time. Clearly the issue of human life is a primary factor 
around protecting from forest fires. And so that becomes one of 
the issues. 
 
Now you’ve referenced the question around the Howes Lake 
fire, I think it is. And this was a fire that was discovered on July 
2, 2005 about 100 kilometres north of La Ronge. And this fire’s 
located within the observation zone for the forest fire 
management strategy. Within this zone the policy states that an 
assessment is made of the values at risk with the intent to allow 
for fire in ecological processes. Intervention’s considered based 
on the values versus the cost of suppression. 
 
Due to the threat to values in the area, on July 7, 2005 
sprinklers were placed on the properties in the Howes fire area 
including three that were later burnt. On July 8, 2005 the smoke 
in the area made it unsafe for crews to return and service the 
sprinklers. The fire grew from 1,000 hectares to 12,000 hectares 
during the day. 
 
The primary goal of the department is to protect human life and 
one of the secondary goals is to assist the residents to protect 
themselves from wildfires. None of the three structures 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

involved, in other words the residences that were there, were 
occupied during the fire. On July 9 after the smoke had cleared, 
the crews were able to return to the area and discovered that 
these three structures had been burnt. The total size of that fire 
was 24,000 hectares. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, when crews are sent in to set up 
sprinkler systems to protect property, what’s the process? 
They’re flown into the area with their equipment and personnel, 
they set up. I’m guessing they wet the place down. How long do 
they stay? Do they leave at the end of the day? Because you 
mentioned that because of smoke conditions they were unable 
to return. So if you could just basically outline the whole 
procedure when an incident like this occurs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The sprinklers are either driven to a site if 
there’s a road there or if it’s a site on an island or in a remote 
place then they would be flown in probably, well, either with a 
helicopter or with a float plane if it’s on water. And pumps 
would be set up and the sprinklers set up. 
 
Often when a fire is there, there is a number of points where 
you are trying to fight the fire so I would assume that the 
personnel go different places and end up trying to service the 
pumps effectively, I would say, as putting more fuel into the 
machine so that it continues to operate. So in this particular case 
it appears that the smoke got so bad that they couldn’t get back 
in to that particular spot. And so therefore the pumps couldn’t 
operate on a continuous basis. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, if I’m understanding you correctly 
the crews are put in, their equipment is put in place, set up and 
so on. But they are . . . the crew’s pulled out before nightfall 
and then returned the next day if they can get back. I mean, this 
is some of the criticism that I was hearing from property owners 
with this particular fire that they were telling me that by 5 
o’clock the crews were out of there and, you know, the 
equipment was left there until the next morning if the crews 
could return. And I wonder if you could explain what the 
process is and whether that information in fact is correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well typically a sprinkler set-up with a 
motorized pump will have a large tank which has sufficient fuel 
to last at least a day. And so it will be set up in that way with a 
sprinkler system. If there’s active forest fighting in that area, 
well there would be maybe some crew left there, but most often 
they would go and maybe set up some sprinklers in another 
spot. 
 
Practically, we’re not going to leave staff in the face of a fire 
that’s moving towards them as well because we’re very 
concerned about staff as well. It sounds like in this particular 
instance they were planning to return the next day and put more 
fuel in the tanks for the motors. And they were not able to get 
there because of the smoke and the intensity of the fire. And 
therefore the sprinklers ended up not having sufficient water to 
work any more. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, a number of the business owners that 
contacted me . . . And I guess I should explain. You know, 
these business owners, they’re owners of some of the outfitting 
camps, the fly-in fishing camps and so on. But they aren’t large, 
you know, well-funded, some of them aren’t large, well-funded 

entrepreneurs. This is another business that they have and they 
operate it during the summer. 
 
But they still have some pretty significant dollars invested in 
their business. And one of their concerns is — and I think it’s 
certainly an important concern — is that even though they may 
not lose their facilities, their cabins and their boats and their 
motors and that sort of thing, but if the forest is completely 
burnt around them, around their lake and so on, they really have 
difficulty the following season to book tourists and 
fisher-persons, I guess is today’s term, for the upcoming season. 
And many of these people are catering to the US market. And 
they say, how do we go to the various sports shows and so on 
and the various market promotion activities that they do during 
the winter, and attract customers to their businesses if they 
show photographs of a forest completely burnt down? 
 
I mean we’re talking, you know, people spending up to $1,000 
or more per day to come and fish in our lakes, to experience 
Saskatchewan wilderness. And by and large those people aren’t 
going to come to an area that’s been burnt out. The people that 
are operating these camps have investments of a half a million 
to several million dollars invested in the business. They are, like 
you know, bringing significant tourist dollars into our economy 
from outside of our province and outside of our country. 
 
And what they’ve been asking is that we need to look at our 
response to fire situations that threaten their businesses. I don’t 
think they’re advocating, and I certainly am not advocating that 
we return to putting every fire out. I’m sure there’s large areas 
of our province where fire plays a very useful role. Fires have 
happened in the forest and in the prairie areas since our 
province has been here. 
 
But I think we have to pay attention when we have concerns 
expressed by these people. And we are hampering and we are 
actually detracting and having a very negative effect on their 
opportunities to bring tourists to our province. And they are 
asking that you review your response areas, I guess, and the 
way you would deal with fires that would affect this prime 
fishing and hunting area just north of the Churchill River, north 
of Missinipe. I believe there’s certainly other areas that we 
perhaps could apply it to. 
 
But we need to, I think we need to review how you and your 
department reacts to wild fires, you know, very similar to the 
Howes and Jewett Lake fire of last summer. And I was 
wondering, are you going to be doing anything in an official 
way or are you going to leave it up to your officials to learn 
from experiences, and just perhaps be more proactive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Chair, the question that the 
member asks is an important one around acknowledging the 
policy behind the forest fighting in the boreal forest and in fact 
in any forest. 
 
One of the concerns that has arisen in many parts of North 
America is that we have an ability to go and stop fires which 
have cleaned out a lot of the debris in the forest which then, 
because we’ve stopped these fires, the debris builds and builds 
and builds and so that the intensity of the fires when they do 
come are so great that they’re very difficult to stop. 
 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

And so what we have in our forest fire management strategy, 
and included in the particular area that the member’s been 
asking the questions about, is the point that we’re going to 
actively fight fires that come within 20 kilometres of a 
community, a larger community, and that we’ll work very 
closely with property owners to help them protect themselves 
from fires if they are very isolated or if they have fishing lodges 
or other kinds of businesses. That’s what the FireSmart program 
is about. It includes I think everything from making sure that 
you get the debris out of the trees or anywhere near your 
operation to actual setting up some of the plans and sprinkler 
systems and other things like that. 
 
But the important part to remember is that in our budget this 
year — and we’re here discussing the budget — we have 
$93.716 million for our fire management and forest protection 
subvote. And that’s almost $100 million that we are committing 
to deal with forest fire fighting on a broad basis across the 
province, which is borne by the taxpayers of the province. And 
we have very good crews, we have good equipment, and we’re 
continually renewing that, learning and developing new 
strategies. 
 
And we have to make sure that we do this in a way that allows 
us to protect our communities, but it also allows some of the 
natural courses to take place in the boreal forest. The boreal 
forest regenerates itself through fire. The trees, a lot of these 
pine cones or the seed pods in the trees actually burst open 
when they’re heated sufficiently to then plant a new forest. You 
need some of those things to happen on an ongoing basis. 
 
One of the things that does happen after fire has been through 
an area is that the new greenery, the new trees encourages a 
whole number of the animals to return to that area because it is 
a bit of an oasis in the forest. 
 
And so what we have to recognize is both the forest ecology 
and the protection of the public, protection of human life, and 
try to get the appropriate balance. That’s what Saskatchewan 
Environment is trying to do through its forest fire management 
strategy. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I think you hit on the key word, and that 
is balance. And you know, I certainly agree with, you know, 
most of what you said as far as the role that fire plays. And you 
mentioned that, you know, we have significant dollars in this 
year’s budget to fight forest fires. And I guess what I am doing, 
I’m voicing the concerns that I heard last summer from 
individuals and business owners who are saying, we have the 
ability to attack fires in certain areas. 
 
We’re not talking about, you know, broad brush, you know, 
putting out every fire in the observation zone. And particularly 
when we have an area of the province that plays a pretty 
significant role in attracting tourist dollars to our province . . . 
And again a lot of these dollars are US dollars coming from, 
you know, from US tourists and fisher people and so on. And 
you know, I think what they’re saying is we need to find that 
balance where we can let fire play its natural, beneficial role. 
But we also have to protect that area of commercial activity and 
tourist activity. And they are calling on you to re-evaluate not 

so much the basic policy of a wildfire, but the response in the 
observation zone. 
 
So as I said, we need to find that balance, and I guess we 
probably don’t agree at this point in time where that balance 
point is. 
 
Having said that, I think my colleague from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, he has some further questions for you, 
and then we’ll pursue some other matters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Just before we leave this area of the forest 
fires, I’ve been able to get the answer about your question at the 
beginning, around the number of commercial operations. 
Basically most of these identified dots on the map that you are 
wondering about are trappers’ cabins and recreational leases 
and not fishing lodges. So there’s very few that are fishing 
lodges, and so that’s the answer to that question. 
 
The other thing is that I myself have spent time in this exact 
area that you’ve been raising questions about. And it is very 
dramatic when you come in a canoe or a boat to an area where 
there’s been a forest fire. But then when you come again and 
see it next year or the year after, it’s also dramatic — how green 
that space is and how much the forest regenerates. 
 
And I think that, once again, we have to emphasize that balance 
between the necessity of the continual renewal of the boreal 
forest with the protection of lives and property. And that’s what 
our forest fire management plan is built to do. 
 
The Chair: — Recognize the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
just noticed in your comments there that you have nearly $100 
million that will go into firefighting this year. And I’m glad to 
see that; I really am. One of the things I’ve always said, that we 
should be looking after our forest. And if any way we can retain 
our forest, then we should be firefighting it and maintaining it. 
 
A few questions regarding fires. If a fire starts on a First 
Nations and then comes off the First Nations onto provincial 
land, what is the manner that that forest fire is paid for? Does 
the federal government come to the table and help out in 
firefighting or whatever cost has contributed to that fire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. The federal government does come 
and contribute to the cost. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it on a 
percentage basis, or does the federal government come to the 
table and pay for the full costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The costs and how they’re allocated are 
assessed based on each particular fire. But essentially, if it starts 
on federal land and then spreads out, 100 per cent of that cost 
would be for the federal government. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to that, 
I don’t know if it was in 2004 or 2005 — I believe 2004 — I 
believe the ministry of the day had a let-it-burn policy or 
something similar to that. In regards to that, and I think about 
back then, and also it was the dry years when it had that kind of 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

a policy in place. And now we’ve gone away from that to 
putting more money or allocating more money into firefighting 
and I’m wonder what the change around was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The information that I have is that there 
never has been a let-it-burn policy. But clearly there was a new 
forest fire fighting . . . or forest fire management policy that 
came out a number of years ago, and that’s what we’ve just 
been talking about with your colleague as it related to north of 
the Churchill River. But perhaps you maybe have some other 
questions you want to ask in this area. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Yes I do, Mr. Minister, thank you. I’m 
going back to 2004, and I remember north of La Loche there 
was a fire, and I believe it was 2004. And the fire got out of 
hand and the winds changed, and it blew it across the border 
into Alberta. What happens in regards to a scenario where it 
starts in one province and moves across the border to another 
province? How does that fire being paid for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well each particular fire is assessed as to 
what happens, and we have interprovincial agreements with our 
neighbours — east and west and presumably north, if we 
needed them, with the Territories — and then the costs are 
assessed. But practically we have a procedure and a process to 
go through based on what would happen in a particular fire. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you Mr. Minister. Back to the fire 
that happened north of La Loche in 2004, it started in 
Saskatchewan, burned out of control. The winds changed. It 
went across into Alberta. I believe at that time Alberta put that 
fire out. I’m wondering with the interprovincial laws that’s 
there regarding forest fire fighting, did Saskatchewan contribute 
to that fire because it started in Saskatchewan first of all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have any specific information as it 
relates to the fire that’s being asked about. But normally 
between provinces there’s a reconciliation after the whole fire 
season is over, and there may be some fires that go one 
direction and others coming the other direction, and there’s a 
discussion about how the costs should be allocated and then a 
final arrangement made. But I don’t have any specific 
information about the fire that the member’s asking the question 
about. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will dig up some 
more information with that and I will talk to him personally in 
regards to that. 
 
My final questions that I have, Mr. Minister, and that’s in 
regards to a piggyback question to what the member from 
Batoche had last time when he was talking to the ministry, and 
that was in regards to the FMAs and specifically 
Weyerhaeuser’s FMA. And it’s regards to Weyerhaeuser’s 
FMA, if the sale doesn’t go through, what takes place with the 
FMAs and how are we handling them? Does Weyerhaeuser still 
have control of them? 
 
One of the questions I have that there is a 24-month cause and 
that is after two years if there’s no activity within the FMA then 
the . . . there will be other dealings done regarding the FMA and 
they may have to forfeit that FMA. 
 

As we know that the forestry industry is in dire straits right now 
as the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] will know that 
because he’s the Forestry Secretariat, and I hope and pray that 
we get the Weyerhaeuser mill up and running again because 
there’s a loss of jobs, and we don’t need that in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But in regards to the 24-month cause, we know that 
Weyerhaeuser through FMA is cutting hardwood and delivering 
it to Tolko, the OSB [oriented strand board] plant in Meadow 
Lake. And I believe that they’re still doing it today even though 
Weyerhaeuser has closed down. 
 
Weyerhaeuser in P.A. shut down April 13, and Big River shut 
down April 19. If this is the case and they’re still taking timber 
from the FMA and delivering it to another mill, does that cause 
problems with the 24-month shutdown period in regards to the 
FMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The particular question that the member is 
asking relates to the FMA for Weyerhaeuser and the fact that 
there is some poplar trees that could be cut down. And those 
particular trees have not been fully utilized. 
 
The cutting plan that was put forward to the department by 
Weyerhaeuser included all of the different plans that they were 
going to do. That was rejected because they’ve shut the mill 
down. And they are in the process of resubmitting a plan that 
relates to that, the poplar that may be cut down. 
 
The clause in the agreement relates to the shutdown of the mills 
and the 24 months would continue whether that poplar was cut 
or not. So there’s no implication around delaying the 24 months 
by them cutting the poplar trees. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards then 
. . . So they’re not cutting hardwood for the OSB plant as we 
speak today, but they have assigned or asked for a special 
agreement to cut some more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Chair, the Weyerhaeuser is not 
cutting right now. They’re in the process of doing a revised plan 
which we’re anticipating will include a plan to cut this 
hardwood which they haven’t cut before in sufficient quantities, 
and that has not yet been received by the department so there’s 
been no plan that’s been approved. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mrs. Chair. I have just one or 
two questions I think. I just had a couple of phone calls and 
reports regarding some biomedical waste found in a Saskatoon 
landfill that was untreated. Can you verify if that’s true or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, the department is aware of this and 
I’ve been aware of this. There was an inappropriate dumping of 
biomedical waste at the city landfill site and the officials are 
working with the city to correct any problems that are there and 
make sure that these things are done appropriately. 
 
[16:45] 
 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

Mr. McMorris: — Could the minister then explain the process 
that was undertaken . . . or how was this found? Is there regular 
tests? Or in this particular case, how was the biomedical waste 
found at the landfill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think in this particular case somebody 
who was there observed this biomedical waste and phoned in a 
complaint and then investigation started immediately. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I would probably agree with you that 
somebody was there and found it. I’m just wondering, is it 
somebody from the department, somebody from your 
department that found this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, it was somebody who was using the 
dump who was not a department employee. They do go and 
inspect sites on a regular basis, but we also respond to 
complaints from the public in general. And this was somebody 
who was very observant and made the appropriate calls to 
investigate right away. And we thank the public for doing that 
any chance they get. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Minister, then tell me what was the extent 
of the find? Was it a large quantity? Can he give me some 
details on what was found in the landfill in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To the best of our knowledge, it was a 
few bags filled with some sharps and possibly some blood 
products — so that was the extent of it — which was crucial 
that this was reported. And that inappropriate procedures that 
somebody’s using for disposal of this will be stopped and 
changed, and that’s what’s happened. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you then 
explain to me what the proper process is? Where does the 
biomedical waste go? What is the procedure? I mean why 
would’ve this happened that it would have been found in a 
landfill used by the general public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The normal procedure is that the 
biomedical waste is separated and is dealt with and goes to the 
Loraas Disposal site which is a separate site from the city site in 
Saskatoon. And in this particular case that did not happen. This 
particular situation is being looked at with the Saskatoon Health 
Region officials and the city of Saskatoon officials and the 
Environment officials to discover how this particular waste 
ended up at the city dump as opposed to the appropriate spot at 
the Loraas Disposal site. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So then it’s separated and it normally goes 
to a private landfill, as opposed to the public landfill where this 
waste was found this particular time. 
 
When it goes to a private landfill, can you just kind of explain 
the procedure of disposing of this? Does it . . . Maybe I’ll just 
leave it at that. What is the procedure of disposing of the 
biomedical waste once it gets to the private landfill, in this case 
Loraas Disposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Typically what happens and what is 
available at the Loraas site in Saskatoon is a special area which 
may have a clay seal and some other features to it which will 
allow for the biomedical waste to be disposed of there. And 

then there’s a regular schedule of making sure it’s all covered 
and not exposed to anybody who might use the site. 
 
But it’s something that’s managed differently than the general 
waste part of a dump. And in Saskatoon, the Loraas Disposal 
site has set up the appropriate procedures to make sure that this 
waste is dealt with appropriately. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So this would be unique to the Saskatoon 
Health Authority that they use Loraas, or is that the dumping 
facility for all biomedical waste from all the different health 
authorities? Is that just specific for Saskatoon or is it also . . . 
does Regina Qu’Appelle, for example, use that same facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Typically how it works, and there are 
different disposal sites across the province, but typically a 
health facility will have made appropriate contractual 
arrangements with experts in the field. Loraas is obviously one 
of them and waste management is another company. And 
sometimes the municipalities will have the professional people 
that work in their organizations. 
 
And then what happens with biomedical waste is that there’s a 
whole procedure right from within the facility all the way to the 
dump site so that everything is properly labelled and people 
know what they’re working with and dealing with as it is 
transported to the dump site. And those protocols are ones that 
are part of how the hospital or other facility does . . . but it’s 
usually worked out on a contractual basis with one of the waste 
disposal companies. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I assume from that then . . . because I 
don’t know if it really answered the question. My question was, 
does all the provincial biomedical waste go to Saskatoon or 
each authority contracts in their own area? And is it then all — 
in each case, in the 12 health authorities’ cases — is it all 
handled within Saskatchewan? Or is any shipped out of the 
province to Alberta, to an incineration facility in Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can answer your first question which I 
did before, which is that the Loraas Disposal is a site that’s used 
in the Saskatoon area. There are other arrangements in other 
parts of the province. I’m not certain whether some particular 
kinds of biomedical waste may go out of the province but most 
often the arrangements are made locally or within certain 
regions. But it’s usually done with the professional waste 
disposal companies who handle that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’m interested for example in the Saskatoon 
case. And I’m sure no expert, but what you’re telling me is it’s 
a private landfill. You know, for example, the two bags what 
you say was found in the public landfill, if that went to the 
Loraas Disposal site it would be put in a pit and eventually 
buried — no treatment, nothing done with the sharps. 
 
What type of a process is gone through with this biomedical 
waste? I know it’s got to go through certain procedures when it 
leaves the facility. It’s got to be handled properly. It’s travelling 
in a . . . whatever type of vehicle to get out there. But once it’s 
there in a landfill, before it goes into the landfill, what is done 
with the biomedical waste? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have all the expertise to answer all 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

the specific questions that the member has raised. But from 
Saskatchewan Environment’s perspective, the biomedical 
waste, sometimes it’s treated in the hospital before it actually 
goes into the waste containers to go to the waste disposal 
company. And I’m not quite sure what they would use there, 
but there are some various things that they can do with some of 
the products. And then it is specially handled, both in the 
transportation and then when it goes to the dump site, and is put 
into special places according to appropriate protocols by experts 
in this area. And that’s the normal course in our province. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Can you, Minister, tell me then, is any sent 
out of the province? We know Saskatoon is there. We have 12 
other health regions that are doing contractual agreements with 
waste disposal companies in their particular area. Are we 
sending any biomedical waste out of the province? Because I 
know there is a facility in Alberta that incinerates. Are we using 
that facility at all with any of our biomedical waste from 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the answer to that particular 
question. I just don’t know whether there is some incinerator 
capacity in Saskatchewan or not or whether . . . some that goes 
to Alberta. We do know from an environmental perspective that 
there are certain very toxic substances that go to the incinerator 
operation northwest of Edmonton. And I think practically they 
take substances from all of Western Canada and maybe even the 
whole of Canada for some particular products. But as it relates 
to the incineration capacity in Saskatchewan, I don’t know the 
answer to that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I don’t know if Environmental estimates are 
going to be up again before the end of our session here, but I 
would be interested in finding out if and how much we are 
sending out of the province to be incinerated in Alberta. And a 
bit of a, you know, not a pure breakdown, but are we talking . . . 
We’re not talking sharps. We’re talking some hazardous waste. 
I’m not even exactly sure. So if I could get a little bit of an 
explanation on that, I’d really appreciate that please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate the comment from the 
member and not all of this information would be directly 
Environment. I’ll see whether there’s some. And you may wish 
to follow up with my colleague later in this week on this 
particular issue if there’s some other questions that you still 
have. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. I’d just like to 
thank the minister and his officials for providing the 
information through the course of our discussions on the 
various topics and particularly those officials that travelled from 
Prince Albert. We appreciate them being here this afternoon. 
And we certainly look forward to our next go around in 
consideration of estimates of the Department of the 
Environment. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Chair, I’ll move that committee 
report progress on Environment estimates and move to 

consideration of estimates in the Department of Health. 
 
The Chair: — It’s been moved that the committee would report 
progress on the Department of the Environment and move to 
the estimates on the Department of Health. Is it the favour of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. It being 5 o’clock or very near that 
hour, I would declare the House recessed until 7 p.m. this 
evening. 
 
[The committee recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1558 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Deputy Speaker ...............................................................................................................................................................1558 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1558 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1566 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering Economist John Kenneth Galbraith 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
 Charity Fashion Show in Weyburn 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1560 
 Creighton Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council Celebrates 20 Years of Quality Service 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1560 
 Macoun Student Competes in National Writing Contest 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1560 
 Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan Awards 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1560 
 Shaunavon’s Citizen of the Year 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1561 
 Voices of the North 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1561 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Funding Allocations for School Divisions 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1562 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1562 
 School Attendance 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1563 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1563 
 Recruitment of Endocrinologists 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1564 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1564 
 Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1565 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1565 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1567 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1568 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1569 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1570 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1571 



 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1571 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1573 
  Hart ......................................................................................................................................................................1573, 1579, 1585 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Allchurch .......................................................................................................................................................................1577, 1582 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1583 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


