


















































Hansard: May 08, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 55A  MONDAY, MAY 8, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1545 
 May 8, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 
not be present to open this day’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Another 
highway in the constituency of Cypress Hills is in desperate 
need of repair. I present the following prayer on behalf of my 
constituents: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, today’s two pages of petitions are 
signed by individuals from the communities of Maple Creek, 
Piapot, and Claydon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to read a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Prince 
Albert. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too have a 
petition to fund Avastin. Madam Speaker, the signatures on this 
petition request in their prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Madam Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Prince Albert. I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise as 
well to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
lack of funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals 
all from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Today I have a petition with 
citizens concerned about Highway No. 20. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway No. 20 be 
upgraded to primary weight status to ensure the economic 
viability in the surrounding areas. 
 

And the signatures, Ms. Deputy Speaker, are from Lockwood, 
Saskatoon, Lanigan, Drake, Nokomis, and Semans. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Today I 
have a petition on behalf of citizens of this province who are 
concerned about the government’s refusal to fund the drug 
Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
again to present a petition from citizens concerned about the 
lack of government funding for the cancer-fighting drug 
Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2006 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
residents across Saskatchewan that are concerned that 
Saskatchewan is the only province besides PEI [Prince Edward 
Island] that does not have a dedicated children’s hospital. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

The petitioners today live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, and 
Silverspring in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with Highway No. 
3. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road to 
highway no. 795 . 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from 
Turtleford, Fairholme, Edam, and Glaslyn. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I rise to read a petition from concerned 
citizens concerned with the lack of the government’s ability to 
finance the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is signed by the good people of 
Saskatoon, and I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to 
maintain the Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 

Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Foam Lake and Imperial. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thank you. It’s a pleasure today to rise 
and present a petition that this is the first time in the province’s 
history that the government has denied coverage of a cancer 
drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise in the House 
today to present a petition regarding autism spectrum disorder. 
This petition calls for: 
 

More behavioural therapists and coordination among the 
departments of Health, Learning, and Community Resources 
and Employment with input from stakeholders to formulate a 
provincial comprehensive autism spectrum disorder treatment 
program and to provide adequate, effective and early 
treatment based on intensive behavioural interaction and 
includes speech, communication, occupational, and physical 
therapy, and medical attention for ASD-related conditions. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. I so present, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

The petition concerning surgical services in the Tisdale 
Hospital, that’s sessional paper no. 742; 

 
And additions to previously tabled petitions being addendums 
to sessional paper nos. 5, 27, 64, 67, 638, 639, 669. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 



May 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Wednesday move first reading of an Act respecting biodiesel. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I have several questions for the 
government. I give notice I shall on day no. 60 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many communities in rural 
Saskatchewan are without the services of a full-time 
resident physician, and which ones? 

 
I also give notice on day 60: 
 

To the Minister of Health: does the provincial government 
offer temporary physician services to communities that 
have lost their full-time resident physician until a 
permanent physician can be obtained? 

 
Also on day no. 60, I give notice to ask the government the 
following question: 
 

Does the provincial government offer a physician 
recruitment service for communities that have lost the 
services of a full-time physician? 

 
Also on day no. 60, I ask: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what assistance does the 
provincial government provide for communities who have 
lost the services of the resident physician? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
It’s an honour today to introduce to you and to all members in 
this Legislative Assembly the candidate for Prince Albert 
Northcote for the Saskatchewan Party in the upcoming 
provincial election. Kevin Shiach has joined us this afternoon. 
 
Kevin is currently involved in the private sector in Prince 
Albert but has also served as a pastor as well in his community. 
He attracted over 100 people — about 140 people — to an 
uncontested nomination, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So clearly, clearly he’s ready to go to work and ensure that the 
current member for Prince Albert Northcote has the opportunity 
to explore other exciting endeavours after the next election. 
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure today to introduce a constituent from Regina 
Lakeview, and he has a special status here because he’s the 
brother of our Page, Michael Radmacher. And sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery in the back row is Bruce Radmacher. And he 
is a member of the Regina Symphony Orchestra, and he’ll be 
performing here in the Chamber later today. So I ask all 
members to welcome Bruce Radmacher. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly four people seated in your gallery that are very 
important to me. My wife, Trish. Trish is a television anchor in 
Saskatoon as well as taking care of our children, Carter who’s 
eight, and Paige who’s six. And welcome her to her Assembly 
here this afternoon. Also my mother, Lucy Cheveldayoff, is 
here. Mom just completed a constitutional law class at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and she did very well. So if any of 
the members needs any advice on constitutional law, she’d be 
able to provide that to you this afternoon I’m sure. 
 
Joining them here in the gallery is Ken and Merle Sawatsky, 
good friends of mine. Ken is one of the founding members of 
Junior Achievement in Saskatchewan. Merle’s involved with 
Eastern Star and Saskatoon Family Services Bureau. 
 
Madam Speaker, to all members, please help me in welcoming 
them to their Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Through you and to all members of the Assembly I would like 
to introduce someone special to me in my life, somebody who 
stands beside me in the tough times and good times. And I 
would ask all members to welcome my wife, Sheila Allchurch, 
to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Well, members, I would like to 
introduce to you seated in the Speaker’s gallery my cousins, 
Margaret and Leif Riesach. They were here for the first time I 
was asked to replace the Speaker in the Chair, and as it 
happens, they’re here today to see me try this once again. I’d 
ask all members to give them a warm welcome to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2006 

Head-Milestone. 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This 
week in National Nursing Week. National Nursing Week’s 
motto is Promoting Healthy Choices for Healthy Living. 
Whether it is in an emergency situation, surgery, post-surgery 
care, comforting a dying patient or patient education, nurses 
play a crucial role in the delivery of health care in our province. 
It’s important that members of this Legislative Assembly 
recognize and support the important contributions that nurses 
provide to Saskatchewan people. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this province is entering a crisis as 
more and more nurses are retiring and even more tend to leave 
the province for greener pastures. Those who are left behind 
must work harder and longer to provide care. But they’re only 
human. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government must find ways to 
support nurses, provide quality workplaces, and undertake a 
more aggressive position in nurse recruitment and retention. 
This province needs more nurses. 
 
This year Manitoba has announced that they will be having 
3,000 nursing students go through their classes in Manitoba. 
That’s twice as many as Saskatchewan, twice as many as our 
province which are similar in population. 
 
So I take this opportunity, once again call upon the Minister of 
Health and his government to provide a clear recruitment and 
retention strategy that includes targets, and a timeline to fulfill 
the existing nursing vacancies, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this week is National 
Nursing Week, a time set aside to recognize and honour the 
significant contributions that nurses make to the health of 
Canadians. 
 
This year’s theme is Promoting Healthy Choices for Healthy 
Living, indeed a very apt theme as Saskatchewan nurses 
advocate for healthy personal choices and improved community 
well-being and contribute greatly to public health and primary 
health care. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we recognize that nurses are currently 
in short supply around the world. Here in Saskatchewan we are 
addressing this issue in our Working Together: Saskatchewan’s 
Health Workforce Action Plan released this past December. The 
strategy is a comprehensive, detailed plan designed to improve 
health care in Saskatchewan by keeping and attracting health 
care professionals and was developed in consultation with 
nursing organizations and other health-provider groups. 
 
Already our workforce action plan is recognized as a national 

standard and is being praised for its innovative health care 
planning. The workforce action plan builds on the solid work 
we had done on The Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care 
released in 2001. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we are keeping more nurses in the 
province. Of last month’s graduates from nursing education 
program of Saskatchewan, 95 per cent accepted positions in 
Saskatchewan. Madam Deputy Speaker, I extend a heartfelt 
welcome to these new graduates. At the same time I offer my 
sincere appreciation to all Saskatchewan nurses for their hard 
work, their commitment, and their compassion. 
 
I ask all of my colleagues to join me in thanking our nurses for 
their ongoing contributions to the health care system and in 
wishing them the best this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 

National Emergency Preparedness Week 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, today marks the beginning of the National 
Emergency Preparedness Week. 
 
Emergency Preparedness Week is celebrated annually in every 
part of Canada by all levels of government. Throughout the 
week events and activities will be held across Canada to help 
individuals and communities prepare for the potential impacts 
of emergency situations. 
 
Activities held during Emergency Preparedness Week will 
stress the importance of being prepared for any type of natural 
or human-induced emergency and increase Canadians 
knowledge of the nation’s emergency management system. The 
week is also an opportunity to showcase the programs, training, 
and equipment that have been put in place to enhance the safety 
and security of Canadians and their physical and cyber 
environment. 
 
Being prepared is an important step that all Saskatchewan 
residents should take because we never know when there will 
be a widespread power outage, a terrorist attack, a major flood, 
or any other type of disaster. 
 
Emergency Preparedness Week reflects the increasingly 
threatening world we live in and emphasizes the importance of 
taking immediate steps to improve preparedness at home, at 
school, and in the workplace. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, last Friday 
evening I along with the Minister of Northern Affairs and a 



May 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

large and very enthusiastic audience attended the eighth annual 
SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these awards are an initiative of the 
Wicihitowin Foundation to recognize the outstanding 
achievements of Saskatchewan First Nations and Métis young 
people. Each of this year’s nominees and winners has 
demonstrated a commitment to their community, excellence in 
their academic achievements, and exemplary leadership 
qualities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this year’s winner of the Culture 
Award is Sam Anderson of the Poundmaker First Nation. The 
Fine Arts/Performing Arts Award went to Misty Kay of 
Kawacatoose First Nation. Yona Jimmy of Moosomin First 
Nation is the award winner for education. Sweetgrass First 
Nation’s Kendall Albert won the Sports Award, and Danielle 
Dupre of Lac La Ronge First Nation received the award for 
community service.  
 
The Recreation Award went to Kayla Natawayes of Sandy Bay, 
the Spirit Award to Victoria McDermott of Prince Albert, and 
Dakota Creely of Regina received the award for leadership. 
Nikita Nelson of Pelican Narrows received the Technology and 
Science Award. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Outstanding 
Achievement Award went to Rachel Ross of the Sturgeon Lake 
Cree Nation. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the nominees and 
winners of the 2005 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of 
Excellence. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

KidSport Week 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Participation in sports and recreation by Saskatchewan youth 
plays a major role in the life of people in our province and is 
pivotal in the growth and development of our young people. On 
behalf of the official opposition, I want to voice our support for 
the declaration of KidSport Week in Saskatchewan, from May 6 
to May 13. 
 
As members are aware, KidSport is a children’s charity that was 
developed in British Columbia in 1993 and has since expanded 
to eight provinces, including Saskatchewan. KidSport’s mission 
is to increase the accessibility of sporting opportunities to 
financially disadvantaged children so these children can 
participate in community sports programs. This program makes 
a huge difference in the lives of our young people who are able 
to join with their friends in sports events. Today KidSport has 
raised over $1.6 million in Saskatchewan and has helped over 
18,000 kids. 
 
I would like to take the opportunity today to thank the members 
of the 41 communities who provide funding to disadvantaged 
children, as well as provincial sponsors and national sponsors 
who make KidSport a success. One of the great things about 
KidSport is the money raised in communities stays in that 

community. I’d also like to encourage members of the public to 
support KidSport initiatives in their communities, both during 
this week and throughout the year. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 
 

Credit Union Recognized for Commitment to Community 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. On 
April 11, 2006, in recognition of its commitment to supporting 
local initiatives and enhancing community well-being, 
Saskatoon Credit Union was presented a Building a Better 
Future Award from The Ethical Funds Company. Saskatoon 
Credit Union’s submission focused on the individual 
development account program, which is a financial learning 
tool to assist youth with potential to stay in school. 
 
The program teaches low-income youth how to manage their 
financial affairs, save money towards a goal, gain employment 
skills, and build towards completing their education or entering 
the workforce. As a result of receiving this award, The Ethical 
Funds Company will make a donation on behalf of Saskatoon 
Credit Union to the community first program. This program 
operates a community investment fund that provides 
non-traditional financing options for community economic 
development projects that in turn help reduce poverty in 
Saskatoon and the surrounding areas. 
 
The award is a well-deserved recognition of the commitment to 
the community possessed by the management and employees of 
Saskatoon Credit Union, which donates funding and also 
provides their employees the time needed to mentor and help 
run the individual development account program. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Saskatoon 
Credit Union for receiving this award, for improving the 
outlook of the less fortunate youth, and for demonstrating 
outstanding corporate social responsibility. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon to Host International Biology Olympiad 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this summer the city 
of Saskatoon will be privileged to host the 18th annual 
International Biology Olympiad from July 15 to 22. This annual 
competition which is held in a different country each year 
brings students together from around the world for a scientific 
competition that challenges their skills in tackling biological 
problems and in dealing with biological experiments. Interest in 
biology, inventiveness, creativity, and perseverance are all 
necessary qualities for students to succeed. And I have every 
confidence that Canada’s students will rise to the challenge. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this competition provides an 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2006 

outstanding opportunity for our province to showcase the best 
of Saskatoon to the world. With representatives from 55 
countries in the city, students and leaders from around the world 
will have the opportunity to be involved in social, recreational, 
and cultural activities that will highlight the best of our city and 
our province. 
 
I want to thank the steering committee who have put a lot of 
time and effort to make sure that this event is a success. And I 
also want to take this opportunity to urge the provincial 
government today to support this financially. This is a great 
opportunity to showcase our city and our province to the world. 
It’s a great opportunity for the province to support the city of 
Saskatoon. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Property Tax Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, on April 21 the Minister of Finance was asked 
about property tax hikes for residents of southern Saskatchewan 
that would result from the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] 
failure to properly fund the cost of education in our province. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, here’s what the minister had to 
say and I quote: 
 

. . . there is no reason that residents in the . . . former 
Sunrise School Division, including the city of Weyburn, 
should see any increase in their education and property tax 
. . . 
 

That’s what the Minister of Finance had to say. On Friday last, 
the South East Cornerstone School Division put out their press 
release. And guess what, Madam Deputy Speaker? Property 
taxes are going up and going up significantly in most areas of 
that division including the city of Weyburn. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to the minister: why on April 21 then 
did he provide inaccurate information to this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The member ought to know full well that it is school 
boards that set those rates. What we said is that there is 
sufficient money in this budget that there need not have been a 
tax increase. Now if Audrey Trombley, the defeated Sask Party 
candidate, and her board decide that they want to raise those 
rates, then that is who he should be asking his question to. 
 
It is interesting how that party opposite says one thing in here 
and something different outside. You know it’s just the other 
day they were criticizing me for running government-sponsored 

advertising. What is it that I see on the news at 12:30 today? 
More taxpayer-funded advertising. This time featuring none 
other than a visage of the nicely tanned member from Swift 
Current. Explain that, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, explain 
how you’re using those taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, imagine the irony of 
that Minister of Finance, the half million dollar man raising the 
issue of advertising campaigns, Madam Deputy Speaker, all the 
while underfunding education in the province so that not just 
one board, but board after board and school division after 
school division are having to do what to make up for that 
underfunding? Increase taxes. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that minister stood in his place and 
said the city of Weyburn should not, will not have a property 
tax increase. That’s what he said, as a result of the NDP budget. 
We know though, Madam Deputy Speaker, property taxes will 
be going up for the city of Weyburn, for the residents of 
Weyburn by 5 per cent. Again to the Minister of Finance: why 
did he provide inaccurate information to this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, once again what we are 
seeing is a situation where the Leader of the Opposition is 
simply not credible, whether it’s on the issue of government 
sponsored advertising . . . which now today, he seems to have 
no problem whatsoever with him being featured prominently in 
taxpayer-funded advertising or in the issue where he is 
distorting what I said in the Assembly, which is that the people 
of Weyburn need not see any increase in their property taxes. 
 
Now if Audrey Trombley who is a defeated Sask Party 
candidate would like to explain to the taxpayers there why it is 
she jacked up the tax rates — she should do so. But otherwise I 
can assure the members that there was sufficient money in this 
budget; there should have been no increase in the city of 
Weyburn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this is typical from this 
Minister of Finance to blame someone else for something that 
he has done — in this case, in this case property tax hikes 
across the province — because then, Madam Deputy Speaker, if 
it’s the Cornerstone School Division’s fault, then it must also be 
the Sun West School Division’s fault because the district that 
now includes Biggar, Davidson, and Kindersley, that district is 
going to experience property tax hikes between 4 and 18 per 
cent. But according to the NDP, that must be their fault. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the Prairie South School Division, 



May 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

education property taxes will be going up between 7 and 15 per 
cent. In the Chinook district — the budget not yet released — 
those property taxes will likely be going up. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, to that Minister of Finance: are all 
of the school boards wrong and is he right? Is that the minister’s 
position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, clearly 
the member does not seem to want to look at those school 
divisions that are able to hold the line or reduce. He does not 
take into account that in the city of Estevan taxes will go down 
this year. He does not take into account that under regional 
pooling what we will get rid of is the horrid distortion that was 
in place where the areas that had an oil well existing in them 
had paid significantly less taxes than those that could only see 
the oil well from where the community was. That’s what those 
members refuse to recognize was what regional pooling was 
doing. 
 
It is yet another example of them saying one thing in the House, 
saying something else when they’re out campaigning, and 
looking for whichever answer works best for their own political 
benefit. Shame on them for playing that political game. Shame 
on them for voting against the budget that provided record 
money for education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, shame on that Premier 
and that government for only a few months ago saying that they 
were going to do something about the property tax issue, and 
the something that they were going to do was to hike property 
taxes across the province including in the city of Weyburn. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if it’s all the school board’s fault, then 
that Minister of Finance should phone his friend John Conway 
on the Regina board. Their taxes are going up 3 per cent — 
public and separate I believe. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the situation in the Southeast, as the 
Minister of Finance has portrayed, apparently that while the 
government is prepared to cash the oil and gas royalty cheques 
from that district, they’re not prepared to invest in education or 
on infrastructure, and so now the Cornerstone School Division 
is looking at a tax hike; in the Estevan rural, up 30 per cent. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, can that Minister of Finance explain to 
the people of the Southeast, to the Cornerstone School District, 
to the people of Weyburn what he has against them, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The increase in funding that we 
provided in this budget was voted against by that opposition 
and by that party. 
 
The model of regional pooling was designed specifically to 
make sure that residents in the areas that do not have oil 
resources continue to benefit from the oil resources around 
them. That was why Midale and that area is seeing an increase. 
That is why Estevan is seeing a decrease. I’d be interested to 
know what the member for Estevan says. 
 
But what’s more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the position of the 
Sask Party opposition who takes this approach, that well — you 
know what? — this is a huge issue. But just last week what was 
he saying? A $60 million difference on the federal budget was 
simply semantics in terms of equalization. What was it he said 
when the federal budget came out? No, don’t worry, Mr. Prime 
Minister; don’t send all that money to Saskatchewan. Just send 
60 per cent. What was it he said? You know they love the 
budget that provided a 6 per cent increase for health care 
funding federally, but they voted against the budget that 
provided 10 per cent provincially here. 
 
It’s just about cheap, cheap politics on the part of the Sask Party 
and the Sask Party leader, and he should be ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, from a region of the 
province of Saskatchewan that willingly, that willingly 
contributes hundreds of millions of dollars over the last number 
of years to the provincial treasury in oil and gas royalties, to 
that area of the province, to Weyburn and area, that 
government, that Premier, that Minister of Finance, all they can 
offer is disrespect. All they can offer are education tax 
increases. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, no wonder only about a half a dozen 
people showed up at the Minister of Finance’s post-budget 
meeting in Weyburn. And no wonder, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that the Premier had to cancel his fundraising dinner with two 
days to go in Weyburn. You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
they might get more interest in their political party if they 
showed that they actually cared about southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
The question to the minister is this: why did the NDP 
government put forward a budget this year, why did that 
Finance minister put forward a budget that had all these hidden 
tax hikes on the property tax question, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I can think of no greater disrespect 
than for a Leader of the Opposition to treat so shabbily one of 
the members that she is forced to resign from the House and to 
provide no explanation and to drive us into a by-election in 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2006 

Weyburn. Let’s talk about disrespect, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Let’s talk about disrespect. I would say ask Brenda Bakken 
about disrespect, and we’ll know exactly what we see as the 
member turns his back in terms of listening to this answer. That 
is the ultimate in disrespect when you drive them out. 
 
There are all sorts of reasons to vote for this budget, Madam 
Speaker, all sorts of reasons in terms of increased education 
spending, health spending, in terms of money for public safety. 
And did the members of the opposition find any reason to 
support? No. Why? Because this budget is good for 
Saskatchewan people, but it is very bad for the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Future Changes to School Divisions 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, school boards are setting their 
budgets. Mill rates are rising. We’re losing students, and cuts 
are on the horizon. I raised this issue last week in an attempt to 
get some real answers from the minister and, as usual nothing 
happened. 
 
So again, Madam Deputy Speaker, we need clarity from the 
minister. To the Minister of Learning: how many schools will 
be closed across this province as a result of this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have said on a 
number of occasions that these decisions are made by the 
school divisions in their area. We respect the right of the elected 
members of the school boards to make the decisions for the 
students that they serve and the communities they serve. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this issue has come up over and over 
again, and I’m not sure if the members opposite are suggesting 
that we should become directly involved instead of leaving 
these decisions up to the boards of education that are elected by 
their communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Madam Deputy Speaker, this is 
very simple. The Minister of Learning is responsible for 
leadership and providing the direction for education in this 
province. Madam Deputy Speaker, anything less than that is an 
abrogation of their responsibilities. 
 
Once again I will ask the question. If she will not answer the 
question about how many schools will be closed, perhaps the 
minister would be kind enough to answer the question: how 
many teaching positions then are going to be eliminated as a 

result of this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of 
the things that the opposition does is try to jump out in the front 
of every parade. Now about two weeks ago, the member was 
standing a couple days in a row asking the question, well we’re 
cutting teaching positions, cutting teaching positions. And then 
the division put an article in the paper saying we should be able 
to accommodate. And we may have to move teachers between 
schools, but we should be able to accommodate and mitigate the 
losses. 
 
Then the member stops, Madam Deputy Speaker. He should 
quit trying to jump in front of the parades, wait for the duly 
elected boards to make their decisions, and then we’ll see where 
the school divisions are at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Speaker, once again we 
hear from the minister a complete refusal to take any 
responsibility for the direction and the outcomes of what’s 
going to happen in learning in this province. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, clearly this is a responsibility of the provincial 
government. Clearly this is a responsibility of that minister. 
 
Clearly, Madam Deputy Speaker, the question deserves to be 
answered. How many teaching positions are going to be cut in 
this province? How many schools are going to be closed? The 
people of this province deserve an answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is with 
a bit of concern that I hear this question. Does the member 
opposite believe that everything should be directed out of this 
building, out of the departments within the city of Regina? They 
ask politicians to get involved in the justice system. They make 
recommendations that we should be censoring various areas. 
 
Now the members opposite are advocating that the Department 
of Education, the Department of Learning and all decisions 
should be made affecting learning in the province of 
Saskatchewan centrally in Regina. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we disagree with that attitude. We 
believe that the school divisions that are duly elected, 
representing their communities, will come to the best decision 
for their students that they service within their school divisions, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 



May 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

Investment in Pangaea 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the government makes the decision on 
how much money the school boards are going to get and how 
the money is being spent and priorized . 
 
I’d like to talk about another issue of government investment, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. On page 9 of the latest annual report 
from Investment Saskatchewan, it talks about recovering some 
money invested by this NDP government in Pangaea Systems. 
This company was given three and a half million taxpayers’ 
dollars in 2003, and the company promised to create 35 jobs — 
35 jobs. Madam Deputy Speaker, no jobs were ever created, 
and the company then turned around and left Regina without a 
peep. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to the Minister Responsible for 
Investment Saskatchewan: how much of the taxpayers’ money 
has been recovered, and how much is still outstanding, and has 
this NDP government abandoned the remainder? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
I’ll take the question on behalf of the Minister of Industry and 
Resources, the minister responsible. But let me say this, first of 
all, Madam Speaker, Investment Saskatchewan was set up and 
created, Madam Speaker, as a means to ensure, as a means to 
ensure that investments on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan were managed, were managed by an independent 
board to ensure as best as possible that we could get our 
investment climate improved and growing here in the province, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
I think that has been occurring, Madam Speaker, and we should 
allow Investment Saskatchewan to continue on doing its work, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
The government gave Pangaea $3.5 million or $100,000 a job 
for the 35 jobs they were supposed to create which never 
happened. Then they turned around and sold this company to 
CGI Group out of Montreal. CGI bills itself as the eighth largest 
independent information technology firm in the world. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what action has this government taken 
with CGI Group regarding the recovery of the money invested 
in Pangaea by the Saskatchewan taxpayers? Or has the NDP 
simply thrown two and a half million dollars down the drain? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Madam Speaker, it was well 
publicized several months ago that the government was taking a 
loss with respect to the investment in Pangaea. 
 
But I want to say to this House, Madam Speaker, that it was a 
well-intentioned investment which was to create some jobs in 
the city of Regina. And what happened, Madam Speaker, was 
that that company, like other companies, was affected by the 
rise in the American dollar relative to the Canadian dollar. And 
that investment did not work, Madam Speaker, but it was 
entered into with the best of intentions. 
 
Recently, Madam Speaker, some of that money was recovered. 
I don’t know if the opposition has made reference to that or not. 
And yes, there was a loss, Madam Speaker. But I want to say, 
Madam Speaker, that overall the investments of the Crown have 
made money. And yes, some lose but overall they make a good 
return for the people of the province, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I have questioned the Minister of Labour for 
three days on allegations of political interference in the Labour 
Relations Board. We didn’t receive any answers from the 
Minister of Labour, and we received silly responses from the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
On Friday, the deputy minister of Labour appeared before the 
assembled media, shedding no new light on this important 
topic. While Mr. William Craik is prepared to say his 
recollection of a conversation with the former Vice-Chair of the 
LRB [Labour Relations Board] is substantially different than 
Mr. Matkowski’s version, Mr. Craik would offer little else. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when is this minister going to come 
clean? When are the people of Saskatchewan going to get the 
answers they deserve on this important question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. What the people of Saskatchewan deserve to know is 
that this board operates at arm’s-length fashion. It’s 
independent. 
 
Last week we covered a lot of ground on this issue. And the 
deputy minister did say that his recollections are vastly different 
than the fellow in question. And I think this is an important 
thing. And of course this is heading to court in the near future. 
 
But I think what is more important, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
are the seeds of doubt that the members opposite are spreading 
about a very important institution — our labour law. We know 
the members opposite have an agenda. They’ve talked about 
competitive labour law. And this is a first step: cast seeds of 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2006 

doubt, make people question the value of this. And I think 
they’re doing a bad, bad service for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to quote 
from an article in the weekend edition of the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix with its heading that says, “Forbes’s reaction hurt 
Sask. image.” Madam Deputy Speaker, the article goes on to say: 
 

The seeming inability of Labour Minister David Forbes to 
address in a forthright way the accusation that political 
meddling led to the non-renewal of the term of a vice-chair 
of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board further 
solidifies suspicions of a pro-union bias in the provincial 
government. 
 
It’s the kind of political gamesmanship that does nothing to 
improve Saskatchewan’s image and . . . undermines the 
government’s effort to attract employers and investment. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, when will the Labour minister stop the 
gamesmanship and give us some straight answers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
of course we can all find articles like that, and of course that’s an 
interesting one. I found that of interest to read. But I did find it 
interesting last week when we had a good-news story here in 
Saskatchewan, 3,700 new jobs — not a mention from these folks. 
In fact not quite good enough, not quite good enough. 
 
And the week before, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was just appalled 
by the kind of language that’s coming out of the opposition talking 
about . . . on Day of Mourning. What did we hear those folks say? 
Well accidents just happen. Accidents just happen. 
 
Do we need occupational health safety regulations? We’ve had 
some very good things happen in this province. The Mosaic fire is 
a good example of how things work right when we have strong 
regulations and strong labour law. And they turn around and talk 
about competitive labour laws we need to change. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I have some deep concerns about the real agenda of those 
folks over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I don’t know where the 
minister is hearing the words that he claims to be claiming that 
we’re saying, when in fact I stood in this Assembly and I 
commended the people that work, and the fact that we were 

recognizing them in a North America safety week. For that 
minister to stand and say that we are not respectful of workers is 
wrong, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Walter Matkowski alleges the deputy minister 
of Labour advised him to quit immediately because his rulings 
were not popular with unions. That allegation, if proven to be 
correct, amounts to political interference in what should be an 
independent body — the Labour Relations Board. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the minister has been aware of these allegations for 
several days. Will he today agree to conduct an investigation 
into whether or not there was political interference in the 
Labour Relations Board? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I find it interesting these comments and especially the 
one that the critic opposite started about last Wednesday. Here 
we had a situation on the Day of Mourning, the Day of 
Mourning, and we read 33 names into the record here. And the 
member opposite from the other side talked about competitive 
labour laws within a half an hour, within a half an hour. 
 
And you know, another member over there talks about, well 
accidents just happen. If you’re driving down the street, you 
could have a car accident. You know, I think these folks have 
some serious issues. 
 
And I have to tell you this, Madam Deputy Speaker, last week 
was North American Occupational Safety and Health Week. 
Did I see any of those folks at any of those events? We had over 
1,500 tickets sold to the breakfast on Wednesday. He gets up, 
makes a speech in the House, and thinks he’s home free. That’s 
not on, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to refer 
the minister to the April 2004 edition of the Labour Reporter 
published monthly by the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
Let me read the headline from page number one, “Workers not 
well served by some Labour Relations Board decisions.” The 
headline from page two, “Labour Relations Board rulings irk 
many.” The heading from page three, “Labour Relations Board 
decisions questioned.” From page number four the heading 
reads, “Does the LRB need a midcourse correction?” 
 
Those are the four headings from that Labour Reporter, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Can the minister tell us if he thinks those 
headlines suggest there were some concerns in some quarters 
with Mr. Matkowski’s rulings on the Labour Relations Board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 



May 8, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I find it 
interesting when the opposition quotes from the media and 
wraps themself in the goodness of they’re going to protect the 
interests of working people. 
 
Well here’s a simple quote for the Leader of the Opposition 
from October 3, 2005, on CJME. The Leader of the Opposition 
has stated that he’s going to “go to war” with the working 
people of Saskatchewan in the interests of the economic 
environment and the business climate of Saskatchewan. So 
what is the real agenda of the members opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the 
government I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 
1,086 to no. 1,094 inclusive. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank you for 
being able to sift through all the noise. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, in order to prepare the House to receive Her 
Excellency, the Governor General of Canada, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:23.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1546 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  The Deputy Speaker ...............................................................................................................................................................1547 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Nursing Week 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 National Emergency Preparedness Week 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 KidSport Week 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1549 
 Credit Union Recognized for Commitment to Community 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1549 
 Saskatoon to Host International Biology Olympiad 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1549 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Property Tax Rates 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1550 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1550 
 Future Changes to School Divisions 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1552 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1552 
 Investment in Pangaea 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
 Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  The Deputy Speaker ...............................................................................................................................................................1555 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




