






















































Hansard: April 20, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 43A  THURSDAY, APRIL 20, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1229 
 April 20, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents in the area of Highway 32, 
especially the communities along that highway between Leader 
and Cabri. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Prelate and Sceptre. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by people of Saskatchewan who are trying to survive as 
they drive on Highway 5. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition are from the communities of 
Spalding, Quill Lake, Archerwill, and Saskatoon. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition today with citizens concerned about the safety on 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from LeRoy, Humboldt, 
Wadena, Lake Lenore, Kamsack, Watson, Middle Lake, and 
Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again today to present a petition for safer driving conditions on 
Highway No. 3. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district, which 
includes my father- and mother-in-law, Ron and Rose Poelzer. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents in the constituency of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs regarding a much-needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 
 

Today the petitioners live on Peters Cove, Stillwater Drive, and 
Hogg Crescent in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorders again, and will read briefly 
from it: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

Assembly may be pleased to act upon recommendations 
made by the Government of Saskatchewan caucus 
committee on human services regarding diagnosis and 
therapies. 
 

And I will read just a small portion of what is requested: 
 

One, to support regional autism service providers and 
provincial autism organizations that are providing support 
to families and individuals with autism spectrum disorder, 
and secondly to ensure that autism spectrum disorder 
autism adult services and supports are accessible and 
based on need rather than IQ or physical disability. 
 

This petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. I so present. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received. Two new petitions: 
 

First petition concerning cancer patients and access to 
medical treatment, sessional paper 668; 
 
And the second petition, maintenance of Highway 3, that’s 
sessional paper 669; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 64, 638, 644. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I present the sixth report of the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills which reads as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 
has agreed to report the same without amendment: 
 
Bill No. 301, The Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach 
Centre, Inc. Act; 
No. 302, The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment 
Act; 
Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act. 
 
And further, that the fees less the cost of printing be 
remitted to the petitioners for Bills 301 and 302. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a motion moved by myself and seconded 
by the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried, and it is committed to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that on day no. 43 I will ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority: to date has the provincial 
government made any payments to any First Nations with 
regards to the water level dispute on Echo and Pasqua 
Lakes, and if so, for how much and when? 
 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have another question. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority: to date has the provincial 
government made any specific payments to the Standing 
Buffalo First Nation with regard to the water level dispute 
in the Qu’Appelle Valley, and if so, for how much and 
when? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for ITO: did management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or to detect fraud in 
the year 2001? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for ITO: how did 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for ITO: does management of 
the department have any knowledge of any actual or 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2001? If so, what was the nature of this 
activity? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for ITO: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for ITO: is management of 
the department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2001, such as information received from employees, 
former employees, customers, clients, suppliers, or others? 
If so, what is the nature of this activity? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 2002. I so 
present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney, the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased today to introduce through you to all members of 
the Assembly a large number of guests in your gallery. These 
are members of our law enforcement and peace officer 
community in Saskatchewan that are here today for the second 
reading of the peace officer police memorial day Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have Jim Barbondy, a highway traffic officer 
from Prince Albert — if you could please stand when I call 
your name — Sergeant Major Randy Burt from the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police]; Bob Bymoen the president 
of the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union; Greg 
Catley deputy sheriff, Regina Provincial Court. 
 
Richard Coffey from the safer communities program in Regina; 
Bernie Eisworth, executive officer of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Police Officers from Regina; Dan Elberg, a 
corrections worker at the Regina Correctional Centre; Sandy 
Evanovich, Vice-Chair of the young offenders committee. 
 
Courtney Frank from the Regina Correctional Centre; Thomas 
Fulcher with the safer communities and neighbourhoods; Troy 
Hagen, a superintendent with the Regina Police Service; Grant 
Halkyard, community operations, adult probation, Regina. 
 
Dave Harvey, chief of enforcement with Saskatchewan 
Environment, Prince Albert; Dave Haye, president of 
Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers from Saskatoon; 
David Horn from the safer communities and neighbourhoods 
unit out of Regina; Terry Lang, the deputy minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Bob Kary, the executive director of the young offenders branch 

of Corrections and Public Safety; John Horstman, highway 
traffic officer, Regina; Mack Howat, the manager of the Regina 
provincial court security detention unit; Shelley Johnson, the 
legal inspection regulatory Chair at SGEU [Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union]. 
 
Dwayne Jonasson, the highway traffic officer from Wynyard; 
Steve Kent, Prince Albert corrections worker; Deputy Chief 
Dale Larsen, Moose Jaw Police Service. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Dale played a role in keeping me on the right side of the bars 
when I was a youngster and keeping me going the straight and 
narrow, so he deserves special credit. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Cam Lueken from the Saskatchewan 
Association of Conservation Officers from Melfort; Robert 
Mura from the Regina Correctional Centre; Barry Nowoselsky, 
the SGEU vice-president in public service sector; Sergeant 
Grant Obst from the Saskatoon Police Service. 
 
Shane Osberg from the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union; Chrystal Pelletier from the Regina Correctional Centre; 
Chief Superintendent Everett Summerfield from RCMP F 
Division, and he’s accompanied by his wife, Julene 
Summerfield. Thank you. 
 
Ken Sabo, director of court security for Saskatchewan Justice; 
Mick Taylor from Prince Albert, corrections worker, and he’s 
accompanied by his wife, Yvonne Meekel; Terry Ullman, the 
Chair of the young offenders committee; Bobby Woods and his 
wife, Doris Woods. Bobby Woods is a probation officer in 
Buffalo Narrows as well as the mayor. And last but not least, 
Mr. Speaker, Lea Zohner, a corrections worker from Regina. 
 
I want to welcome you all to your Legislative Assembly and 
thank you for coming today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the 
House would like to join with the minister opposite for his kind 
introduction to the police officers and correction workers that 
are present today. We note his comments about his previous 
dealings with them, and we accept the fact that they have made 
a good start and want to encourage the officers to continue their 
work with that particular minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the hard work and commitment that 
these officers make on a daily basis. We know that they are in 
very challenging profession that has many difficulties and also 
many rewards, but members on this side of the House 
appreciate, respect, and value the work and contribution of 
these officers, and we want to welcome them very much to this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of this Chamber, 
sitting in your gallery, representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency — they’re sitting in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker; I should have indicated — representatives of the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency who are here today to witness the 
second reading of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you Mr. Gary 
Semenchuck, Chair of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency Board; 
Mr. Bob Allen, CEO [chief executive officer]; Ms. Mary 
Johnson, assistant to the CEO; Dr. Ten Suan Goh, executive 
director, Allan Blair Cancer Centre; Ms. Heather Stuart, 
director of the cancer registry and privacy officer; and Mr. Jon 
Tonita, director of program evaluation and surveillance. I ask 
all members to welcome them to their Chamber today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with the minister on behalf of the official opposition and 
welcome the members from the cancer agency here today. It’s 
certainly an issue that we have been dealing with . . . well I can 
say during the six years while I have been a MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] for Indian Head-Milestone, getting 
phone calls, and the absolute seriousness of this disease. So I’d 
like to thank the members here for the great work that they do 
in this area. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly a 
constituent of mine, seated in the west gallery, Mr. Rick 
Wildfong. Mr. Wildfong is a farmer, a substantial farmer from 
the Craik area and a custom combiner known in grain farming 
circles from the Gulf of Mexico to northern Saskatchewan. And 
he also happens to be a member of my . . . He’s a director on 
my executive, my constituency executive. And I’d like to take 
this opportunity and hope all members will welcome Mr. 
Wildfong. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly an individual seated in the west gallery. He’s a fellow 
by the name of Andrew Beck. Andrew, in addition to studying 
political science at the University of Regina, is a very fine 
athlete. He’s a solid lifeguard. He’s a wicked, ultimate Frisbee 
player, and he’s also a champion water polo player. 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, he was on the provincial masters 
championship team in Saskatchewan. This year sadly they lost 
to Saskatoon, and I know all this because I was on that very 
same team, Mr. Speaker. But please welcome Mr. Andrew Beck 
to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I noticed 
that a gentleman just walked into this Assembly who is no 
stranger. Sitting up in your gallery, Mr. Lorne Hepworth who 
has joined us this afternoon. I wanted to extend a welcome to 
Mr. Hepworth as a former member and in his new role with 
CropLife Canada. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Excellence in Policing Service Awards 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last week it was my privilege to 
attend a Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police senior 
officers mess dinner in Prince Albert. This event recognizes 
retiring senior officers as well as provides an opportunity to 
present excellence in policing service awards. 
 
We should always be aware of the contribution and sacrifice 
that all of our police officers make and the fact that many of 
them put themselves in harm’s way to provide the safety and 
security that most of us take for granted. Actions that are based 
on split-second decisions are often reviewed in great detail and 
with the benefit of 20/20 hindsight. 
 
I would like to just mention briefly the award winners. The 
Leadership Award went to Staff Sergeant Robert Frame. The 
Excellence and Performance Award went to Staff Sergeant 
Gerry Gourlay. The Community Policing Award went to 
Constable Timothy Schwartz. The Public Education Award 
went to Constable Denise Reavley. And the unique award of the 
evening, Mr. Speaker, was a Valour Award that went to a 
Saskatoon constable, Tim Bayly, an officer who was faced with 
a police officer’s worst nightmare. Constable Bayly was 
confronted by an individual who was high on drugs and waving 
a loaded gun. When the individual pointed the gun at Constable 
Bayly, Constable Bayly was forced to use lethal force. 
Obviously this was a difficult and courageous decision that 
saved not only Constable Bayly’s life but as well protected the 
life of members of the public and other police officers. 
 
I want to ask all members of the legislature to recognize the 
contribution of not only these officers but the continuing 
contribution of all of our police officers. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Cumberland. 
 

A Role Model and Friend Retires 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, not long ago I had the 
pleasure of attending the retirement party for Ray McKay, one 
of the extraordinary individuals I’ve had the benefit of knowing 
growing up in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ray McKay is a member of the Lac La Ronge 
Indian Band. He grew up on the trap line near La Ronge before 
getting his education degree and becoming a teacher and school 
principal. 
 
He has served as executive director of the northern 
Saskatchewan education services branch and as deputy minister 
of Northern Affairs. For the past eight years, Mr. McKay has 
been the chief executive officer of Kitsaki Management Ltd., 
owned by the La Ronge Indian Band. Add these career 
achievements is a long list of boards where he has represented 
northern Saskatchewan including the Crown Investment Board 
and the Canada West Foundation. 
 
But what I find most impressive, Mr. Speaker, is Ray’s 
commitment to the well-being of northern people. He has said, 
quote, “Education is the key to the personal, cultural, social, 
and economical well-being of our people.” 
 
I am proud to call Ray McKay both a role model and a friend, 
Mr. Speaker, and I want to wish him a long, healthy, and happy 
retirement. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, ēkosi. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Nekaneet First Nation and Swift Current Agree to a 
Non-Smoking Casino and Performing Arts Centre 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the provincial 
government was in the process of introducing, implementing 
smoking ban legislation in the province of Saskatchewan a 
couple of years ago, the official opposition asked some 
questions. Specifically we asked if the government had done its 
homework. Had the government, for example, sat down with 
representatives of First Nations to discuss issues of jurisdiction? 
 
Despite assurances at the time that the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government had done their homework, had done the 
consultation with First Nations, and that the smoking ban would 
be universal across the province, we obviously found out a little 
bit later that the government had indeed not done its homework, 
had not done those consultations, hadn’t done the due diligence. 
We obviously found that out, Mr. Speaker, and what has ensued 
of course is an arguably unlevel playing field for certain 
establishments in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Earlier this week, we saw an example of what can happen when 
partners who are party to an agreement sit down and consult 
with each other and undertake the due diligence that is 
necessary to come to an agreement that’s in the interest of all 
parties. 
 
On Tuesday officials from the Nekaneet First Nation, as a 
member of the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, and the 
city of Swift Current formally signed the municipal services 
agreement for the Swift Current casino and performing arts 
centre, and officials announced that they have worked out an 
agreement that will make this facility non-smoking, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Congratulations to the Nekaneet First Nation, the 
File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations], and the city of Swift Current for 
doing what our government failed to do — do its homework, sit 
down, hammer out an agreement that is in the best interest of all 
parties. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Resident to be Inducted into Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, to baseball enthusiasts of Prince Albert, Manny 
Primeau is something of a legend. And I am pleased to 
announce to the Assembly today that on August 19 in North 
Battleford, Manny will be inducted into the Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame. 
 
Darryl “Manny” Primeau began playing baseball at an elite 
level in 1965 for the North Battleford Beavers of the North 
Saskatchewan Baseball League. Though he was forced to 
hitchhike from Prince Albert in order to get to the first practice, 
Manny made the team on that very same practice. 
 
That year, Mr. Speaker, Manny boasted a .340 batting average 
which earned him sixth place in the league. His stellar play 
helped the team to win the 1965 league championship. The 
following year he sported a batting average of .327 en route to a 
total of three selections as all-star. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manny spent several years in the North Battleford 
Baseball League before turning to fastball where he helped his 
team to win both provincial and national championships. 
 
Though so obviously one of Saskatchewan’s very best baseball 
players, Mr. Speaker, he prefers to downplay his personal 
performance. He claims to just have been fortunate. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to invite the members to join with me in 
congratulating Darryl “Manny” Primeau on his induction into 
the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame. He is a fierce 
competitor, and he’s a true role model to Saskatchewan’s 
athletics. Thank you very much. 
 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Vision for the Future 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has been busy sending out invitations to businesses in 
the Southeast to have supper with his cabinet and caucus in 
Weyburn next week. The letter reads, and I quote: 
 

Shaping Saskatchewan’s future is an exciting challenge. 
We invite you to join us in hearing Premier Calvert’s 
vision for the future of the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, one business person replied to me by saying, what 
future? Some vision — everyone is leaving. 
 
The funny thing is that there is no local number to call, but 
there is a Regina number. So I have to ask, what is the 
Premier’s vision for the future? Does the Premier’s vision for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy include higher property taxes because of 
one leadership contestant’s botched amalgamation? Does the 
Premier’s vision for Saskatchewan include the member from 
Greystone’s idea to charge extra-high royalties on oil sourced 
from tar sands? Does the Premier’s vision include spending half 
a million dollars on budget advertising when cancer patients go 
without life-prolonging drugs? Does the Premier’s vision for 
this province include the worst job-creation record in Canada 
and thousands of our young people leaving? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this province needs is a government that is 
committed to a full growth agenda. What this province needs is 
a Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Regina Open Door Society Honours Welcoming Spirit of 
Employers and Businesses 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last night I, along with the Minister for Industry and 
Resources and the Minister Responsible for Immigration, had 
the pleasure of attending the Regina Open Door Society 
Employer Recognition and Information Night, an event to 
recognize members of the business community who assist the 
Open Door Society in welcoming newcomers to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immigrants and refugees bring a wealth of 
knowledge, skills, and experience to our province, and 
welcoming workplaces are critical to a positive and successful 
immigration experience. The numerous businesses honoured 
last night contribute greatly to this process by granting training 
opportunities, work assessments, and encouragement to 
newcomers. Often these employers provides immigrants with 
their first job in Canada, and the success stories we heard last 
night were truly inspirational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, increased immigration will be an integral 

component to the continued success of our province. Agencies 
like the Open Door Society and employers like these honoured 
last night are wonderful examples of the welcoming spirit so 
essential to keeping newcomers in our province. 
 
I would like to ask all members of this House to join me in 
congratulating Regina Open Door Society and their associates 
in the business community for their important work in 
welcoming and supporting newcomers to Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Parties’ Nominations for Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Constituency 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed that 
the Premier is doing a lot of talking about our excellent 
candidate in the Weyburn-Big Muddy and very little about his 
own candidate. 
 
The Weyburn Review says that the Premier did not like the way 
Dustin Duncan was nominated and said if it wasn’t for the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Duncan would not have won. I 
have to ask the Premier, what did he not like about the way Mr. 
Duncan was nominated? 
 
Was it the enthusiastic sale of 700 memberships that created a 
surge of energy in the Sask Party in the Weyburn area? Was it 
the fact that there were three contestants in the nomination? The 
Saskatchewan Party nomination was the only contested 
nomination in that constituency. Both the NDP and the Liberals 
had to conscript for acclamation and had a lot of empty chairs at 
their nomination meetings. Or was it the fact that there was over 
500 people standing wall to wall in McKenna Hall? 
 
The Saskatchewan Party nomination had almost as many people 
at the nomination meeting as the Premier had at his Regina 
business dinner. I know the Premier has a lot on his mind, what 
with the NDP leadership going on full tilt behind him. All of 
these signs point to a worn out and tired NDP government 
gasping their last breath and seeing only darkness at the end of 
the tunnel. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the people of 
Saskatchewan are confused today no doubt after the comments 
from this Health minister yesterday. A week ago the Health 
minister stood in the rotunda of the legislature and said he was 
ultimately responsible for health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. But yesterday the minister stood in this 
Assembly and said, and I quote, “The New Democratic Party 
government, as the member opposite would suggest, is not 
responsible for long waiting times . . .” 
 
To the minister: if he isn’t responsible for the long waiting 
times in this province, who is? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
always appreciate it when the members opposite quote me. It 
seems to have a different ring when they say it than when I say 
it in the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand by my statement that the minister is 
ultimately responsible for health care in the province. It’s why 
I’m willing to stand in this Chamber and answer questions on a 
daily basis from members of the opposition, from meeting with 
people on the street, in my office, in the grocery stores. 
Ultimately, Mr. Speaker, I as the minister am responsible for 
what happens within health care. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we delegate authority for day-to-day 
operations. That delegation, Mr. Speaker, goes to regional 
health authorities and to agencies within the system. Mr. 
Speaker, we rely on those professionals to do the job that they 
also care about. So, Mr. Speaker, I take my responsibilities very 
seriously and I trust those around me who take their 
responsibilities seriously as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t like the way I 
requoted him yesterday. Well how about this quote from 
yesterday as well when he said that “The optimum wait time 
[for] . . . physician referral to oncologist . . . [is] about 9.5 
weeks.” 
 
That’s the optimum time in Saskatchewan to see an oncologist 
is nine and a half weeks. The national average wait time is four 
to five weeks, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister stand by those 
numbers that our wait times in Saskatchewan are twice as long 
as the national average? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the members opposite are aware that we consider the 
work of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and the needs of 
Saskatchewan cancer patients to be a priority of this 
government. And as such we have put additional money over 
the last four and five years, Mr. Speaker, into cancer and into 

the agency. Mr. Speaker, the numbers that the member quotes, 
as ministers of Health are aware, are calculated differently in 
different provinces and are put together, are put together, Mr. 
Speaker, in ways to assume that we’ve got apples to apples 
comparison. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, under the current 
circumstances, I am well aware that the wait times in the 
province are too long. The cancer agency and Saskatchewan 
Health are working very hard to bring those numbers down, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I raised 
the case of Emily Morley, who was told that she would have to 
wait 12 weeks to see an oncologist. Now here’s what the 
minister had to say out in the rotunda after question period. And 
he said, and I quote: 
 

Today in question period was the first time I’ve ever heard 
of this particular case. As I speak to you, I am still not 
aware of the particulars of this case, only the questions 
that were raised in question period. 

 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us if he received a phone call 
on Monday night regarding the specifics of this case? Yes or 
no. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
Monday night I received a telephone call concerning a petition 
that was being circulated. I was informed that the petition may 
be presented in the Chamber during the course of the week. Mr. 
Speaker, I thanked the caller for bringing that petition to my 
attention, knowing that a number of petitions are circulating 
through the province at any given time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the details of the case were not brought to my 
attention, Mr. Speaker — the question period matters yesterday 
and the family in question, Mr. Speaker. I still have not met 
with the family. I still have not had that case made directly to 
me. The work that Saskatchewan Health, the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency, and others, Mr. Speaker, have taken place as a 
result of indirect inquiries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Warren Morley, 
Emily’s husband, told us that a good friend of his had called the 
minister personally about Emily’s case Monday night. No doubt 
he talked about the petition and well over 700 names on the 
petition. But I find it rather interesting that in a half an hour 
phone call, he wouldn’t have talked about the specifics of the 
case, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

The minister stood in the rotunda yesterday and absolutely 
denied knowing any of the particulars about the case. Now that 
he’s had a chance to rethink that statement, will he come clean 
and tell us whether he knew for sure some of the particulars in 
this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the direction that the member opposite is providing 
to me. I did not have a half an hour telephone call. I discussed a 
petition with the individual who had called me. Mr. Speaker, I 
was not asked to intervene in the case. The information was 
simply being provided to me that there was a petition being 
circulated and the individual wanted me to have that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to say I had a half an 
hour conversation is completely incorrect. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this just flows from the credibility that the members have 
opposite in terms of quotes and bringing false information in 
front of the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have since 
learned once again that after this NDP government is publicly 
embarrassed regarding Emily Morley, for example, Emily 
Morley has since got a phone call from Sask Health yesterday 
afternoon. She now has an appointment to see an oncologist a 
week from today. What happened to the 12-week waiting list? 
 
We’re extremely pleased that Emily and her family are getting 
timely care in the province, but it’s absolutely appalling that 
people have to come to this Legislative Assembly to get the 
type of health care they deserve in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it begs the question: what about all the other 
patients that are sitting on waiting lists 12 weeks long to see an 
oncologist? Do they have to come to this Assembly to make 
their case public? What is he going to do to shorten the waiting 
list so people don’t have to come to this Assembly to plead their 
case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I appreciate the question. And I too am very pleased that 
the system has worked for Mrs. Morley and that in fact she has 
received an appointment time to see an oncologist, Mr. Speaker, 
as a result of questions being raised yesterday — as I would 
have acted if the Morleys had come to see me or phoned me, as 
would have happened had a member phoned me in advance 
earlier in the week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inquiries were made. The Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency reviewed the file, and as a result of that they 

saw that there was some urgency to the case. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this is what the system was designed to do. 
 
I encourage other people, other members of the public who are 
in the same situation, to keep in touch with their physicians, to 
work through the quality of care coordinators, and, Mr. 
Speaker, to familiarize themselves with the system so that those 
who are day to day responsible for the operations of the system 
can do the job that they’re expected to and who take 
responsibility to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Chris Andersen, 
Emily’s son, had a great analogy yesterday. He said that the 
NDP’s health care system is like a game of snakes and ladders. 
The family contacted the quality care coordinator and were told 
that they would have to wait like everyone else. Chris is 
frustrated that patients have to navigate this complex system 
without any guidance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the many people that are waiting 
throughout this province that are falling through the cracks? 
Will the minister stand in his place today and take the ultimate 
responsibility and ensure that people do not have to wait 12 
weeks to see an oncologist so that they don’t have to come to 
this Assembly to plead their case to get timely health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I will repeat something I said yesterday and add a couple 
of pieces to that. 
 
First and foremost, the cancer agency recognized, on the loss of 
two oncologists in Saskatoon, the need for recruitment activity 
to take place and have been very successful at recruiting a new 
oncologist in Saskatoon — and I might add, Mr. Speaker, have 
been successful also in recruiting one to Regina. Mr. Speaker, 
the cancer agency has been taking some very strong steps in 
that regard. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the cancer agency has established a wait 
times task force with representation from all disciplines and the 
department with the goal of improving access to agency 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is action that was taken prior to this case 
coming forward and recognizes the need to deal with what we 
all agree is an unfortunate circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that 
there are currently five oncologists at the Saskatoon Cancer 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

Centre. The minister has indicated that the sixth oncologist will 
be starting sometime in September and recruitment efforts are 
under way to find a second. That would make in Saskatoon 
Cancer Centre a total of seven oncologists. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency a 
letter dated September 21, 2002, and in that letter it quotes: 
 

The Saskatoon Cancer Centre is experiencing a significant 
shortage of five out of nine positions are now vacant. 
 

Five out of nine positions are now vacant. Mr. Speaker, what is 
the target for the Saskatoon cancer agency? In the letter they’re 
saying nine — they’re quoted as saying nine. At best effort by 
this minister they’ll get to seven. What is the target number for 
the Saskatoon cancer agency? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan Health works very closely with the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to determine the appropriateness 
of the work that’s being done, the budget that is allocated to it 
and, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the fact that we as a 
government have been able to commit to the agency increased 
funding in each of the years in the last five years, Mr. Speaker. 
This budget alone, which the members opposite have chosen 
not to support, has increased the cancer agency’s budget by 17 
per cent or roughly $10 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is significant increase to assist the cancer agency to meet 
the internal targets that it sets and in order to meet the needs of 
cancer patients in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, last year’s 
increase gave the agency the ability to see an additional 250 
patients. Mr. Speaker, we assume that the agency this year will 
be able to see many, many more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Future of Prairie Rubber Corporation Plant in Assiniboia 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday was a sad 
day for the Assiniboia community. Mr. Heath Mohr, the general 
manager of Prairie Rubber Corporation, issued layoff notices to 
all his employees at the recycling plant. At its peak, that plant 
employed 40 people. Now it stands idle and the equipment will 
be moved out of the country. Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP 
government let this happen? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this particular issue in 
Assiniboia is a sad situation for that particular company. They 
have a contract with the Scrap Tire Corporation of 
Saskatchewan which is run by the tire industry. It has 
representatives from car dealers, from tire manufacturers, tire 
sellers; Canadian Automobile Association, Saskatchewan 

branch; and others who are involved in the car industry. They 
have been in a process of negotiation and meeting with the 
company in Assiniboia and they are in the process of 
exchanging information. And, Mr. Speaker, it appears that the 
business operations of the Assiniboia plant cannot go forward 
with the arrangements that are possible across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well not only 
is it a sad day for the Assiniboia area, it’s a sad day for the 
province when this happens. Mr. Speaker, the company 
operating the plant in Assiniboia can make money in its plants 
around North America but it can’t in Saskatchewan. It was 
asking for an extra buck a tire. For the cost of two of the 
Finance minister’s ad campaigns this plant could remain open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government likes to talk about creating a 
green and prosperous province but it can’t keep a tire recycling 
plant in operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what’s going to happen now to the 
mountain of tires that are there? 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the obligations we 
have as members of this legislature is to set out the information 
accurately. And the member opposite knows that the local 
REDA [regional economic development authority], the 
economic development people, the mayor, the company — 
Prairie Rubber in Assiniboia — met together with the 
Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation here in Regina on April 
7. They met I think for almost three hours. They exchanged a 
lot of information about what the various possibilities were. 
And I think people had a sense that they all understood what the 
information was. 
 
Out of that meeting came a letter from the Scrap Tire 
Corporation to Prairie Rubber saying that the 50 cent increase 
that they had been receiving would continue to the end of 
December this year, and that they should then operate on that 
basis. Mr. Speaker, that same increase applies to the other 
rubber company in Saskatoon. They, as on a basis of this, have 
announced they’re expanding and that they’re doing more work 
because they can use the same kind of subsidy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is 
comparing apples and oranges and he should know that there’s 
a far different process for recycling implement tires than there is 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

car tires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a letter to me, Mr. Heath Mohr says the 
Environment department had no intention of giving the plant an 
increase in the money paid for recycling scrap tires, a result of 
the meeting the minister was talking about. According to Mr. 
Mohr, departmental officials were, and I quote, “. . . just 
stringing . . . [me] along . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this firm was asking for a small increase from the 
Scrap Tire Corporation. Consumers need not have paid more. 
Mr. Speaker, the only commitment this company was able to 
get was for an audit of the raw scrap tire inventory. Mr. 
Speaker, why is this government willing to let this recycling 
opportunity slip away? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the information is that the 50 
cent increase in the amount payable from the Scrap Tire 
Corporation was extended to December 31. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
we understand that that particular operation has been in a down 
mode basically since October and that they have been trying to 
sort out what their financial situation is. Mr. Speaker, it appears 
that that is not something that is viable in the way it’s presently 
organized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Scrap Tire Corporation, which is run by the 
industry, has to make choices between how much the 
consumers will pay versus how much it costs to do all of the 
processing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have not yet applied to the department for 
any increase in that amount because they are trying to get that 
balance between the customers who buy tires and the whole 
operation to recycle tires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will wait and get advice from the experts who 
are working in this field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Crop Insurance Premiums 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on a 
number of occasions this sitting of the legislature, we’ve asked 
the Agriculture minister prior to the March 31 deadline to 
extend the deadline for farmers to pay their premiums, past 
premiums for the last year and bring them up to date. We asked 
him to extend that deadline from at least two to three months to 
give them a chance to make those payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many farmers lost their crop 
insurance contracts because the deadline wasn’t met to pay part 
or all of their premiums? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the last numbers that we have put it just over 500 people who 
have withdrawn from the program. This is not the highest 
number. That being said, it is also a major concern that at a 
difficult time like this that there are farmers who were not able 
to pay the crop insurance premiums, or there were those who 
chose not to, for whatever reason chose not to make 
arrangements for the payments. 
 
I think the member opposite knows that farmers who came and 
made arrangements, a 25 per cent down payment, and made 
arrangements for covering the rest of their costs would be 
continued on in the program. And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been 
told over the past and this year again that there are a variety of 
reasons why farmers have chosen not to renew their contracts. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. The 
main reason they didn’t renew their contracts is they couldn’t 
afford to pay the premium from the year before. That shouldn’t 
be news to that minister. He should understand what’s 
happening out in rural Saskatchewan on a family farm in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has Crop Insurance in Melville had any farmers 
come to them after the deadline of March 31, whether they’ve 
came into the money, they’ve been able to sell grain and raise 
the money — have farmers come to Crop Insurance and asked 
to be reinstated and that they would pay their crop insurance 
premiums in full? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we went really beyond what has been done in past years to 
remind all farmers that there was a deadline, that the deadline 
was firm, and all farmers knew. They received registered letters. 
 
Even in the last few days, Mr. Speaker, I had members from 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], the 
executive from SARM came and spoke to me. And in order to 
try and deal with some of those who may not have read their 
registered letters, we took special effort to communicate with 
farmers. I phoned radio stations around the province and 
provided all farmers that we could get in contact with very 
clearly the message that there is a deadline and that deadline 
was the end of the opportunity to enrol in the program. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister: has Saskatchewan Crop Insurance had farmers 
come after the March 31 deadline having the money to pay the 
premium and asked to be reinstated into the crop insurance 
program? That was the question I asked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
very clearly, as I have indicated in the past, the deadline was 
firm. Farmers knew that. The opposition knew that. We knew 
that. 
 
The member opposite, when asked if he thought an extension to 
the deadline would actually make any difference, said, and I 
quote, said “no,” Mr. Speaker. And therefore I think the 
questions around whether or not anybody came to see after the 
deadline if they could have crop insurance extended is really a 
bogus question, Mr. Speaker, because the member opposite 
knows there was a deadline. And did he think that it would 
make any difference to extend it? His words, Mr. Speaker, I 
quote again, “no.” He did not. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll answer 
the question for the minister, because yes, they have had 
farmers come. We have one in the gallery today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rick Wildfong of Craik is an example of this. Mr. 
Wildfong, who is an executive member of the member for 
Thunder Creek, even he was not prepared for the treatment 
from this NDP government. Mr. Wildfong could not sell malt 
barley until April 4, accumulated the money, went to Crop 
Insurance and said, I will pay my premium in full but will you 
reinstate me? The answer was no, we will not pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister do the right thing today and let 
that constituent, that farmer know he will reinstate him in the 
crop insurance program if he pays that premium in full? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I indicated earlier, we went to extensive lengths this year, 
beyond other years, to make sure that every farmer was well 
informed about what needed to happen — that there was a 
deadline and that they needed to meet that deadline. At the very 
least, at the very least, Mr. Speaker, they had to go and make 
arrangements prior to that deadline, prior to the deadline. Every 
farmer should have known that. 
 

If they were in arrears, they got a registered letter. They got a 
registered letter letting them know that, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say that if Crop Insurance has been approached, they’ve 
given their answer, Mr. Speaker. The answer is clear, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a deadline. That deadline has passed. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the farmers in 
Saskatchewan hope another deadline comes very quick — the 
next provincial election. Get rid of that NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, there was a time when we 
probably only had about 80 per cent of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan supporting us. The way that NDP government is 
treating rural Saskatchewan and farmers, I believe that number 
is getting closer to 100 per cent by the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review. He says they’ve 
done extensive things for farmers. Well in this budget they cut 
the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] funding 
by $154 million. That really helps farmers. They cut the crop 
insurance dollars by 12 million. That sure helps farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. They cancelled the crop insurance contracts of another 
500-plus farmers out there. That really helped farmers in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Where is the compassion of that NDP government when it 
comes to our farmers who are in a time of need and need help 
today — not a year from now, but today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
one of our members earlier mentioned how important it is to 
actually stick to the facts when you’re speaking in here. And, 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re getting across the way is really a lot of 
nonsense as far as I can see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly, clearly, Mr. Speaker, when the chips were down, when 
it came time to actually try and get some more support for 
farmers — cash support that would make a difference — where 
were they, Mr. Speaker? They were not with us, Mr. Speaker. 
They were not with the farm groups. Where were they, Mr. 
Speaker? Sitting here doing nothing, Mr. Speaker, nothing for 
the farmers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have hope that there will be a federal 
payment. We had a very good ear from the caucus, the federal 
caucus, government caucus, and the opposition caucuses. Mr. 
Speaker, we had a very good ear from them. We have hope that 
there will be a cash payment, no thanks to the people who sat 
here and did nothing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 893 to 902 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 893 to 902 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Cancer Agency Act, Mr. 
Speaker. This Bill proposes the repeal of The Cancer 
Foundation Act which was enacted in 1979, and its replacement 
with The Cancer Agency Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government made important changes to the 
governance and accountability of regional health authorities in 
2002. Since then the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has 
incorporated many of those practices into its operations, even 
though its legislation has not required it. This Act and The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006, which I will 
also present for second reading later today, will extend to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency the same degree of 
accountability that has governed regional health authorities for 
the past four years. 
 
This updated legislation also reinforces the contemporary 
approach to cancer care that sees the agency and the regional 
health authorities work together to plan, deliver, and evaluate 
cancer services in the province. The Government of 
Saskatchewan has significantly increased its investment in 
cancer prevention and treatment services. This legislation 
reinforces the roles and expectations of the agency and the 
regional health authorities in this mixed delivery model of 
cancer services. 
 
This legislation also provides a framework for Saskatchewan to 
continue to provide high-quality, patient-focused, sustainable, 
well-integrated cancer prevention and treatment services today 
and into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier today and just prior to question period, I 
introduced in your gallery a number of members of the 
committee that advised on the content of this Bill. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I once again want to acknowledge the 

contributions of Mr. Gary Semenchuck who is the Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Bob Allen who is the chief 
executive officer, and others on the committee such as Dr. Ten 
Suan Goh, the executive director of the Allan Blair Cancer 
Centre; Ms. Heather Stuart, privacy officer and the director of 
the cancer registry; and Mr. Jon Tonita, director of program 
evaluation and surveillance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through this committee, the management and 
board have been consulted in the preparation of this legislation 
and have expressed support for the objectives of accountability 
and transparency that are central to this legislation, as well as its 
support for the mixed delivery model of cancer care in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to improving the 
prevention and treatment of cancer in Saskatchewan. We will 
provide leadership in establishing the framework for efficient, 
accountable services offered by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Cancer Agency Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54, The Cancer Agency Act be now read a second 
time. The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly this afternoon on second reading of Bill 
54, An Act respecting the Provision of Cancer Care Services 
and the Cancer Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the period of time that I had the opportunity 
to be the official opposition Health critic, I came very much to 
appreciate and have a great deal of respect for the work and the 
dedication of the cancer agency in our province. It has been 
absolutely inspiring for me to see the dedication and 
commitment of these health care professionals to doing 
everything they can to provide superior cancer care treatment to 
the citizens of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in every instance when I had the opportunity to 
meet, particularly with the CEO, Bob Allen, he was very 
helpful in terms of articulating the vision and direction and 
aspirations that the agency had for improving the delivery of 
services to our province and the people that need their care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cancer is a disease that brings fear into the hearts 
of most people when they hear that they may or someone near 
to them may indeed have this dreaded disease. And even though 
this is in many cases a very serious and problematic diagnosis, 
it also should be recognized that through work of individuals 
like those in the cancer agency, great strides have been made in 
many types of cancer and great progress has been made in the 
treatment and care of cancer patients. And I think that it’s 
important to recognize and to express the gratitude of this 
Assembly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan for the 
cancer agency for the tremendous work that they’ve done. 
 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, is very 
important both to the cancer agency and also to the regional 
health authorities because by updating this legislation it changes 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

some of the details and the professional arrangements whereby 
these organizations work together in order to provide health 
care services to our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation is important. It’s fairly significant, 
and it’s fairly extensive. And I know that the current official 
opposition Health critic, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, is very much looking forward to having a 
meeting with the cancer agency and their officials in order to 
discuss and make sure that this legislation meets the needs of 
the agency — not only for today but going forward into the 
future — as they exercise their mandate to provide superior care 
to the citizens of our province. 
 
In order to allow that consultation to take place, Mr. Speaker, in 
a very timely way, at this moment I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 54 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, The Regional Health 
Services Act came into force in August 2002 and established 12 
regional health authorities to replace 32 health districts that 
previously provided most health services to Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with The Cancer Agency Act, The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 takes the 
accountability framework that currently governs regional health 
authorities and health organizations and extends it to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the changes affecting the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency were originally considered when regional health 
authorities were enabled in 2002. At that time the government 
chose to concentrate on the establishment of the health 
authorities with changes to the cancer agency’s legislation to 
follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will bring the cancer agency into 
line with the standards that currently apply to regional health 
authorities. These include more direct accountability to the 
Minister of Health, greater public access to the decision-making 
process, and a clearer delineation of which matters are the 
responsibility of the organization’s board and management and 
which matters require prior ministerial approval. 
 
Many of the changes in this legislation and in The Cancer 
Agency Act are consistent with practices that the cancer agency 

has already adopted prior to any legislative requirements. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Regional 
Health Services Amendment Act, 2006. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 51, The Regional Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on the second reading of Bill No. 51, An 
Act to amend The Regional Health Services Act. Mr. Speaker, 
as in my prior comments about the cancer agency, I think that 
it’s important that this legislation is considered in tandem if you 
like, because it does affect the relationship between the cancer 
agency and the regional health authorities in providing that 
umbrella of appropriate care for people that need cancer care in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that in addition to the fact that we have the 
legislative framework that’s going to allow greater 
co-operation, I think it’s important to acknowledge and to make 
sure that on the record we show our support for the fact that 
these agencies do in a very effective and efficient way work 
together in a collaborative process to make sure that no one is 
falling through the cracks in the delivery of care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if people receive the diagnosis and receive word 
from their family physician that they are indeed carrying this 
disease, it is something that immediately raises alarm bells. And 
I think all of us who are involved with providing care need to 
understand that this is a very, very important time in people’s 
lives and family’s lives, a time of great anxiety and a time of 
great worry. And we will have to do everything we possibly can 
to make sure that the delivery of service and treatment is 
seamless and that it is done in a very timely way so that people 
do not have to suffer and worry on waiting lists inordinately 
long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that it’s important that this legislation is 
done properly and that nothing is overlooked. And to allow that 
to happen so that our Health critic has the opportunity to talk to 
regional health authorities in addition to the cancer agency, at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 51 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Police and Peace Officers’ 
Memorial Day Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of an Act respecting a memorial day to honour police 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

and peace officers. Our government is proud to formally 
recognize the selfless contributions of fallen police and peace 
officers, as well as honour those who currently serve in these 
capacities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. ministers of Justice, Highways and 
Transportation, and Environment, and I, are honoured to give 
recognition of this day and be in the presence of the special 
guests seated in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are men and women who unselfishly 
dedicate their lives to ensuring the safety and well-being of this 
province and its people. Each year this memorial day Act will 
serve to remember those who have made the ultimate sacrifice: 
officers who have fallen in the line of duty. Mr. Speaker, their 
lives were not lost in vain. They died answering one of the 
greatest callings one can have. They died in service of their 
fellow person. 
 
Peace and police officers are vital to protecting our safety, our 
freedoms, and our way of life. They keep our highways safe, 
protect our borders, maintain peace and order in our courts of 
law, keep our communities safe by guarding and rehabilitating 
those who break the law, protect our environment and natural 
resources, and enforce the criminal law within Saskatchewan 
and across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a society we sometimes take for granted the 
vital role that police and peace officers play in our everyday 
lives. The tragic events on March 4, 2005, in Mayerthorpe, 
Alberta, where we lost four members of the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police, one of whom Brock Myrol was born in 
Outlook, Saskatchewan, has forced us to once again re-examine 
our values on a personal, provincial, and national level. Because 
of these horrific events, the public has gained a deeper level of 
respect and appreciation for the important role that police and 
peace officers play in our daily lives. 
 
Keeping Saskatchewan citizens safe is a top government 
priority. Police and peace officers are vital to achieving this 
objective. Mr. Speaker, establishing this day formalizes the 
province’s commitment and support of police and peace 
officers in Saskatchewan. It will also further commemorate the 
sacrifice that many officers have made in the line of duty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation is consistent with the 
federal government’s approach to declare the last Sunday in 
September of each year as Police and Peace Officers’ National 
Memorial Day. 
 
Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read into the record 
the names of the peace officers that have lost their lives in 
Saskatchewan: Stanley Blythe, John Sangster, Harold 
Thompson, Alfred Newland, Murray Doell, Arthur Haugen, 
Patricia Sharber, Kevin Misfeldt, and Breton Thomas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I formally move second reading of The 
Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 49, The Police and 

Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act be now read a second time. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition is pleased to 
support the second reading of this Bill. During my time as the 
Justice critic, I’ve enjoyed meeting and spending time with 
police officers. I’ve often said that I think any elected official 
— whether it’s a school board trustee, a councillor, mayor, 
MLA, or otherwise — should be required to do a ride-along so 
they have some understanding of the nature of work that’s done 
by our police officers. It’s just after a year since the tragic 
incident at Mayerthorpe, Alberta. I think it’s time that this 
legislature and other places in the country recognize the 
ultimate sacrifice that these officers have made. 
 
Usually, Mr. Speaker, it would be the practice of the opposition 
to want to adjourn debate so that they would have time to 
debate, review, consult, and allow other members to speak to 
this Bill. Today we want to take the unusual step of allowing 
this Bill to proceed directly forward. We want to break with 
tradition to show our support to the officers that are here today, 
and we want to ensure that this Bill is passed in a timely manner 
so that memorial day can take place in the year 2006. We want 
to commit to the members opposite and to the members in the 
gallery that we want to ensure that this Bill has speedy passage 
and that we will do everything that we can so that it passes 
during this session. 
 
We want to thank the officers for their continuing hard work. 
It’s the least that we can do to stand with them in recognizing 
their fallen comrades. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
that Bill No. 49, The Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day 
Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Corrections and 
Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — I move that Bill No. 49 now be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 49 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



April 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Bill stands 
referred. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 

2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 59, The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
I’m very pleased to outline for all members the background and 
substance of the series of amendments to The Education Act, 
1995 that are included in this amending Bill. 
 
The Education Act, 1995 provides the fundamental statutory 
underpinning for the provision of K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] education programs in our province. It sets out the 
governance structure of service delivery through locally elected 
boards of education. 
 
Members will appreciate that in view of the broad range of 
matters covered by the Act and as part of the ongoing 
restructuring of our education system, there is a constant need 
to update its provisions to reflect changes in the system to 
remove outdated provisions and to address issues of law, policy, 
and administration as those issues arise. Mr. Speaker, in a 
moment I would like to outline each of the specific amendments 
involved. 
 
But first however, I would like to emphasize that these 
amendments have been prepared in consultation with our 
provincial partner organizations in education: the Saskatchewan 
Association of School Business Officials, Urban Municipal 
Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan, Rural Municipal 
Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan, the League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association, Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, and the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak briefly about each of the 
categories of amendments in this Bill. First, there are a series of 
amendments dealing with the establishment of school 
community councils as the local governance model within the 
context of school division governance. The amendments will 
give boards the authority to establish school community 
councils in every provincial school as the legislated mechanism 
for parent and community engagement and local voice in 
education across the province. They will be comprised of 
parents, community members including First Nations 
communities, students, principals, and teachers, and they will 
be truly representative of each individual school’s community. 
 
Their specific purpose is to develop shared responsibility for the 

learning success and well-being of all children and youth, and 
encourage and facilitate parent and community engagement in 
school planning and improvement processes. 
 
In order for school community councils to be established in 
every school, changes in The Education Act, 1995 are required 
to disestablish the current legislated district boards of trustees 
and local school advisory committees. These changes include: 
repealing provisions of the Act regarding membership, election, 
meetings, and duties and powers of the district board of 
trustees; repealing provisions of the Act regarding 
establishment, membership, and functions and duties of local 
school advisory committees; adding provisions to the Act 
regarding duties and powers of the board of education with 
regards to the establishment, election, implementation, and 
operation of school community councils in every school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to emphasize that school community 
councils will address the need for parents and community 
members to be actively engaged in the decision making for their 
boards of education. And it’s even more important in our new, 
larger, restructured school divisions. These councils will ensure 
that both urban and rural residents will have access to the same 
opportunities for involvement in their children’s learning and 
the same framework of local governance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other amendments in the Bill include the 
amending of the fiscal year in The Education Act, 1995, and 
other relevant legislation in order to change the school division 
and conseil scolaires fiscal year from January 1 to December 
31, to a period that corresponds with the school year, September 
1 to August 31. The school divisions have requested this change 
in the fiscal year of school divisions and conseil scolaires in 
order to facilitate administration and accountability as it links 
the financial planning and reporting cycle to the school year. 
 
The change will be implemented in two stages. A transitional 
fiscal year will cover the period from January 1 to August 31, 
2006. And the first full new fiscal year will cover the period 
from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 2007. Mr. Speaker, there 
will be no change to the process or timing of setting mill rates 
or to the process of collecting and disbursing taxes to school 
divisions. This will not change the way in which K to 12 
operating grants are calculated or paid. This amendment will, 
however, strengthen planning and accountability by matching 
the fiscal year with the school division’s natural business cycle 
and will facilitate meaningful financial and outcome reporting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the other amendments in this Bill either deal 
with straightforward administrative matters or can be described 
as housekeeping or consequential amendments. And I will give 
you a very brief description. The Bill includes the updating of 
terminology in The Education Act, 1995 so that it more 
accurately describes current practice with regard to the 
Department of Learning’s core curriculum. There will be no 
significant change in intent or practice for school divisions. 
 
And lastly, housekeeping amendment to change the name of the 
Saskatchewan Correspondence School to technology supported 
learning. This change is a result of the amalgamation of the 
Saskatchewan Government Correspondence School and the 
learning technology unit. 
 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, all of the amendments that I’ve outlined contribute 
to ensuring that The Education Act, 1995 remains up to date 
and that it continues to serve the various needs and interests of 
all those involved in the delivery of K to 12 education services 
to Saskatchewan students. And as I’ve previously indicated, the 
Bill has been prepared in consultation with our education 
partners. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move that Bill No. 59, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 59, The Education Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 59, An Act to amend The Education Act, 
1995. Interesting to hear the minister’s points. The main one is 
the creation of new school community councils which would 
really replace the old local school councils, school boards. And 
now these are the new councils for the new amalgamated school 
boards. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, the trustees are really volunteers at 
the local level, doing everything from planning to helping at the 
local school events and in many cases being on call 24 hours a 
day at local schools for all sorts of emergencies and types of 
activities. So it’s certainly been a very valuable group of 
individuals and really they’ve been really a core of the 
volunteer work that’s done at the school level. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve also taken part in the past in helping 
to determining who to hire and different aspects that the school 
divisions would rely on their input as well to make the local 
school work and be as efficient as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also spoke about changing the fiscal 
year to accommodate the changes. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
the changes to the amalgamation of the school divisions 
certainly has caused a lot of upheaval in various communities, 
closure of offices, people being . . . loss of jobs in certain 
communities. I know certainly there have been loss of jobs in 
my hometown of Biggar. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, schools is such an important part of a 
community. It’s certainly been a tremendous concern in 
communities around the province that have lost their schools 
and once the moratorium is lifted, I’m sure — by looking at the 
way the grant structure is — they’ll probably be looking at 
many more closures. And you only have to look at the Weyburn 
school division which is called . . . The new name is South East 
Cornerstone. They are taking a 56.81 per cent decrease in 
operating grants. And so that’s very . . . I mean that’s a very 
serious situation that is going to take place in that school 
division and many other school divisions around the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will certainly look at this Bill very 
carefully. We’ll speak to the stakeholders. And at this time, I’d 
like to move to adjourn debate. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading on Bill No. 59 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
excellent work of the policy field committees on Human 
Services as well as Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:56.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1230 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1230 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Excellence in Policing Service Awards 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 A Role Model and Friend Retires 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Nekaneet First Nation and Swift Current Agree to a Non-Smoking Casino and Performing Arts Centre 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Prince Albert Resident to be Inducted into Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Vision for the Future 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
 Regina Open Door Society Honours Welcoming Spirit of Employers and Businesses 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
 Parties’ Nominations for Weyburn-Big Muddy Constituency 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1234 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Future of Prairie Rubber Corporation Plant in Assiniboia 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
 Crop Insurance Premiums 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1240 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
 Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
 



 

 Bill No. 49 — The Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1244 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


