
















































Hansard: October 27, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 2A  FRIDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 9 
 October 27, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again today on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills and 
present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the 
community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise on 
behalf of the people who are concerned about the Bruno access 
off Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
to Highway No. 5. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Allan, 
Watrous, Bruno, and Florida. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present this morning to do with the access road to 
Bruno off Highway No. 5. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
Highway No. 5. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Saskatoon and Bruno. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition signed by citizens concerned with the serious 

condition of the access road off Highway No. 5 to Bruno. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access off 
Highway No. 5. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Saskatoon, Humboldt, and Wakaw. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition regarding the Bruno access road off Highway 
No. 5. The current condition of this highway is actually very 
hazardous, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
Highway No. 5. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the Bruno 
area. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition that is calling for improvements to Highway No. 5 at 
the Bruno turnoff. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Meacham and Bruno and I’m pleased to be able 
to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition today with citizens who are concerned about the safety 
at the turnoff for Bruno on Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, Humboldt, 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I have a petition that I’d like to present on behalf of 
people from Estevan who are very concerned about the future of 
the Estevan Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Estevan, Bienfait, and Redvers. 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from the citizens of Biggar who are opposed to possible 
reductions of their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people concerned 
about the Bruno access road off Highway No. 5, in need of 
serious repair. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
Highway No. 5. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by residents of Bruno, St. Benedict, and 
the city of Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to keep the 
highway section shop in Watrous open. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Sask Highways 
employees who would be affected by such a possible 
closure. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Imperial, 
Humboldt, Simpson, Watrous, and Manitou Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain 
open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan highway employees who would be affected 
by such a possible closure. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Watrous, 
Young, Simpson, Humboldt, and Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise to read a petition about people that are concerned with the 
Highway 5 access to Bruno. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
Highway 5. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon, 
Carmel, and Bruno. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop at Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Manitou Beach, and Young. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition calling on the 
Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan. I’ll read the 
prayer. It is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain 
open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who would be 
affected by such possible closures. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by citizens from the 
towns of Young, Watrous, Zelma, and Nokomis. And it is my 
pleasure to present this on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
honour and a privilege to rise with a petition today on the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous, 
Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain 
open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who will be affected 
by such possible closure. 
 

This petition from the people of Young, Saskatoon, and 
Watrous. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to rise today to join my colleagues in presenting a 
petition. This one is regarding the Bruno access highway off 
Highway 5. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway 5. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people of 
Bruno, Regina, and McLean, and I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY 
STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker presents the 
seventh report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Chair of the 
House Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before moving the 
concurrence motion, I would like to make a few comments, if I 
may. 
 
Mr. Speaker and members of the House, I think today is an 
important milestone in the future of our Assembly. Today we’re 
going to change the rules of this House in a way that I think and 
I know are for the betterment for all of our members. 
 
In doing so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the work 
that has gone before the current efforts, and in particular the 
work of the member from Cannington, the member from 
Regina South, who were sponsors of the initial reforms and 
modernization that occurred prior or after 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building on that initiative and building on the new 
committee structure, it was, I think, only proper that early in 
this new session the Government House Leader at the time, the 
member from Douglas Park, and myself were able to initiate a 
trial basis of a permanent fall and spring sitting of the 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, I think that that has gone a long way 
into paving the way for the process that we are going to initiate 
with the motion today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we undertook as a committee, a 
subcommittee of the Standing Committee on House Services, to 
survey our neighbouring Western provinces and to take the time 
to get their advice and their wisdom. And the Government 
House Leader, myself, Mr. Putz, and yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
took a few days to actually visit each of those provincial 
jurisdictions and to listen to what they had to say about their 
experiences in their own jurisdiction. 
 
But also I think, maybe even more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
we took the time to run past them in their wisdom what we were 
contemplating. And almost universally they said to us that they 
believe we were very much on the right track, and that we 
would find in practice very quickly that these new changes and 
the new rules we were contemplating were going to be of a 
tremendous benefit not so much to ourselves but to the 
constituents that we serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there are things that I think that are important to 
highlight, I think that that is the details. But the most important 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

concept, I think, that in these rule changes that should be 
recognized is that this is important work for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. It’s important for our constituents because I 
think what it’s going to do is give us the opportunity to be more 
accessible to those people who need to see their member of the 
legislature on a regular basis. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that 
is important. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The other aspect that’s important in this is that because we have 
a more predictable system, I think the public service, the 
professional civil servants of this province, will also be better 
served and better able to plan the process of drafting legislation, 
of preparing budget estimates, and knowing how the process is 
going to unfold in terms of proper and thorough consideration 
of both Bills and legislation and the government’s estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as well, as time unfolds, we will see that 
we will make greater use of the committee structure that was 
provided for us by the modernization changes that happened 
after the 2003 election, that we’re going to see the committees 
meeting intersessionally to a greater degree and making 
available the opportunity for citizens to comment directly on 
different aspects of legislation or the budget process. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that that is important. 
 
And I also think it’s important for our families and for members 
of the legislature to be able to be home in their constituency on 
a more regular basis when the legislature is sitting. You know, 
this is not necessarily the easiest job in the world, and at times 
we find the stresses of our responsibility spill over on to our 
families. And I think that these modernization changes are 
going to go a long way into making this job something that 
people will find more satisfaction in being accessible to their 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in moving this motion, I would like to make sure 
that the people of this province understand that this is an 
important bit of work. It’s not revolutionary. It’s evolutionary. 
We probably went from being one of the last jurisdictions in 
Canada to move to this structure, and we have now I believe 
with the committee structure that we have, actually probably 
have the most modern set of rules of the House of any 
jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
And so it’s with great pleasure that I move, seconded by the 
member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort, the Deputy Chair of the House Services Committee, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North, that the 
seventh report of the Standing Committee on House Services be 
now concurred in. The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As I listen to the precise words of the motion, as well as the 
words of the Opposition House Leader who participated in the 
subcommittee, it strikes me that there is one rule change that we 

should ought to have considered, we didn’t do — we have yet 
that dangling preposition at the end of this motion. 
 
But in spite of the dangling preposition, Mr. Speaker, let me 
concur in the motion that has been moved by the Opposition 
House Leader, and to express the government’s support as well 
for the rule changes, this modernizing of our legislature that we 
are bringing to the Assembly for adoption today. 
 
Many of my remarks, I think, will very much complement and 
reinforce those made by the Opposition House Leader. It seems 
to me that what we are doing here is accomplishing the final 
phase of a modernization process that has been ongoing for 
about seven years now. 
 
And I want to acknowledge the member for Cannington and the 
Minister of Finance today, who both, on behalf of this 
legislature, began to do some scrutiny in other jurisdictions, 
including other nations, that have led to changes that we’ve 
seen in our operation over the past few years. And I think what 
this does, Mr. Speaker, is it brings us to the conclusion of the 
modernization process that enables us to do our work in the 
efficient, professional kind of way in the context of modern-day 
standards. 
 
I want to emphasize one of the things that this enables us to do 
is something that many of us have felt for a long, long time is 
necessary, and that’s to better balance our responsibilities to the 
legislature with our responsibilities to our constituencies. And it 
has been the tradition since the beginning of time, in 1906 when 
this House first sat, that when we would come to this House it 
would be for five days a week. 
 
And the reality for many, many . . . in fact I would say virtually 
all of the members, Mr. Speaker, is that what that meant is 
during those session times that members had very little time to 
spend with their constituents, dealing with matters of concern to 
their constituents — including matters that were before the 
House — and unfortunately even less time to spend with their 
own families. And what this enables us to do is to balance that 
responsibility to the legislature with our constituents. 
 
And we certainly found as we met with people from other 
provinces — the Western provinces, Manitoba, Alberta, and 
British Columbia — that it has become common practice. All of 
them have the calendar and the Monday to Thursday sitting 
schedule that we’re adopting here, that we heard consistently 
that it was Friday became a regular day for members to do their 
constituency work. And that was important not only to them but 
to their constituents in a predictable kind of way. So I certainly 
endorse the better balance that this enables for us to do our 
duties. 
 
It also I think should ought to be noted with the changes . . . 
because there have certainly been some gives, both the 
traditional positions of the government, for example, to call, to 
name the beginning of the session and the opposition to 
determine the end of the session. Those have both been gives 
that have been done. But it is my judgment, having served in 
this House on both sides of the House over the period of my 
career, that what we have left the legislature with, with these 
rule changes, is a proper balance that serves the needs of both 
sides of the House. And if democracy is being served well in 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

the province, then it must enable both sides of the House to do 
their roles — providing scrutiny from the opposition, providing 
leadership by way of direction and legislation and budget on the 
part of government — to enable those jobs to occur in a 
responsible kind of way. And I am pleased about that. In my 
judgment, that at the end of the day serves the Saskatchewan 
people well. 
 
We learned as well from the other jurisdictions two things, that 
it was of great . . . When they converted — because we’re the 
fourth of the Western provinces to be going to this kind of 
schedule — that when they converted, it made the most 
difference to those, predictably, who lived the furthest. The 
further away you live from the capital city, the greater 
difference it made in terms of the change for you. And also for 
those members who have families at home, it also made a 
significant difference in terms of quality of life and that work 
and the family balance that is important to all of us in 
modern-day times. 
 
As the Opposition House Leader has mentioned, it was also a 
bit of a surprise to us, but on reflection we acknowledged, that 
the predictable calendar also made it possible for the 
government administration in preparation for the sessional 
things, either budget or legislation, to better plan their times and 
operate more efficiently. And that was a surprise benefit in 
other provinces that we anticipate to be here in Saskatchewan as 
well. 
 
I just want to point to one thing that the Opposition House 
Leader didn’t make specific reference to. One of the changes 
will enable us now, with all of the estimates of the budget with 
the exception of the Executive Council, they will all now be 
done in committee. And that will increase our efficiency 
because, as we have adopted some time ago, our scrutiny 
committees can meet two simultaneously which is somewhat 
unique in Western Canada and enables this legislature to be 
very, very efficient in accomplishing the public tasks of both 
the government and opposition and doing it in a more efficient 
way by doing two scrutiny committees at the same time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in concluding I want to say thank you to you 
for your involvement in the process. I want to acknowledge the 
very thoughtful and purposeful work that the Opposition House 
Leader did and also the guidance in terms of process that we got 
from the Deputy Clerk of the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
And I do want to acknowledge and say thank you to the 
Speakers, House leaders, members, and clerks from the 
provinces of Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia who 
helped us in our scrutiny to understand the experience of theirs, 
and to bring what I think are a good set of changes to the rules 
here in Saskatchewan. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I conclude 
by saying the government strongly concurs on the motion that is 
moved by the Opposition House Leader today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member from Melfort, seconded by the 
member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried, unanimously I believe. The 
Chair recognizes the Deputy Chair of the House Services 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present the 
eighth report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which I now lay on the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort and seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 7 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming: does SLGA have any VLTs purchased or leased 
from WMS Gaming? And if so, has SLGA had any 
contact with WMS Gaming regarding the VLT 
programming error? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 7 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming: has SLGA audited any winnings of its VLTs 
purchased or leased from WMS Gaming? 

 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 7 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming: what are SLGA’s standard auditing procedures 
for VLTs? Who performs these audits? And when were 
the procedures last updated? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 7 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: to date, with 
the breakdown for each year, how many applications did 
the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program approve? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 7 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: to date, with 
the breakdown for each year, how many applications did 
the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program reject? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 7 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: has the 
minister or staff attended any immigration trade fairs, 
conferences, or other events? And if so, who attended 
from the government? How much did it cost taxpayers? 
And were there any non-governmental immigration 
representatives attending since September 2005? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Though I wish it were 
for a different reason, it is still a pleasure and an honour to 
welcome some special guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who 
are here attending to see us pay tribute to the former member 
for Martensville — our friend, Ben Heppner. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you would permit, if members would permit 
as well, I would like to introduce to you and to the members of 
this Assembly Ben’s wife, Arlene; Ben’s son, Ken; Ben’s 
daughter, Lana; Ben’s other daughter, Nancy; and Whitney 
Friesen, a long-time constituency assistant for Ben Heppner. 
We welcome them here today, and I know members are looking 
forward to paying tribute to our friend and our colleague, Mr. 
Heppner, in just a short time from now. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature my daughter, Kara, who’s in your gallery. I think 
this is my first opportunity to do that. And I was very pleased 
that Kara could join us yesterday for the Throne Speech and 
that my son, who is a member of the Communications Squadron 
reserve, could join us yesterday as a member of the honour 
guard for the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Kara is a student at Canada’s United World College and 
needless to say, her mother and I are extremely proud of her. 
Members do not need to point out that obviously her beauty and 
brains come from her mother’s side of the family. I am already 
well aware of that. I trust, hope, that members would join me in 
welcoming my brilliant, beautiful, and brave daughter to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce two people from the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency. I have with me today Megan 
Lazeski and Mark Richards. They were with us yesterday for 
the Throne Speech and they called it fascinating. 
 
I hope everybody will join with me in welcoming them to this 
Assembly which belongs to them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
and a privilege to introduce, seated in your gallery, my mother, 
Lucy Cheveldayoff. Now many of you have met my mom and 
know her quite well and know that she used to spend all her 
time watching the legislative channel. 
 
But I must tell you, Mr. Speaker, I now have competition. My 
brother is on the show Making The Cut: Last Man Standing, so 
she’s spending her time half watching that, half watching this. 
But there’s a lot of similarities. In Making The Cut: Last Man 
Standing, what they can’t settle on the ice, they take to the 
boxing ring. And if they can’t settle it there, they go and they 
play beach volleyball. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it might be an idea, you know, the boxing 
ring. I don’t know, you know. The beach volleyball might be 
interesting. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would all members please 
join in welcoming my mother. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

Democracy in Action 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the last few days, our province has seen democracy 
in action. On October 25, the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] held their elections. It was an 
exciting race, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to take this 
opportunity to congratulate the FSIN’s new leader, Grand Chief 
Lawrence Joseph. Grand Chief Joseph is a familiar face to 
many of us, having served as the FSIN’s fourth vice-chief since 
1997. 
 
I would also want to congratulate Vice-chief Morley Watson for 
his re-election, the new Vice-chiefs Glen Pratt and Lyle 
Whitefish, together with current Vice-chief Guy Lonechild. The 
First Nations of Saskatchewan have an impressive leadership 
team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also want to extend thanks from this 
legislature to former FSIN Chief Alphonse Bird for his years of 
service and former Vice-chief Delbert Wapass. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as we know, this wasn’t the only example of 
democracy in action in the last few days. Some of our school 
divisions, many of our municipalities engaged the democratic 
process, and we would issue our congratulations to all of those 
who were re-elected and to all of those who are elected for the 
first time. 
 
I think what is most significant, Mr. Speaker, in that all of these 
elections involved a number of very hard-working, dedicated 
men and women who put their names forward for service. And 
we’ve often said the only enemy of democracy is indifference. 
And democracy is alive and well in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Our congratulations to all who participated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Death of Cancer Patient 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with deep regret that I stand today to inform my colleagues and 
all members of the Legislative Assembly of the passing of 
Emily Morley of Meath Park. Yesterday at 11:30, 57-year-old 
Emily Morley’s courageous battle with cancer came to an end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raised Emily’s case on April 19, 2006. She was 
told that she would have to wait three months to see an 
oncologist for the first time — three times the national average 
wait — that after already waiting several months for tests to 
confirm she had cancer. One week later, after the family came 
to this Legislative Assembly, Emily got to see an oncologist for 
the first time, Mr. Speaker, and was told that she only had three 
months to live. But Emily exceeded with intervention and was 
able to spend an additional three months with her family — her 
husband, Warren; her children, Karen and Chris; and her 
grandchildren. 
 
Emily was well known around the province because she wrote 
and circulated an Internet petition demanding the government 

address the long waits for treatment for cancer. There are 
thousands of names on this petition from all corners of the 
province, not only Saskatchewan but across Canada and the 
globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues on this side of the 
House and all members of the Legislative Assembly, I offer my 
deepest, heartfelt condolence to the Morley family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Vision for the Future of Saskatchewan  
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, last year our government outlined 
a broad vision for the future of Saskatchewan. A lot of progress 
has been made toward achieving that vision and even more 
progress is planned. Yesterday’s Throne Speech provided a 
clear focus for the coming year — making life better for today’s 
Saskatchewan families and building an even better future here 
for young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last time the Leader of the Opposition was in 
government, his party nearly ruined the province. But thanks to 
the hard work and sacrifice of Saskatchewan people, and 15 
years, 13 consecutive balanced budgets, and 14 credit upgrades, 
the province’s economy is re-energized and we’re forging 
ahead. 
 
Our government’s agenda has four cornerstones: make 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures; strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in 
improving public health care while reducing wait times and 
improving access to services; advance Saskatchewan as a leader 
in environmental protection and the green economy; and ensure 
that today’s Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our vision is of a province that is down to earth 
but where the sky is the limit. We are building an even stronger 
economy where everyone in Saskatchewan benefits, and we’re 
making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for young 
people to live, work, and build strong futures. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
month, October, is Breast Cancer Awareness Month. The pink 
ribbon represents the women that are bravely fighting this 
disease. The pink ribbon campaign supports the prevention, 
detection, and cure of breast cancer. Breast cancer is the most 
common cancer in Canadian women. In 2006 alone an 
estimated 22,200 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer 
and approximately 5,300 will die with it. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is proud to join the Canadian Cancer 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

Society and support the fight against breast cancer. The people 
of Saskatchewan are concerned about breast cancer. They are 
dedicated to finding a cure and supporting research. 
 
Recently Regina held the CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce] Run for the Cure in support of the breast cancer 
association, and people from across Saskatchewan took part in 
this great event. They helped to raise $23.4 million across 
Canada in support of the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation. 
 
A report released this month by the Health Quality Council 
shows women in Saskatchewan wait far too long for breast 
cancer care. The average wait is four months and for many 
women it is much longer than that. It is simply unacceptable for 
Saskatchewan women to have to wait this long for the care they 
need. 
 
I congratulate the Canadian Cancer Society once again naming 
October as Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan-Rivers. 
 

City of Prince Albert Declares Itself Violence-Free 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
my pleasure to rise today to announce that the community of 
Prince Albert has recently declared itself a violence-free city. 
Every year Prince Albert will host a rally on September 22 in 
commemoration of this declaration and reaffirm its pledge to 
make the city truly violence-free. The declaration includes strict 
bylaws and consequences and is the first of its kind in Canada. 
 
Participants this year were encouraged to sign a guest book 
commemorating the event. And throughout the evening the 
people of Prince Albert also had the opportunity to come 
forward with messages of peace and testimonials of what the 
declaration means to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, late September was chosen as the period for the 
rally because it coincides with national police and peace 
officers’ day. When we celebrate Prince Albert’s declaration, 
Mr. Speaker, we also celebrate the contributions of its police 
officers to peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
today in congratulating individuals like Sandy Pitzel and Julie 
Pitzel for their good work on this initiative, and to the city of 
Prince Albert for declaring itself violence-free. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Cabinet Membership 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we now know where that tired, old NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government’s priorities really lie. 
 
When the Minister of Community Resources was negligent in 
his duties to protect children, mendacious in his answers to this 
House, only to be shown up by his own deputy minister, that 
Premier did nothing. Another minister chose to question the 
direction the Premier was leading this government and that 
earned him an express ticket to the backbenches. 
 
Apparently the message for everyone else in cabinet from the 
Premier is this: if you put the most vulnerable in our society in 
jeopardy, you can keep your job; question the Premier and 
you’ll be sent to the nosebleed section of the government’s side 
of the House. This only serves to exemplify how that tired, old 
NDP government has chosen to focus on internal issues rather 
than the safety of children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Constituent Receives Literacy Award Source 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, every year the Council of 
Federation Literacy Award recognizes outstanding achievement 
and excellence in literacy. It’s presented annually to an 
individual in each province and territory in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to share with the Assembly that a 
constituent of mine, Carey Rigby-Wilcox, is this year’s 
Saskatchewan recipient of the Council of Federation Literacy 
Award. 
 
Ms. Rigby-Wilcox is a literacy learner, activist, and volunteer 
who has proven herself to be deeply committed to promoting 
and advancing literacy at the community, provincial, and 
national levels. Mr. Speaker, she is a former vice-president of 
READ Saskatoon’s Board of Directors. She is a board member 
of Saskatchewan Literacy Network and the Canadian Literacy 
Board of Directors, and she also speaks to various groups about 
the challenges faced by people with low literacy skills. 
 
Given recent cuts, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that list of challenges 
would now have to include the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Carey Rigby-Wilcox in her 
personal achievements and all she has done and continues to do 
in raising awareness, helping Saskatchewan build a social 
legacy, and enhancing the quality of life of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Carey Rigby-Wilcox is a worthy recipient of the 
2006 Council of Federation Saskatchewan Literacy Award. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

Combatting Population Decline 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you know 
what would be even better than Family Day in the province of 
Saskatchewan? What would be better if more families could 
have their kids stay in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That would be even better. That’s not happening 
under this NDP government; it’s not happening under the 
leadership of this Premier. In fact, consider his record, Mr. 
Speaker. Since he became the Premier, 18,000 people have 
voted with their feet and unfortunately left this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Last year in the middle of a boom, while even 
Manitoba was growing in terms of a net growth in population, 
what happened in NDP Saskatchewan under this Premier’s 
watch — 4,500 more people left, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
province’s record under the NDP. We’re at our lowest 
population now in nearly 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, to the Premier: why is his tired, old 
NDP government failing the province on the most important 
issue facing the province’s economy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again we see the 
considerable difference between the Saskatchewan Party 
opposite and this government, Mr. Speaker, a considerable 
difference. A Leader of the Opposition who stands and whines 
and complains will not remember, of course, the time when he 
was around government when the population exodus of this 
province was at record rates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see the people, we see the young people 
returning to Saskatchewan. We see young people in this 
province finding opportunities here. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
Throne Speech and a focus that says we are making life better 
for Saskatchewan families and we are building a better future 
here. And it’s a very specific plan and action that we have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I challenge the Leader of the Opposition, once, stand on his feet 
and give us a different idea. Show us a plan, show us a policy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s just not there because every 
day, every day the only policy over there is, how do you get to 
government? That’s the only question they ask, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the Premier 
would want to talk about the considerable differences on this 
issue we’re talking about now in population because here are 
his words, Mr. Speaker. He refers to Saskatchewan as the wee 
province. He’s done it publicly. He says that our province will 
be in and out of equalization, that that’s our fate. He’s got a 
minister on the front bench who said when people leave 
Saskatchewan there’s more left for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 

He’s got another MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
on that front bench over there that said it’s statistically 
impossible for Saskatchewan to grow at even the national 
average of 1 per cent population growth a year. That’s his 
government’s view — not shared, I would point out, by the 
people of this province or the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Premier, to the Premier: his record is 18,000 people have 
left while he’s been the Premier, 4,500 last year in a boom. 
Why is his tired, old government failing Saskatchewan on the 
most important issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to further evidence my 
point about the difference, Mr. Speaker, here’s a government 
that’s speaking positively about the province, a government that 
is encouraging young people to make their futures here, that’s 
building that future for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a copy of an email from a 23-year-old 
young woman who wrote to the Leader of the Opposition 
seeking opportunities from his point of view that she might 
explore to return to Saskatchewan. Now what did he do? Did he 
tell her, did he invite her in his response to this province? No, 
no. Did he talk to her about the 100,000-plus young people who 
are today working in this province? No. Mr. Speaker, what does 
he do? In a letter to this young woman, he goes into a political 
diatribe, Mr. Speaker, a political diatribe with no 
encouragement to that young person. 
 
Is it any wonder, is it any wonder young people have that kind 
of perception when we have a political party and a leader of a 
political party, Mr. Speaker, who promote this kind of trash talk 
about the province, Mr. Speaker? I say join us, join us, Mr. 
Speaker, join us in building a future for people, for families. 
Join us in building a better future for our young people here, 
and stop just leaving your life for getting in this office, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know I’ve written a lot of 
emails. I’ve written a lot of emails, but I’m pretty sure I’ve 
never engaged in a political diatribe, Mr. Speaker, in those 
emails to people who have written to the province. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago when the Premier announced his 
innovation television or advertising campaign for the country, 
here’s a quote from the Premier. He said, “Innovation is not a 
concept that business people outside of our province generally 
associate with Saskatchewan.” 
 
Well whose fault is that, Mr. Speaker? Last week he told the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial board — and get this — he 
said, you know what Saskatchewan needs to do? It needs to 
rebrand. Saskatchewan needs a new brand. I wonder if the 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

Minister of Industry whispered in his ear about that one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The NDP has been in government for 15 years. This Premier’s 
been in the chair for six years. If those things haven’t happened, 
it’s their fault. And would he explain to the people of the 
province why he’s so late coming to the conclusion that the rest 
of Saskatchewan arrived at years ago, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that Leader of the 
Opposition, that caucus have a very short memory, a very short 
memory. You’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, when we engaged in a 
campaign to tell the people of Canada, young people across the 
nation, about the wide open future that was here in 
Saskatchewan, what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They criticized 
us. They complained. They whined, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, when we unveil this new campaign to speak to 
Canadians, to business leaders across the country about the 
innovative nature of Saskatchewan, what do we hear from 
them? Complaints, Mr. Speaker. Complaints, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, he had an opportunity. He had an opportunity on a 
very personal basis to say to a young person who wrote to him, 
what is my future, what is my potential in Saskatchewan? Did 
he talk about the jobs? Did he talk about the opportunities? Did 
he talk about the jobs in his very own constituency of Swift 
Current? Not a word, Mr. Speaker. Not a word. You know what 
he said? Well I’m going to send your letter over to the Minister 
of Advanced Education because she knows the truth. She 
knows the answer and she’ll respond, and of course she has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time we had an opposition that wasn’t just 
whining and complaining, never mind tired and old. What we 
need is a government that’s inspired and bold, and that’s what 
we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting that the Premier 
of Saskatchewan is now saying that we need a new brand in the 
province of Saskatchewan? When we raised that, when I raised 
that in an economic paper and in discussions, in debate in this 
Legislative Assembly, his Minister of Industry I think blew a 
few blood vessels in his response. I think he might have pulled 
a muscle ridiculing that very same thing. He might have been so 
angry that he phoned a talk show, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure. 
 
But now the Premier is admitting that we have a branding 
problem. The Premier is admitting that businesses outside of 
Saskatchewan don’t see us as a place for innovation. Mr. 
Speaker, the question is, whose fault is that? Whose fault is it 
that in the middle of a boom we lost 4,500 people, Mr. Speaker? 
Whose fault is it that 18,000 have left since he became the 
Premier? It’s the government’s fault in large measure, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s their lack of vision, their lack of understanding on 
the economy. Why has he failed the province so badly on this 

most important issue, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have the third highest 
GDP [gross domestic product] growth in Canada in 2005. We 
have more people working in Saskatchewan than ever before. 
We have over 100,000 of our young people working here, Mr. 
Speaker. When I became Premier of this province, you know 
what the problem was? We had more workers and people than 
jobs. Today we have more jobs than we have workers to fill 
them. That’s a great challenge, Mr. Speaker. We’ve turned this 
economy around, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with no assistance, 
no assistance from the whining and complaining of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now with this strength in our economy we are opening 
opportunities for young people in our own province. We’re 
inviting people back. We’re inviting the new immigrants. We’re 
providing new opportunities for our Aboriginal young people 
because, Mr. Speaker, this government believes in the future of 
this province. We believe in Saskatchewan families. We’re 
going to make life better for those families. And just hang on to 
your seats, Mr. Speaker. Get ready for members’ statements. 
We are going to make life better for Saskatchewan families and 
a better future for our youth right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier was just 
hinting at what might come later today when the government, I 
think — we think — cuts the PST [provincial sales tax]. We 
would ask the voters of the province to remember, we would 
ask the residents to remember that if that’s the case, it’s this 
NDP government that campaigned on lowering taxes in ’03 and 
actually increased the PST a few months later. 
 
Now they might feel a little guilty about that. They might try to 
even do a little bit better than one point. But I think the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to see through it, Mr. Speaker. I 
think they’re going to see through it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is this: there’s actually going to be 
two family days next year. There’s going to be one in February, 
and then there’s going to be another one on election day in the 
province of Saskatchewan when a government is elected that 
actually has a plan to keep families together right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member, that Premier promised in 2001 that within five 
years, within five years he would reverse the trend of 
out-migration of youth — that we’d have net youth 
in-migration. He’s failed on the promise, Mr. Speaker, that he 
made five years ago. Is he prepared to admit that? And better 
yet, is he prepared to commit to an election soon and very soon 
so we can have two family days in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well one thing for sure about the Leader 
of the Opposition — he can’t stand good news, can’t stand good 
news. That is for sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say again, Mr. Speaker, 15 years ago this 
province was bankrupt, thanks to that party, Mr. Speaker. It 
took us 10 years, Mr. Speaker, to put the fiscal house in order. 
It’s taken us five years to re-energize the economy. We’ve done 
it, Mr. Speaker. Work is completed. We have a re-energized 
economy today providing opportunities for our people and new 
opportunities for young people and opportunities for 
investment. We’ve changed the climate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to ensure through this Throne 
Speech and our vision that benefits of this economy are 
available to today’s families. We’re going to ensure that we 
have opportunities for our young people right here. We’ve set 
out four cornerstones — the four cornerstones of youth, of 
environment, of health, and ensuring that benefits come to 
Saskatchewan families while we build this green and 
prosperous economy in diverse and growing communities. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a vision. That’s a vision with a plan. 
 
I challenge the Leader of the Opposition to go beyond the 
rhetoric, go beyond the rhetoric we’ve heard now for three 
years. Go beyond the election signs they’ve planted all over the 
province. Go beyond the expenditure of taxpayers’ money on 
his own commercials. Give us some substantive plan to debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Community Resources has a serious credibility 
problem. This morning I was provided with pages and pages 
outlining how the current and former ministers were aware of 
serious problems at the Oyate Safe House. They’ve known 
about these problems, Mr. Speaker, since July 2003. That’s one 
month after the safe house was open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could the minister say in March of this year 
that he was not aware of any problems? How could he stand 
outside this Assembly and tell reporters, and I quote, “We have 
no evidence there have been any problems . . .?” 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, as minister I want to point out that I welcome the 
scrutiny. And I want to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 
that we stand by the answers we gave, and that we fully intend 
to be very fair and open to the public and give as many 
interviews to the media as possible. 
 

What is really important, Mr. Speaker, is to point out to the 
people of Saskatchewan is that while we’re finding solutions, 
what the opposition wants to do is they want to talk about what 
the minister said when and where. And I welcome that scrutiny; 
I say that again. 
 
And the most important thing is I take the role very seriously, as 
this government does, to work with these most disadvantaged 
children, and to point out our solution is not to lock up these 
kids and talk about it. Our solution is to put some very tangible 
action plans, which we fully intend to do. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, documents I received this 
morning indicate that the current minister was again briefed on 
February 6, 2006 about the problems at the safe house over the 
last two years. 
 
Yet one month later here’s what the minister said. “We have no 
concerns as to glaring problems in relation to money 
management.” Here’s what he said days later. “We have no 
evidence there have been any problems . . .” Here’s what the 
minister said in June: the information that we had was that there 
was no problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister say these things when we 
know that he was fully briefed on these problems? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that I welcome 
the scrutiny on what’s been said when, where, and certainly to 
whom. I would point out that right now we’re spending an 
incredible amount of time trying to find solutions to make sure 
that we have a full response as indicated by the advocate — 
which is necessary — as indicated by the auditor and indicated 
by many, many people. We intend to follow that blueprint to 
make sure that we’re successful. And as I mentioned earlier, we 
take the role very seriously and as a minister we want to fix this 
problem. 
 
But what I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, which is really important, 
we have to go through the political games that that party likes to 
play on many, many issues. Their primary focus is to seek 
power no matter what they do and no matter what they say. And 
I’ll point out, on this side of the Assembly we take that role 
very seriously. We plan on putting in a full, a full court press to 
make sure we provide as many options to these children, to 
make sure that they’re taken off the street and given opportunity 
in life. That’s where we’re going to spend our time 
concentrating. In the meantime we’ll go through the process of 
explaining to that party what we said when. In the meantime 
we’ve got work to do in Saskatchewan. That’s exactly what we 
intend to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, Mr. Speaker, definition of 
taking it very seriously . . . He knew about it for three years. 
And if it hadn’t have been for a report in television, he would 
not have taken it at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says this government knew 
about the problems at the Oyate Safe House, and yet the safe 
house was not closed until after the media reports shed some 
light on how these young women were being endangered at the 
very place they’re supposed to be kept safe. Mr. Speaker, the 
Children’s Advocate says there were ongoing problems at the 
safe house. Mr. Speaker, it appears everybody knew about these 
problems except the minister. Would the minister care to 
explain himself today to this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister was aware 
that there was questions from Jeff Leo of CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] to an FOI [freedom of information] 
in which they asked information on the safe house. We were 
apprised of that fairly early. And given the fact that we knew 
Mr. Leo was looking into the safe house, we knew that they 
certainly had their problems in the early stages. 
 
And the information I got from the officials is the fact that these 
problems were resolved, things were moving forward, and 
Oyate was heading in the right direction. And given that 
information at that time, Mr. Speaker, I did indicate that things 
were moving forward with Oyate, things were fine with Oyate, 
because that’s the information that we got. Of course in 
hindsight after we hear from the auditor and the advocate, we 
find out there’s more problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most important thing is, as minister we’re 
apprised of some of the problems, and we knew that the 
problems were being resolved and there was good progress 
being made. And that’s why we made the statements that we 
made in this Assembly. And I point out again, our effort is to 
make sure that we put the work in necessary to make sure that 
these children have as much opportunity to get off the sex trade 
as possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a shame that it has to be 
the auditor and the Children’s Advocate that explains there’s 
been issues, when they knew from July 2003 there were issues. 
Why wouldn’t they respond and take up the issue on their own 
initiative, except to be forced there by public scrutiny? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these children are being sacrificed. They were 
supposed to go to a safe haven. The minister, this government, 
failed those young women. Mr. Speaker, the problem of sexual 

exploitation of children continues. These girls are still out there 
on the street, and now they have no place to go because of this 
government’s incompetence. Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell 
us where these children will sleep tonight? 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, the children that were out at Oyate are now within 
our own facilities, and we have many staff members that are 
committed to working with these children. So the answer to the 
question, the children are in our care and certainly they’re in our 
facilities. 
 
I will point out, Mr. Speaker, what’s really, really important on 
this issue is where we go from here. And I point out that the 
Children’s Advocate give us a good road map on what we need 
to do to be effective in terms of making sure that many options 
exist so that these children no longer participate in this unsafe 
activity. That’s what’s really important. 
 
And from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, I 
certainly welcome the scrutiny, but the most important thing is 
we’re going to spend much of our work on the solutions. And 
what I’d much rather do is take advice from the Children’s 
Advocate as opposed to the members opposite who are purely a 
political agenda and, Mr. Speaker, that is insulting to the 
process. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On listening to 
that previous answer I think we understand that this government 
does not understand the word responsible or honourable. And 
it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, when you listen to the 
Premier’s answers earlier when he clearly demonstrates that he 
doesn’t understand math or how to use a calendar when he 
suggests the Sask Party was responsible when the Sask Party 
was formed in 1997, not prior to 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s often said that punishment should fit the 
crime. However the NDP caucus seems to operate under a 
different set of rules. If you speak the truth, your career in 
cabinet is cut very short. However if you risk the lives of 
vulnerable children, you get to stay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Premier if he read the 
report of the Children’s Advocate on the Oyate Safe House. 
Because if he had, surely the Minister of Community Services 
would no longer be in cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what I planned out earlier 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

is that again I point out I welcome the scrutiny of what I said 
when, where, and to whom. And we’ll go through that process. 
To the people of Saskatchewan I say this: we’ll go through the 
process to satisfy that political agenda because we have to do 
that, because they want answers and we’ll give them answers. 
 
Secondly, what I want to do is I want to spend much more of 
my time, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan what . . . 
much more of my time working on the solutions. Where 99.9 
per cent of the work should be is on the solutions. Now what 
those guys opposite want to do is they’ll use any group, any 
organization for their political agenda. All they have is this 
grasp for power. And it doesn’t matter who they use in the 
meantime; it doesn’t matter what means they have to achieve 
that. All they want is power and they will continue using 
people. In the meantime we have work to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Support for Premier’s Leadership and Government Agenda 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Community Resources says he has to do it. He’s not doing it 
because it’s his responsibility. He could have come before the 
Public Accounts Committee, which invited him, but the 
government members blocked that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another well established principle of justice is 
fairness. Now we know that certain ministers . . . We know for 
certain that the former minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
isn’t the only person questioning the Premier’s leadership, yet 
the former minister of Public Safety is the only person who has 
paid the price for doing that. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? To the 
Premier: when will the other conspirators receive their just 
rewards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, well someone has just 
asked, where’s Brenda? Mr. Speaker, here again we see the 
difference. Here is a government with a vision for the province, 
a vision for Saskatchewan’s families, a vision for our young 
people, four cornerstones, a Throne Speech to debate, a plan, 
strategies, an eight-point plan in terms of education, skills 
training, and labour market development. 
 
What do the opposition want to do? They want to engage in 
politic, in politic, in politic. What’s the motivation, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s not to make life better for Saskatchewan families. 
Their only motivation is to try and make life better for the 
Saskatchewan Party. Well I’ll tell you that if anything is an old 
and tired agenda, it’s that agenda. If anything is inspiring and 
bold, it is the agenda of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We on this 
side of the House are concerned about the future of 
Saskatchewan and the youth in this province. And in fact we 
just elected the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, the 
youngest person in this House, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 
future of youth in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, only one person was 
forced to leave cabinet. What about the others? What about the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation? When is he going to 
be forced from cabinet? What about the Minister of 
Government Relations? What about the minister of . . . the other 
ministers of Highways? Even the new Minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety was less than glowing in his support of the 
Premier. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when he was sworn in, he failed 
to find the word yes when asked if he would support the 
Premier’s leadership. And this, Mr. Speaker, was just after he 
was sworn in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is only one person paying the price for 
questioning the Premier’s leadership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cannington wants to talk about the youngest member. I think 
the member from Moosomin was once the youngest member in 
the legislature when he was part of the Conservative 
government, Mr. Speaker. And he wants to talk about young 
members. Well our Minister of Finance is a young man, a 
young member. But you know, it’s been 10 years since he was 
elected, Mr. Speaker, and I predict it’s going to be well more 
than 10 years before the member from Weyburn, now elected, 
ever sits on the government side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are here, Mr. Speaker, to debate vision and 
plan for the future of Saskatchewan, our families, our young 
people. This government lays out an agenda, a plan. This 
government lays out a vision. We are committed, Mr. Speaker. 
We are committed to working for Saskatchewan families, 
making their life better. We’re working for young people. 
We’re not in here just to play the politics as are the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Tax Changes 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday in the Speech from the Throne we indicated that our 
focus over the next year will be making life better for 
Saskatchewan families. We indicated that would be our focus in 
terms of strengthening public health care, advancing 
environmental protection, building an even stronger future for 
young people, and ensuring Saskatchewan families enjoy the 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

benefits of our strong and growing economy. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, our economy is strong. Today, after more 
than a decade of work, we are a have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Today Saskatchewan has the third 
strongest economy in the nation and is one of only two 
provinces to have consistently outperformed the national 
average for economic growth in each of the last three years. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we are enjoying a fiscal freedom that is a 
result of 13 balanced budgets and 14 consecutive credit rating 
upgrades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Today, Mr. Speaker, we have gone 
from having one of the worst credit ratings in the country to one 
of the best. We have gone from having one of the highest 
marginal tax rates to one of the lowest. We have invested in 
health care, we have invested in education. We have increased 
access to services and increased opportunities for young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have invested in tax cuts for businesses in 
industry to help stimulate further economic growth and 
development. Our vision, our plan for a strong and prosperous 
Saskatchewan is working. And indeed, Saskatchewan is 
working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Today we have a record number of 
people employed in the province. In the past year alone, we 
have seen nearly 19,000 new jobs created, including more than 
23,000 new full-time jobs. This means opportunities for young 
people. It means more Saskatchewan families have more 
spending power and it means there is stronger consumer 
confidence. It also means increased sales and increased profit 
for our businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we are in a period of sustained economic 
growth. As such, I am pleased to announce that effective 
midnight tonight the sales tax will be lowered from 7 to 5 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, this two point cut on behalf . . . Mr. Speaker, this two 
point cut to the PST represents a $325 million tax saving for 
Saskatchewan families and business and municipalities each 
and every year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — With this, we have cut taxes by half a 
billion dollars this year alone. And since this Premier took 
office we’ve reduced the tax bill for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses by nearly $650 million a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in the coming days I’ll 
table legislation to enact this change although it is effective 
midnight tonight. It will be accompanied by legislation to adjust 
the input tax credit for manufacturing and processing 
accordingly. It will increase tobacco taxes to maintain the 
prices. And to maintain . . . We will maintain the sales tax credit 
for lower income families at existing levels. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, together we are building 
a better future for Saskatchewan families, and in so doing we 
are making life better for Saskatchewan people right here at 
home. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to ask you, and I would like to ask all members of 
this House to imagine, maybe just close your eyes for a minute 
and imagine for a moment that we are back in the 2003 election, 
Mr. Speaker. Imagine what you would hear at that time going 
back three years to that election, Mr. Speaker. You’d hear that 
Premier and that government saying trust me, trust the NDP, no 
new tax increases, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we heard in the 
last election. That’s what we heard in the last election. 
 
We heard other things. We heard other things. Just imagine 
you’re back there in that election campaign. We heard about 
greedy corporate hucksters. Yes we did. We heard about 
governments running ads saying reducing taxes would be the 
end of social programs in our province, Mr. Speaker. You don’t 
need much of an imagination to think back only three short 
years ago what this government was saying, what this 
government was saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And imagine, imagine what Saskatchewan people felt when the 
first economic thing that this government did, the first thing that 
they did, Mr. Speaker, was raise the PST. They broke their 
promise. They erased any credibility they might have on any 
economic issue, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they did. Imagine 
how Saskatchewan people felt after that election. They felt 
betrayed, Mr. Speaker. Imagine now, Mr. Speaker, how people 
feel three years later. Imagine how they feel, Mr. Speaker, three 
years later when this government through that tax increase that 
they said they wouldn’t do took $500 million out of the 
provincial economy. Imagine how people feel now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what they did. That’s what they’re trying to 
do now. They’re trying to say that it’s time to make up for past 
mistakes, to buy people back with their own money, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, they couldn’t be bought by this government and the 
people of Saskatchewan will not be bought with their own 
money, Mr. Speaker. They will not, Mr. Speaker. The best 
before date has expired on this government, Mr. Speaker, make 
no mistake about it. And one day, one day that Premier and that 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

government will get the courage to call an election, and it will 
be welcomed by members on this side of the House and it’ll be 
welcomed by families and people across this province. We will 
wait for that day, the true family day in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I want to thank, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the minister for finally, finally admitting something that 
the opposition and the people have known for years now. This 
NDP government is on the wrong track, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
been on the wrong track for three years and now they’re saying, 
they’re admitting it, that they were wrong. 
 
Now just months before the next election they’re finally 
admitting it was wrong in 2003, it was wrong in 2003, to 
mislead the people of Saskatchewan during the last election 
campaign. I suppose we should congratulate the minister for 
seeing the light and finally returning the money back to the 
people of Saskatchewan, the people whose money it is. But that 
would be like congratulating the grinch, Mr. Speaker, the grinch 
for finally returning the presents that he took away only three 
years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people understand and remember 
that this tired and old NDP government, that’s it this 
government that raised their PST after the last election. They 
remember that Boughen report, Mr. Speaker. The Boughen 
report that recommended increasing the PST and using that 
money to provide long-term sustainable property tax relief. 
What happened, Mr. Speaker? They read half the report; they 
increased taxes, but they forgot to read the other half, Mr. 
Speaker. And also, Mr. Speaker, remember what this NDP 
government did with that recommendation? They raised taxes 
all right but they did nothing to provide for long-term property 
tax relief. Nothing to this day, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a shame. 
 
I suppose this tired, arrogant NDP government will spend today 
trying to brag about reducing the PST. But the people of 
Saskatchewan understand, Mr. Speaker, that the only reason, 
the only reason the NDP would ever return the money back to 
the people voluntarily is because they are in deep trouble 
politically, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to be a 
political junkie to know that. You only have to look at the 
returns from the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election and you’ll 
know that this government is in deep political trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people understand that their 
hard-earned tax dollars have been swallowed up by this NDP 
government and they are still sitting on a mountain of money 
from oil and gas revenues. They understand — and certainly the 
voters of Weyburn-Big Muddy understand — that this old and 
tired NDP government is more interested in trying to stay in 
power than fixing the health care system or repairing this 
province’s crumbling highways. 
 
And Saskatchewan people understand, Mr. Speaker, that a PST 
reduction just gets us back to where we were when we began. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the NDP shuffle — one step backwards, two 
step forwards. Then they’ll bring something else out. It’ll be 

two steps forward, one step back. And where are you, Mr. 
Speaker? You’re right where you began. And you know what, 
Mr. Speaker? When you’re standing still in this province, 
you’re falling farther behind and that’s what we’re seeing here 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s the NDP shuffle. 
 
It’s no doubt that Saskatchewan people deserve a break from 
this NDP government, but that break should be more than just a 
cut in the PST. It should be a break from high property taxes, 
Mr. Speaker. It should be a break from crumbling highways, 
Mr. Speaker. And it should be a break from the labour shortage 
that is the largest single barrier to economic growth in our 
province today, Mr. Speaker. It should be a break from the 
continued out-migration of our young people, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, most importantly, most importantly it should 
be a long break from this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Unparliamentary Language 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day I wish to 
speak to a point of order. Earlier this day the member for Wood 
Mountain, in his member statement, did use the word 
mendacious in a way that imputed dishonourable action on the 
part of another member. I found it rather personal and 
unparliamentary. I want to bring it to his attention and ask that 
that word not be used in that fashion again. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I also have several items that I wish to table at 
this time. I have received . . . Order please. Order please. I have 
received a letter from the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan 
which advises the Assembly that the members whose names are 
Kowalsky, Hagel, McCall, Harper, Junor, McMorris, and 
Harpauer form now the current membership of the Board of 
Internal Economy effective September 15, 2006, which I now 
table. I also wish to table the members’ accountability and 
disclosure statements for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2006. 
 
I also wish to table at this time, the New Democratic Party 
caucus financial statements for the year ending March 31, 2006. 
And I also wish to table the Saskatchewan Party caucus 
financial statements for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2006. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to move to a 
condolence motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier’s requested leave to move to a 
condolence motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 
the close of my remarks, I will make the formal motion of 
condolence to note the passing of Ben Heppner. And the motion 
will be seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we do our condolence motions in this 
legislature very often it will be for members whom some of us 
may have known or perhaps only a few of us may have known. 
It is much, much rarer and therefore all the more difficult when 
we pay tribute to a colleague; someone we have all known and 
all worked with, and someone we had all hoped would be here 
with us today. 
 
It is certain that Ben Heppner will be fondly remembered by 
members of both sides of this House. We will pay tributes to 
him here today, and of course hope that in some small way our 
tributes will help bring a measure of comfort to Ben’s family, 
his wife, Arlene, his children and grandchildren, and to his 
many friends, both within this Chamber and beyond this 
Chamber. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that clearly all members knew 
and respected Ben and his abilities in this House, but clearly his 
closest colleagues will have been in his caucus and we extend 
our sympathies to his close friends in his own caucus. 
 
I think it is very safe to say — there would be no dispute about 
this — Ben Heppner led a very, very full life. Now we know his 
work here in the Assembly. We know his dedication. We know 
his passion as he served as an MLA. But in many ways that was 
only the most recent chapter in Ben Heppner’s story — a 
teacher, school administrator for many years, successful 
businessman, mayor of the town of Rosthern, Member of the 
Legislative Assembly for Martensville. In addition to all, he had 
seemingly endless time for community service and community 
support and community activity. He was very active in his 
church — Sunday school teacher and a board member. He was 
active in the army cadets, the Seeger Wheeler Farm, and a host 
of other community endeavours. He found time in his own life 
for pursuits he enjoyed — hunting, fishing, and restoring 
vintage automobiles. 
 
Ben Heppner and I may have had our political difference, but 
there was no difference when we were on the floor of the 
Saskatoon car show and Ben was restoring and showing, and 
we fans were there to observe. 
 
In the last year and a half we saw another side of Ben Heppner 
that I’m sure his family knew but we certainly saw it. We saw a 
brave man who fought his own battle with courage and with 
dignity and then used that experience to help others. So it was 
last November that Ben introduced into this House the Bill to 
designate September as Prostate Cancer Awareness Month in 
Saskatchewan, making our province the very first Canadian 
jurisdiction to proclaim an entire month for prostate cancer 
awareness, and every member of this House was pleased to 
support that Bill. 
 
In some ways, Mr. Speaker, The Prostate Cancer Awareness 
Month Act is in this legislature a legacy of a man who found his 
way to translate his own struggle into a real benefit for others, 

and there is no question he will be missed here and missed far 
beyond here. With that, Mr. Speaker, I would then move the 
formal motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Benjamin Dave Heppner, who passed away on September 
24, 2006, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 
from 1995 until 2006 representing the constituencies of 
Rosthern and Martensville for the Progressive 
Conservative and Saskatchewan parties. 
 
Mr. Heppner was born on March 18, 1943 in Waldheim. 
He attended local schools before graduating from 
Briercrest Bible College in 1964. Mr. Heppner continued 
his education at the University of Saskatchewan from 
where he convocated with a Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor 
of Education degrees. Mr. Heppner married Arlene Fast on 
September 3, 1965, and together they had three children. 
 
A teacher by training, Mr. Heppner taught for 23 years in 
rural and city schools around Saskatchewan. He also 
served in an administrative capacity at three high schools. 
Mr. Heppner was a small-business owner operating a John 
Deere farm implement dealership and a lumberyard in 
Rosthern. 

 
Mr. Heppner was an active participant in the affairs of the 
communities in which he lived. He was very involved with 
his church and served in a number of capacities, including 
serving as chairman of the board of elders and as a Sunday 
school teacher. He was involved with the army cadets in 
Swift Current, the Community Bond Corporation, and the 
Seager Wheeler Farm committee. 

 
Mr. Heppner first sought to represent his community at the 
municipal level. He served as a councillor and as mayor of 
the town of Rosthern. He was elected to this Assembly in 
1995. He successfully retained his seat in the 1999 and the 
2003 general elections. He was a founding member of the 
Saskatchewan Party in 1997 and served as caucus Chair 
from its inception. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion of condolence moved by the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current with respect to Benjamin Dave Heppner. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to the 
Premier for those very elegant and articulate words of tribute to 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

our friend. I also want to say on behalf of the members of the 
opposition and I’m sure on behalf of members of the family, I 
want to thank the numerous members opposite who have 
reached out to Ben’s family, to our caucus, who were able to 
attend the funeral, and the many cards we received. And we 
received a number of them. And the member for Eastview sent 
a kind card, and I hate to name just one because there were a 
few others and we appreciate all of those. And let me offer that 
thanks on behalf of our caucus. 
 
On the Monday after Ben passed away, I phoned Arlene. I 
probably should have phoned sooner but I doubted my own 
strength to do it, and I wasn’t very stable when we talked on the 
phone. But of course Arlene was, and more about that in a 
moment. But she comforted me of all things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then she asked me if I would speak at the funeral, if I’d say 
a few words. And I said I’d be honoured to do that, hopeful I 
could get through it. And so I’m not going to go on at length 
today, Mr. Speaker. There’s a few things I would like to say for 
the public record, but I know there are other members who want 
to get a chance to pay tribute to Ben. 
 
[11:30] 
 
You’re going to hear in the course of those tributes today I 
think more of a focus on Ben as an MLA and as our caucus 
Chair because that’s how we knew him the best. But throughout 
all of this, throughout this very trying and tragic time and from 
his family, we’ve learned about Ben the father and the husband 
and the business person and the teacher and some of the things 
that the Premier has mentioned that Ben did in his life. 
 
And we can actually comment on each of those I think on this 
side of the House — and maybe members opposite, for those 
who have had the chance to talk to Ben — based on his own 
stories from those other parts of his life and phases of his life. 
Certainly it’s easy enough to do from a family perspective 
because Ben was so very proud of his family and very grateful 
for his partnership with Arlene, that he relied on very 
significantly for all he did. 
 
But even for me. I mean I didn’t . . . Ben Heppner actually 
taught in Swift Current. He would have taught at Irwin School 
when I was at Beatty. Those were two junior highs in Swift 
Current, so I never had Ben as a teacher. I’m pretty sure he 
taught industrial arts in Swift Current among other things. And I 
know a number of people that . . . they went to the same church 
at Trailview and some were pallbearers at the funeral. 
 
But I have met since someone who was actually a student, who 
lives in Swift Current now; someone who was a student of 
Ben’s when he taught, when he wasn’t in Swift Current. He’s 
an owner of a business in Swift Current, a very successful 
business. He’s recently moved there — I guess maybe not so 
recent; it’s been a number of years — this young entrepreneur. 
And he moved from Saskatoon where he was a successful 
lawyer and decided to get into the fast food business, and he 
moved to Swift Current. 
 
And when I first had the chance to meet him, because on 
occasion I may accidentally go to fast food restaurants, one of 
the very first things he said to me was, did I know Ben 

Heppner? And I said of course I knew him. He was at the time a 
caucus Chair as the MLA for Swift Current. And I think Darrell 
knew that I obviously would know Ben, and that’s what he 
wanted to talk about. He didn’t want to talk about politics. He 
didn’t want to talk about . . . The first thing on his mind wasn’t 
any political issue or the business or even Swift Current. He 
wanted to ask if I knew Ben and what did I think of Ben 
because he thought a lot of Ben. He confided that he may not 
have been the best behaved student, but Ben saw some great 
potential and intervened personally. And the rest of course is 
history in the case of this young individual and Ben’s 
relationship with him and his recollections of Ben as his 
principal. 
 
We’ve heard stories of Ben the entrepreneur. Ben was pretty 
good I think at business, although not perfect — nobody is. But 
I think Ben was good, from the stories he would tell us, 
although he would never brag about it. But there was the odd 
story of a deal that he had made that you could kind of get a 
glimpse of the fact that while being fair and conducting 
business with nothing but integrity, I think Ben had a talent 
there as an entrepreneur. And we heard some of those stories. 
Certainly he made a lot of deals with respect to cars — and the 
Premier has pointed that out — and trucks. 
 
And even for me he tried to provide some counsel. I have 
recently purchased a 1971 Plymouth Scamp, Mr. Speaker, 
which I did that in the fall. It seemed like an excellent idea at 
the time but it needs a little bit of work. And so the first person 
that I called prior to buying it — and I did mention this at the 
funeral — the first person I called was Ben. And I asked him 
about it because, you know, there is quite a trend nowadays — 
the Premier will know this very well better than I — but there is 
quite a popularity for muscle cars, specifically mopar muscle 
cars. The prices are, you know, they’re climbing. Values are 
climbing if you can have a nicely restored vehicle and maybe 
even more so than Chev and Ford, and I think Ben knew this. 
 
There is muscle cars, mopar muscle cars that I may be too 
cheap to purchase. They might be out of my reach. That would 
be your Challengers and your ’Cudas and your Chargers. But 
more of a maybe thrifty or some would even say a Mennonite 
muscle car might be a 1971 Plymouth Scamp with a 318 that I 
just found out yesterday is completely seized. And I phoned 
Ben, and I asked him about it. And I know he was trying to be 
encouraging. He said, well you know, I think that’s an A-body 
class, and the E-body classes are the Chargers and the 
Challengers and the ’Cudas. And those are the ones that are 
actually worth quite a bit, and I don’t have that kind. 
 
But so he was trying to be encouraging. He said it was a good 
. . . you know, the values of those were climbing, and it was a 
good engine if it ran. And like I said, I wish he was here today 
because I found out yesterday that it is seized. But, you know, I 
could just sense that he wanted to be encouraging, but he was 
also giving me the realistic advice that this may not be the best 
investment in terms of cars that I could make and there might 
be other choices. And that’s the way Ben was. 
 
Ben, I think was concerned for how people felt about any 
number of issues, including his constituents. But he was also 
very concerned about the truth and that people would know that 
as well. 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

So we know Ben the entrepreneur. And we know a little bit 
about Ben the educator. But as I say what we know best on this 
side is Ben the MLA and Ben the Chair of our caucus. And I 
think members opposite have come to know him through that 
role as well and probably seen glimpses of the Ben Heppner 
that we met unfortunately in an all too real way over the last 
number of months as he battled cancer. We miss him, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It was interesting yesterday. We elected a new Chair. 
Congratulations to the member from Lloydminster for receiving 
the support of caucus in that. Milt would be the first one . . . 
The member for Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, would be the first 
one to say, no one’s going to replace Ben. He did that job for us 
since the party’s inception. But, you know, Mr. Speaker, it was 
strange yesterday. It wasn’t a difficult . . . It wasn’t necessarily 
a difficult thing to do to elect a new Chair and to move on. And 
Ben made it easier. 
 
He made it easier as he met with so many of us, as we met with 
him and visited with him in hospital. He was always one to talk 
about what was next, what was going on, what about the . . . He 
wanted to talk a little bit about politics and also what was next 
in our, you know, in our lives personally, what was next in his 
family’s life. And in a strange way, yesterday he made it easier 
to replace him with a new permanent Chair for our caucus. 
 
I had the chance to visit with Ben in the hospital the last time he 
went into RUH [Royal University Hospital] and then before he 
went back to Rosthern into first at home for a while and then 
palliative care. And I’ll never forget those times. Those were 
great because as I said at the funeral, I think we all . . . I didn’t 
want to go. I didn’t want to see Ben without his hair or his 
beard, and I didn’t want to meet cancer and death, especially of 
someone so dear. And for all of us that did that, you know, we 
didn’t meet any of that in his room. We found Ben. Ben was 
still there with a twinkle in his eye. And he wanted to talk, 
sometimes mischievously, about the political situation that was 
going on in the province. He wanted an update on that. And, 
you know, he cheered us up. What kind of man is that, that 
would cheer us up? That’s what we’ll miss. 
 
We’re going to miss his sense of humour. He always had a good 
story or two at caucus. We’re going to miss the twinkle in his 
eye. And you’ll all, members of the opposite, even opposite will 
have known even when he was, you know, pointing that .44 
Magnum finger or taking off his glasses or, you know, from on 
occasion talking from his seat as he may have done, members 
will probably have seen that he would turn around and smile 
and wink. He never had an unkind word privately where 
members opposite wouldn’t have heard to say about any of 
them. 
 
But for him politics was very important and being partisan was 
okay. He felt very strongly that, you know, with all due respect, 
the folks over there should be over here and we should be over 
there. And he fought those pitched battles as hard as any in this 
Assembly and that too is why we’ll miss Ben. He did it 
sometimes with a little bit of sound and fury and often with that 
smile even after he was done. 
 
He was the . . . Interestingly enough when his caucus 
colleagues, before my time, decided that they ought to ask some 

questions about what had happened, what the Government of 
Saskatchewan had planned to do with thousands of sex 
education wooden demonstrators that they had — and some 
members will talk about that, that the government had in a 
warehouse — it was Ben Heppner, who was a man of integrity 
and faith and Sunday school teacher and church board member, 
that they took great sardonic glee in the fact that he got to do it. 
 
And if you read Hansard, he asked the government if they 
would be using them to fill highway potholes or maybe hold a 
great weenie roast in the parks, Mr. Speaker. That was the 
question in Hansard in the verbatim transcript. And in addition 
to that kind of humour, if you look through Hansard especially 
as the Premier has noted in his speech for declaring September 
Prostate Cancer Awareness Month, you will also see an 
eloquent side of Ben and a very serious side of Ben. But we will 
miss all of those sides. 
 
I will just conclude by telling you that I’ll always remember, in 
that hospital room, I asked Ben if he had any advice for me as a 
young dad. He said spend time with your kids and then he said 
pray with your kids. He wondered if he had done it enough 
himself. I told him that I thought he had and as we had met his 
children, we know it’s the truth. 
 
I also got to tell him one other thing that I wanted to, that I 
thought about driving and walking up to the hospital, and I’ll 
just conclude with that, Mr. Speaker. A friend of mine had 
come from Swift Current, a good friend of mine had come up 
with a line a number of years ago that he thought would be 
good if someone could put a verse to it or maybe even write a 
song. And the line . . . And it’s pretty good. In fact, if there’s a 
. . . Well, there’s a Brad Paisley hit that’s kind of like that that’s 
come out since. But his line was this, and he told me — I 
thought it was pretty good — he said . . . The line was, if I was 
half the man that he was, I’d be twice the man I am. 
 
So I thought, you know, that’s how I feel about my own dad. I 
thought, you know, I’m going to try to put a verse to that and I 
even tried to set it to the all three chords that I know on the 
guitar. And some people tell me there are more than three but I 
haven’t found them yet. I’m sure it’s absolutely nothing special 
but I wanted Ben to know that while that’s how I feel about my 
dad, I told him in the hospital that’s how I felt about him. I 
think that’s how many of us feel about Ben. If we were half the 
man that he was, we’d be twice the people we are. 
 
We thank him for that example and we thank his family for 
sharing him with us. We are so grateful that they sacrificed as 
well so Ben could do what he has done in this party and in this 
Legislature and across this province. Arlene, and Nancy, and 
Lana, and Ken, and Whitney, thank you very much. God bless 
you all. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
and a privilege to rise today to celebrate Ben Heppner’s years in 
this Assembly and Ben’s life. Ben was the MLA for 
Martensville, but for me he will always be the MLA for 
Rosthern. 
 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

I first heard about Ben — I didn’t know his name; I didn’t know 
very much about him — in 1971. That was a long time before I 
even thought about getting involved in politics and probably a 
long time before Ben thought about getting involved in politics. 
But I was living in Swift Current at the time, and the Leader of 
the Opposition was talking about mopar muscle cars and my 
friends and I were all into those kind of things back then. But 
there was this teacher in Swift Current who had a special car. 
He had, I think it was about a ’56 or ’57 Ford hardtop and the 
hardtop would lift up and go right into the trunk, and we 
thought that was amazing. Never did get to see the car, never 
met the school teacher, but it turned out to be Ben. 
 
Ben and I were seatmates for many years here, and Ben was 
always an enthusiastic parliamentarian. And as I’m sure the 
government members know that he loved to stand in his place 
and point his finger at them and wave his glasses and just give 
them everything he could, to use parliamentary language. And 
Ben liked to stretch that as much as possible and while he didn’t 
have all the $10 words that the member from Cypress Hills has, 
he certainly did his best to express his indignation and his 
passion for politics. 
 
[11:45] 
 
He was . . . I remember before he got elected, and the previous 
member here for Rosthern was Bill Neudorf. And in caucus one 
day Bill said to me, he says don’t worry about the new guy 
from Rosthern, he’s a good guy; he’s a hunter and shooter. It 
wasn’t anything about his politics. It wasn’t anything about the 
rest of his life, but he was a good guy because he was a hunter 
and shooter. 
 
And Ben certainly was an outspoken opponent to the Liberal 
gun control. He went across this province in the ’95 election as 
did a good many of the government members as well — Bob 
Mitchell was doing the same thing — and speaking out against 
the Liberal’s gun control and the huge waste of money that 
everybody believed it was going to be, and in fact turned out to 
be. But Ben was one of those people who had the creditability 
and the ability to go and speak to a crowd and inform them and 
convince them that that piece of legislation that was proposed 
was absolutely the wrong direction. 
 
He would have loved today in the House, in question period. 
That was what Ben liked about the legislature. He loved to be 
able to get in there and mix it up. He loved the tough questions; 
he loved to be able to ask them. He loved the debate and the 
banter back and forth, and the heckling. And I know that Mr. 
Speaker from time to time has had his hearing aid turned up 
enough that he actually could hear Ben from time to time and 
would scowl at him a little bit. And Ben just . . . He loved 
taking it to the edge on that matter, and would watch Mr. 
Speaker to see if he paid attention and started the slide forward 
in his seat. And that was the end of it. Then you backed off a 
little bit. 
 
Ben loved to do filibusters. Now there’s two kinds of filibusters 
in the House here. There’s the kind where you stand up and talk 
for hours and hours on end as the member from Moose Jaw 
North can do. And then there’s the filibusters that you do when 
you’re asking questions, as in committee. And I remember one 
night — premier’s estimates with Roy Romanow — and it’s 

getting towards the end of the evening. It’s heading to 10:30, 
but it’s probably still an hour to go. And we wanted Ben to stay 
on his feet and ask questions. We didn’t want to let anyone else 
in. And there was an issue that came up while we were in the 
House asking questions. We got this information, so I’m trying 
to tell Ben what’s going on. Ben’s trying to ask questions. And 
the way it works is opposition has to ask the questions, the 
ministers get to answer but they have time and the luxury of 
turning to their officials and discussing the issue and then 
responding. Well in opposition you don’t have that luxury. If 
you’re not on your feet when the minister stops answering then 
the committee Chair will call for somebody else. So you don’t 
have time to sit there and talk to your colleagues, to think about 
your question. 
 
So the premier of the day, Roy Romanow, was not real happy 
with the fact that we were dragging this out so he’s giving very 
short, terse questions and I’m trying to . . . answers. I’m trying 
to explain to Ben what this issue is about and so he is thinking 
about his next question, trying to listen to me, trying to listen to 
what the premier is saying, and this isn’t working well. And this 
went on, Mr. Speaker, for about an hour. 
 
And the premier . . . We were asking questions related to one of 
the premier’s staff who was actually sitting behind the premier 
right at the time and the premier for some reason didn’t know 
who this person was any longer. And Ben’s trying to explain it 
to him and it’s just not working. But Ben, being the trooper that 
he was, dragged that hour out. It was tough work. It was tough 
sledding but Ben did it because that’s the kind of person he was. 
He believed in doing his job. 
 
It’s already been mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, 
the member for Swift Current, but Ben was a professional. And 
when you look at that series of questions with the wooden 
demonstrators — you’re on camera and the member from 
Saskatoon Massey was answering the questions, so you have to 
be very serious — the questions were phrased in a manner that 
were very funny and yet to ask them you have to make it a 
serious issue. The minister answering has to be serious but what 
the rest of the legislature knew, what the press gallery knew, but 
what the public doesn’t see on TV is everybody else was falling 
out of their chairs laughing. And Ben, the consummate 
politician, stood there in his place, as did the minister, and 
answered with a straight face. And that particular story was 
picked up all over North America. It became a very pointed 
issue. 
 
Not long after Ben found out that he had cancer he came and 
talked to me about it. And he said to me, how should I live. 
Should I live like I have two years, or should I live like I have 
10? 
 
I said, well okay, I know you’ve said you’ve got cancer, but 
why are you asking me? He says, well my son wants to go 
caribou hunting . . . with Ben. And I said you don’t have to 
have cancer to go caribou hunting, why don’t you just go 
caribou hunting? So him and . . . Ken and Ben went and did 
their caribou hunting together. I’m sure that’s one of the things 
Ken will remember. 
 
Ben was very proud of the fact that he was a Luddite. I love all 
the little gizmos. Ben thought they were great paperweights. I 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

remember going up to Saskatoon with Ben one evening for a 
meeting and his cellphone is on the seat between us in the car. 
And if you ever tried to phone Ben there was never an answer. 
So I . . . well, Ben, you’ve got a cellphone, why don’t you ever 
answer it? That’s for me to phone out, not for you to phone me. 
 
I said, well at least, you know, you could answer. You could 
take the messages. I don’t know how. Half the trip to Saskatoon 
was me eliminating the messages that he had in his message 
manager. From up to two years or three years before he had 
never listened to any of them. He had no intentions of listening 
to any of them. And even when I would listen to them and tell 
him about them, he didn’t want to know. Technology was not 
for Ben, but old cars certainly were and more specifically old 
trucks. 
 
I remember him coming back into the House one Monday 
morning and saying, well I bought another old truck. Okay, 
what’d you get and he’d tell me. And he said, but Arlene told 
me that if I get another one, I’m going to cut down a tree in the 
yard. Oh that’s kind of serious for the trees. So fine. Next week 
he comes back, well I bought another old truck. Well how’s the 
trees I asked him. One of them is gone. But he loved to get his 
old trucks. And I found out later that the threat from Arlene to 
cut down the trees was they were making some changes in the 
yard and it wasn’t a threat or a retaliation. But it sure made for a 
good story. 
 
Ben was very proud of his Mennonite heritage. He was always 
very frugal. And if you took a look out in the parking lot when 
Ben was here, he never had a vehicle that was newer than ten 
years old and was very proud of that fact. He made sure that 
while he had a good vehicle, it was one that he got for the 
minimal price. 
 
And fact is when we formed the Saskatchewan Party, I had a 
couch in my legislative office. And when we moved, I didn’t 
have room for it so Ben borrowed it. Now that’s in 1997. It’s 
still in Ben’s office and he didn’t have any intentions of letting 
that go. His cellphone he could let go but not the couch. 
 
And fact is, just before Ben passed away he lived up to his 
Mennonite heritage. A few days before, he was negotiating with 
the funeral home on the price of his funeral. He wasn’t going to 
let them take any advantage. He was going to make sure that he 
got the best possible price. 
 
And fact is, Ben used to come back into caucus after an election 
and brag about how little he spent. He’d always want to know, 
you know, what was your dollar to votes ratio, you know, 
because he always had the best. There was no way that you 
were going to spend less than Ben did, or spend more . . . He 
always spent less than the rest of us. 
 
Ben was, well he was very outspoken in the House. He was also 
very, very concerned about his family and his constituents. And 
he was loved by all of them. He was our colleague, our 
companion, our friend, and a leader in caucus. And we loved 
him all. We loved him. So Ben, farewell. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tough, tough to follow 
such heartfelt speeches in the Chamber. Tough to express to 
Ben’s family our feelings about Ben. I’m going to try and do it 
briefly. 
 
But I want to share, Mr. Speaker, and with the family, it was a 
pleasure in a perverse sort of a way to be at Ben’s funeral. And 
it was a pleasure to see the great strength that the family 
exhibited. And, Arlene, you sang at Ben’s funeral, and it’s just a 
testament to Ben’s and your huge belief that what that funeral 
was was delivering Ben to his Saviour, his Lord and Saviour, 
and, you know, bless you for that strength. And I want to share 
how meaningful that was to those of us that were there. Boy I’m 
not supposed to be feeling emotional at all, but it’s difficult not 
to. 
 
We fortunately often don’t have to say goodbye to someone 
who has sat with us and is a colleague, as the Premier and 
members opposite have said. There were times when we wished 
Ben was somewhere other than here, but those were often the 
same times when he wished we were somewhere other than 
here. But there was always a respect. There always was a 
respect. That was business. 
 
And I got to know Ben a little bit more after I got elected to be 
Chair of the government caucus. And we have a quaint little 
thing called a teachers’ institute here that the Speaker has set 
up. And it’s actually quite a nice thing because we invite a 
select group of teachers from across the province to come, and 
for about three-quarters of an hour the Chair of both caucuses 
spend some time and we sort of bare our souls. 
 
Now I ask hon. members opposite and on this side, please, 
please acknowledge Ben was a professional. He didn’t give 
away any Sask Party secrets. I like to think I’m reasonably 
professional too, and I didn’t give away any government secrets 
to Ben. But we had very, very good, open discussions with the 
teachers about how the process works. And Ben was really 
genuinely a treat for me to work with, and I looked forward 
each year to sharing that little bit of time at the teachers’ 
institute with him. Perhaps his experience in the education field 
made him comfortable and at ease in doing that, but it really 
was, it really was fun to spend that little bit of time with Ben. 
 
I noted, Arlene, that you were married in 1965, and it struck me 
that in many ways that was like a couple of days ago. I 
remember the year 1965 vividly. And I remember it being a 
very, very wet year. The harvest that year didn’t get completed 
until October, November. Some people never did get the 
harvest But after that, I’m sure that the time literally has flown 
by, and in many ways it must seem like just yesterday when you 
were exchanging your marriage vows. And in other ways of 
course it’s a whole lifetime when you look at your family that’s 
gathered — many with you today and many not able to be with 
you today. And it must bring great strength and joy to you, the 
time that you were able to share with Ben. 
 
I want to join with members opposite in thanking you and your 
family for the support you gave Ben in allowing him to offer 
himself up for public service. With those few short words, I 
want to again express that I think much was said at the funeral 
and it was a perverse sort of an honour. I wish we could have 
delayed it for a few decades but, as funeral services go, I was 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

honoured to have been one of many that attended Ben 
Heppner’s funeral. My condolences to you and again my thanks 
for your support for Ben Heppner, our colleague. Thank you. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Benjamin 
Dave Heppner could be an intimidating figure for a young 
wannabe politician. So you want to be an MLA, he would ask. 
Yes, I would reply. You want to win an urban seat for the 
Saskatchewan Party? Yes, I said. So how are you going to do 
that? My answer would be work hard, door knock, and build a 
team that’s unstoppable. That’s good, he said, and then a 
matter-of-factly he said, you’ll win, just don’t get cocky. There 
are enough arrogant politicians. We don’t need another one. 
 
Then he had a wink and a smile and a pat on the back, and it 
was good advice from a friend. It was good advice from a 
friend. And it always had a message. And that’s what I felt 
every time I talked to Ben — he’d have some advice and he’d 
have a message. 
 
I actually came to know Ben much earlier when I was growing 
up in Blaine Lake. And being a bit of a newspaper junkie, I 
often read the Saskatchewan Valley News. I would see Ben 
featured in the paper long before his career in the legislature, as 
a teacher and as a businessman and as a member of a church 
board and the mayor of Rosthern and finally as a member of the 
legislature. 
 
After following his career at a distance, then occupying this seat 
— this very seat right behind him — it was natural for me to 
consider him as a mentor. When you’re a rookie MLA with the 
Saskatchewan Party, you know Ben as the straight and narrow, 
no-nonsense caucus Chair, a person not to be messed with. In 
this legislature Ben was known for his quick wit, an icy stare, 
and a sometimes scolding finger. In fact sitting right behind Ben 
I feel that I had the best view in the whole place. When the 
glasses went down and the finger went up, I knew somebody 
over there would be sinking a little bit in their seat. 
 
However when you’re a rookie MLA in this legislature, you 
also see another side of Ben — the supportive, encouraging, 
confidence building, colleague that was always the first one to 
tell you when you’ve done a good job. 
 
And I remember, and I have told my colleagues this, a story 
about my maiden speech in this Chamber. I talked about being 
in Blaine Lake and meeting John Diefenbaker for the first time 
when he came by helicopter with Ray Hnatyshyn into the 
school grounds and running to the front of the line to meet 
Diefenbaker and then running to the back of the line to shake 
his hand again. And Ben just laughed and laughed at that story 
for . . . About a month later he turned around in his seat and he 
said, I could see you little . . . [inaudible] . . . running around 
there in the front and then to the back, you know, doing that. 
And that was just a special way of him saying, you know, 
welcome to this Chamber and joining them. 
 
When my kids were here for the legislative . . . when the 

signing in took place here after the swearing in at the last 
election, Carter and Paige, my son and daughter, were over here 
and they did the wave when we signed in. And he just told me 
about the look on the Lieutenant Governor’s face when they did 
that. And of course myself and my wife were worried about it, 
and he just laughed about the beauty of kids and the beauty of 
family. And getting to know Ben you really, really got an 
appreciation for his feeling about family. 
 
He always joked to me about my wife, Trish, when he saw her 
on the news. He said that she was the only anchor that spoke 
slow enough and clear enough for old guys like him to 
understand. And then he complimented me on my choice of 
constituency assistant, Beth Epp, a Mennonite girl from 
Waldheim who was a friend of his daughter. He said, they just 
don’t come any finer than that. 
 
And if you had five minutes to spare, you just ask Ben about 
hunting with his son or how Nancy was doing, and fifteen 
minutes later you’d get a comprehensive update. And you could 
see the passion that he had for his family and for his wife, 
Arlene. 
 
We had a special time, my wife and I and Arlene and Ben, at 
the Midwest Legislative Conference in Des Moine. Arlene and 
Ben and Trish and I sat at the same table, and we just talked 
about, you know, he was asking me how I enjoyed this job and 
about being at the Midwest Legislative Conference. And Arlene 
and Ben were going on to attend a couple of different country 
music concerts. And I heard Ben talk about his, you know, his 
favourite concerts and he asked me . . . and, you know, we 
talked about seeing George Strait at Texas Stadium. And it was 
something that I’ve never really talked about with Ben in this 
legislature when the, you know, priorities of government and 
opposition were at the forefront. But I saw something in Ben 
that day and it was a very special time. 
 
Another story that really struck me was . . . It comes from Bill 
Boyd, a former member of this legislature, and it was when Bill 
first approached Ben about running for public office or about 
running to become the MLA for Rosthern. And, you know, Bill 
tells the story about how it’s kind of intimidating. At the time 
the people weren’t beating down the door to join the party, to 
become a MLA, and here was Ben Heppner — mayor, former 
councillor, businessman, teacher, very well respected in 
Rosthern. Bill said he was willing to spend two hours trying to 
convince Ben to run for public office. He had a volunteer driver 
that day and he told the driver, well give me two hours and I’ll 
work on him and I’ll try to convince him that this is what he 
should do. 
 
Well Bill Boyd asked Ben and he told him, he said, you know, 
you should run for political office. We need you as an MLA in 
the legislature. Bill said Ben just looked in the sky for about a 
minute and said okay, I’ll do it. What’s next? And Bill went on 
to say well the most difficult time, the most difficult portion of 
that conversation was killing the next hour and forty-five 
minutes till his driver came back to . . . You know, Ben wasn’t 
much for small talk sometimes, but he was ready to get rolling 
and ready to do the job that it would take to become a MLA and 
to represent his area. 
 
I had a special honour last year when . . . or earlier this year 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

actually, in April, when the Leader of the Opposition wasn’t 
available. And I know it’s more because Ben didn’t want to 
overload the leader, and he asked me to speak at his 
nomination. And I felt pretty special about that. And, you know, 
Ben just said that he, you know, he’d been there a while and he 
wanted somebody new to this legislature to bring a different 
perspective to his nomination. 
 
It was a special night for . . . and I know many of my colleagues 
were there when we saw Ben struggle somewhat to get to the 
mike. But within a few minutes or within a few seconds, 
actually, it was vintage Ben. As soon as he saw that mike and 
he put his hands on the podium, he was back at it in all his furor 
and all his glory. And I know at the end of that evening we all 
kind of looked at each other and said, you know that’s the Ben 
we know and that’s the Ben that we treasure. There was some 
magic in that room that night and I’ll always cherish that. 
 
Another special time was sitting behind Ben in this chair when 
he introduced the private member’s Bill regarding the 
awareness of prostate cancer. It was a special time and I knew 
that it would be a time that I would treasure so I tried to listen to 
every word. 
 
And, colleagues, I can tell you because of Ben’s Bill, prostate 
cancer awareness will benefit. Because of Ben’s devotion, his 
family, friends, and colleagues in this legislature will benefit. 
Because of Ben Heppner, Saskatchewan is a better place. Rest 
in peace my friend. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an honour for me to say a few brief words of tribute to my 
friend, Ben Heppner. And I want to first of all express my 
condolences to Arlene and the family and to say thank you for 
letting your husband and dad be a part of making Saskatchewan 
a good place to live. We all understand how none of us come 
here alone; we come here together with our families. And for 
being part of that, a very important part of Ben’s life in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize, in this room today, this is a room that 
is feeling a sense of sadness about a loss of that passionate 
parliamentarian, Ben Heppner. And I just want to acknowledge, 
Mr. Speaker, that I understand there is a special sadness in the 
colleagues opposite. We understand when we come to serve the 
province of Saskatchewan with those that we share passionate 
values and a sense of closeness that the loss is greater. And I do 
want to say, to extend my condolences to all of the members 
opposite as well. 
 
It is a very unique thing that is happening here today, Mr. 
Speaker. When Houses come and the Throne Speech is given, 
the next day we begin the Throne Speech debate. And this is a 
House that by mutual agreement has agreed to set aside that 
normal procedure. We’ll get to the Throne Speech before we’re 
done, but before we begin that time-honoured tradition of the 
processes of this House, that we take time to set aside to honour 
our good friend and parliamentarian, Ben Heppner. 
 
I too am a formal caucus Chair. And maybe sometime there’ll 

be some kind of an old geezers’ club of former caucus Chairs 
that’ll be formed. And good luck to the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
I’ve had the honour of serving as caucus Chair and of serving in 
the Speaker’s Chair, and I have said this many times: when one 
understands the political dynamics of serving as a good Chair of 
your own caucus, making decisions that they feel to be the right 
decisions and allow everyone to have their voice and their say, 
it is in my judgment a tougher job to be a good caucus Chair — 
and with all due respect, Mr. Speaker — then to serve in the 
Speaker’s Chair in the administration of decision making. And I 
simply want to acknowledge that Ben has been a long-serving, 
good caucus Chair who has served his caucus well. 
 
As Speaker I got to see first-hand Ben’s ability to push the 
limits and wander up to the edge of the pool without falling in, 
and how he would be only making his remarks as only Ben 
Heppner could, while looking away from the Speaker, but just 
occasionally glancing over to see where you are. Ben 
understood the importance of passion in this place and he 
brought passion here, and it belongs here. And it was a part of 
how he participated in this great institution. 
 
It was also as Speaker that I had the very special privilege of 
visiting a school in Ben’s riding along with Ben and to see 
together with him his passion for education and for young 
people and that very important part of his life, part of what Ben 
gave to make his world a better place. And I will long 
remember that. I will value the private, brief conversations we 
had during the last sitting on those occasions when Ben felt 
good enough to be here and will cherish his comments, much of 
which was around how much he valued time with family. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that let me conclude by saying that 
this province, this legislature, these people here, those of us 
gathered here today have lost a good friend. We’ve lost a strong 
parliamentarian and that Ben Heppner may be gone but he will 
not be forgotten. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll say 
that this is the first time that I’ve stood for a condolence motion. 
 
I don’t find this a very easy thing to do. But I can honestly say 
as I’ve thought about this for the last number of weeks I’ve 
never felt more wanting to do something like this than I do 
today, and especially because of who we’re talking about today. 
And we’ve heard many, many tributes. And Ben, like the rest, 
was a colleague of mine, truly was a mentor of mine and a very 
good friend. 
 
I hadn’t met Ben before the 1999 election; I met him shortly 
after the 1999 election. And like a number of us, I think there 
was about 17 of us elected for the first time in 1999. And, I 
mean, any newly elected member will know it’s a bit of a 
whirlwind. That first month or two months there’s just a lot 
going on and you’re supposed to be doing this and getting 
offices set up and, oh, now we’ve got a caucus meeting. 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

And I remember going into that first caucus meeting and there 
was a lot of excitement after that ’99 election. And going into 
the caucus meeting, and I had met Ben just once or twice 
before, didn’t know a lot about what a caucus Chair did — 
didn’t know a lot about a lot of things, quite frankly — 
regarding the whole operation of a caucus. 
 
But it sure didn’t take long, like a meeting or two, that I 
certainly knew when I looked to the front of the room that that’s 
were Ben belonged. You know, you’d look at the front of the 
room with that snow-white hair and — with all due respect to 
every one of my colleagues — I don’t know if there would be 
anybody that should have sat at the front of the room other than 
Ben, because he filled that role so well. 
 
I remember the first couple of times, as intimidating as it was, 
you know, you’d put your hand up — I have a point to make. 
And I think it was probably a couple of meetings before I really 
felt confident to have Ben look at me when I had my finger up 
in the air that I do have a point to make. 
 
And I certainly remember making sure that when I did get that 
nod — okay you’re next — that I had my thoughts in line, 
because he just had that way of keeping the ship running 
straight. We didn’t get off this way or that way. He was really 
suited for that role. And quite frankly for a, you know, a newly 
elected member it was intimidating. He could be very 
intimidating even within our own caucus. But that wasn’t a bad 
thing. That I think really what it did was test our mettle and 
make sure what we did have to say was worthwhile saying. And 
he really certainly kind of put that in our minds. 
 
I really got to know Ben though, I wouldn’t say so much in the 
first six months to eight months, but I got to know Ben shortly 
about eight to ten months after the ’99 election when Elwin 
asked me to . . . when the member from Rosetown-Elrose asked 
me to be the Whip. And as the Whip of course you sit right 
beside the caucus Chair. So I sat beside Ben for about four 
years at the front of the room and really got to know Ben much 
better sitting beside him. 
 
Ben had a . . . He didn’t do it every caucus meeting, but certain 
caucus meetings he’d start out with a bit of a story. And I know 
this is a tribute to Ben but I have to be honest, some of them 
just weren’t that good. He’d have a great joke or a great story. 
And it was always interesting because you’d look around the 
caucus table and you know some guys would hang their heads. 
You know you’re kind of waiting for the buildup and they’d 
hang their heads. But what it did do is, you know, maybe four 
meetings later Ben would start with a story — and some of 
them were quite good — but about four meetings later he’d start 
with a story and he had everybody’s attention because you 
thought, now is this going to be the good one, Ben? But I think 
Ben enjoyed it more when everybody kind of . . . oh, what are 
you talking about, or what kind of a story was that? I think he 
kind of enjoyed that more, just to see the reaction on 
everybody’s faces. And you know I think he enjoyed it you 
know to think almost . . . are my colleagues, the rest of caucus 
here, think I’m losing it a little bit? Because it was really, really 
entertaining. 
 
But I think, you know, sitting beside Ben, when I saw Ben do 
his best work is when it got very tense. When the debate was 

strong around the caucus table, when people were voicing their 
opinions strongly for whichever side it was, Ben did his best 
work at bringing that caucus room back to a common ground 
and did great work there. I think also knowing Ben and seeing 
him operate in this Chamber, when he enjoyed it the most is 
when it was the most tense, the most pressure packed, the most 
. . . the harshest debate, the strongest debate — that’s what he 
thrived on. He really did thrive on it. You know there are days 
go by in here where it’s maybe just not that interesting. Sorry 
but it’s not just that interesting. But when it got to be a really 
hotly contested issue, a strong question period, you could just 
sense it in Ben. That’s truly what he loved the most. 
 
I remember a couple of years ago . . . And it’s funny in the 
political life how an issue is so big at a time. And you know 
days pass, months pass, years pass and you can’t even 
remember what that issue was. But I remember Ben standing in 
the House, standing here in the House and asking questions as 
only Ben could do — with the finger, or the glasses off — and 
really going after the government. And then of course when 
you’re done, of course the government asks is . . . has the news 
scrum in the rotunda after. And then we often are questioned 
too by the media. And you know I just remember Ben coming 
back into the lounge and he . . . Oh, that didn’t go very well. He 
loved it, but he just knew it didn’t go very well, you know. And 
it was such a big issue and I can’t for the life of me, I’ve been 
thinking for about two weeks what that issue was and I can’t 
think about . . . I don’t know what it was. But Ben, I just know 
at that point he was loving politics the most. Even though it 
didn’t go maybe the way he wanted it to go, that’s what he 
loved the most. 
 
You know I guess in hockey terms, I mean, he would be the 
first into the corner and he’d come out with the puck. You 
know, he just loved to get into the corner and mix it up, as 
many people have said. 
 
For the last year or better as was mentioned, we all saw the 
effects that cancer had on Ben. Last spring I was asked to — 
because you know Ben was going to be here some but didn’t 
know what . . . he wasn’t sure how often he could be here — 
the leader asked me to take his place where I stand today. And I 
remember talking last spring about how I’d be very glad to take 
this place only for a temporary basis. And I really believed it 
would only be on a temporary basis, but unfortunately that’s not 
the case. 
 
But I remember one day shortly after, I was standing here and I 
guess . . . I don’t know whether I was up for questions, but it 
was very loud in the Chamber — very loud, lots of heckling 
going back and forth, again probably what Ben would enjoy the 
most. But Ben had a knack of . . . I mean, we can all holler back 
and forth and maybe not all of us do, I know some of us do, you 
know, holler back and forth. 
 
But that silence. There is this point in this House where, 
whether the Speaker is just about to stand, but there’s just a 
second of silence where it’s . . . And Ben, from the back corner, 
said, because it was very loud, he said — and I don’t know 
whether you had just ruled or were just going to rule — he said, 
yes keep it down; I can’t hear back here. 
 
And I thought, that’s just vintage Ben. I mean, he would far 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

rather be here, but he was sitting back there. Keep it down so 
that he could hear. 
 
You know, over the last couple of weeks I’ve been thinking of 
the different stories and different memories of Ben. I can 
honestly say I don’t know of a time that I didn’t enjoy being in 
Ben’s company. 
 
The Sask Party caucus and staff put together a one-time 
scholarship in recognition of Ben and it’s going to be presented 
to a grade 12 with English proficiency at the Waldheim high 
school. And I can’t think of a better tribute in the education 
field than that for Ben Heppner, because he truly was an 
inspiration to many. I know his family deeply miss him and so 
do we. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a great honour to participate in the condolences for Ben’s 
family, both his family in the legislature and, more importantly, 
his family in the gallery. I know there’s many, many, many 
members that do want to speak today and so I’ll keep my 
comments brief. But I agree with all of the comments that have 
been made prior about what a great man Ben was. 
 
There’s three points that I want to make about Ben. There’s 
many more that could be made but these are the three that I felt 
were the most important in the time that I had. First was 
recognizing Ben’s kindness. Once you could get past the 
intimidating and gruff exterior he would always have a twinkle 
in his eye. Of course as a rookie MLA on the opposition side 
when there was, as one person indicated, 17 new members in 
’99, he certainly didn’t need to be kind to or welcoming to an 
opposition MLA, but he was. In short chats on the way out of 
the Assembly, on the way to the car, outside of committee 
meetings, he always had a kind word, a gruff comment with a 
twinkle in his eye and then have a very real, kind discussion. 
 
As well, as a member of the YMCA[Young Men’s Christian 
Association], I would see Ben there periodically walking 
around the track. There’s not very many people that you see 
walking around that track that looked less happy about it, but he 
was doing it and when you talked to him about it, it was very 
clear he was doing it for one reason and one reason only and 
that was for his family. He certainly didn’t want to be at the Y 
walking around that stupid track but he wanted to do it for his 
family. 
 
As Deputy Speaker, I actually got to call Ben to order 
occasionally and I got to see first-hand how close he would 
come, and how angry he would get, and how threatening he 
would seem to be, and how intimidating he would be, and it 
was a little intimidating calling him to order and he would be 
very upset. And then, not five minutes later, you’d see him 
outside. How are you doing, Graham? Oh good, how are 
things? Have you got any plans for the weekend? He’d leave it 
in here. It was an absolute love of democracy and he understood 
the theatre of this place and he never let that spill out into the 
real world. 
 
I saw that as Deputy Speaker with the school visits and how he 

treated his class. And you could tell that he was a teacher 
because there was no misbehaving; there was no words said that 
weren’t appropriate. But you could tell that he absolutely loved 
democracy and he treated the role of Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker with the utmost of respect regardless of who was 
holding that position at the time. 
 
The second one that was very clear to me was his absolute love 
of family. That’s the second point I wanted to make. Often 
politicians use their families as an illustrative, an example or as 
some might say, for political gain. Ben was absolutely not one 
of those people. In fact you could very rarely get him to talk 
about the family unless it was something that he wanted to do. 
 
But when he did it was with an absolute pride as a grandfather 
and how the best time of his life was when he had all of his 
family together as a grandfather. And the other point, and I 
want his family to know, is how much he spoke with absolute 
deep pride for how well each and every one of his kids did. He 
was very, very proud of his children. 
 
The last point, and probably the most important point, was his 
complete and deep faith in God. We saw how he handled cancer 
with a dignity and with courage. But his faith in God was 
probably the one thing that carried him through. It wasn’t very 
complicated. It just was. A lot of people debate and discuss and 
are philosophical and what about this, what about that. With 
Ben it wasn’t. It was this is our life on earth and there will be an 
afterlife and he’ll be with God. 
 
Some MLAs will periodically get together for a brief prayer 
time and Ben was one of those individuals, and so we had God 
talks, as what it became to be known. And I married into a 
Mennonite family, so I know that they have a very specific way 
of looking at things and very stubborn — in a nice way — and 
very direct and have a very strong point of view. And so you 
would expect that he might stay with those lines. But we could 
talk about anything. It was very matter of fact. He had a very 
big heart. 
 
And when we talked about different aspects that may not fall 
within prescripts of the Mennonite faith, he said this about 
people on one side of the spectrum or the other. And this stuck 
to me. This is what started . . . this one next sentence is what 
started me to want to speak today. He said there’s going to be a 
lot of surprised people when they get to heaven to see who God 
let in. And that’s on all spectrums, on all sides. There will be no 
surprise that Ben is already in heaven though. 
 
[12:30] 
 
I do have one regret. I had heard that Ben was in the hospital 
and was open for visitors. And so I actually skipped out of some 
events that I was supposed to be going and made my way up to 
the Royal University Hospital on the Wednesday before his 
passing. And they said that they were sorry, that he’d already 
been discharged. So I regret that I wasn’t able to visit with him 
that Wednesday in the hospital. But I do know that if I were to 
see Ben today he would forgive me very easily, but with a laugh 
and with a gruff talk and a joke and probably a twinkle in his 
eye, and it would be all right. Ben’s life was too short but Ben’s 
life was a life well lived. Farewell, Ben, until we meet again. 
 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was first 
introduced to Ben by a former member of this Assembly, a 
colleague and a friend, Bill Neudorf — at that time member for 
Rosthern — who told me that Ben would be an excellent MLA 
representing then Rosthern constituency and now known as 
Martensville. And it was certainly an honour and a privilege to 
be a colleague and a friend. 
 
When Ben arrived in Regina he asked me if he’d mind if I had a 
different roommate in this suite that we were renting, at the 
basement suite. And I said no, that would be great. I’d love to 
have you. And I found out that Ben loved Southern gospel and 
he loved Law and Order. We’d get to the suite at night; if he 
was there before me he’d either have Bill Gaither in the video 
or we’d be watching Law and Order. 
 
Ben Heppner also, in his trench coat, if you didn’t know him, 
could certainly be mistaken for Kenny Rogers. And if someone 
said they were going to hear or to meet Ben Heppner and you 
hadn’t really known him, you might have thought of the 
Canadian tenor. Although both of these men are excellent 
singers, the Ben Heppner we knew would however be the first 
to tell you, don’t ask me to sing. 
 
Ben certainly had a passion for politics and enjoyed the 
boisterous debate that would take place in this Assembly. And 
with his finger pointing, Ben could be a very intimidating figure 
in this Assembly as he made his point. 
 
He was also honoured to be a part of the original eight who 
established the Saskatchewan Party. While he was elected as a 
Conservative, he also had his strong views in regards to the 
direction the province was going and how he felt the province 
was going. And I remember many trips that Ben and I took, and 
a number of my colleagues, as we criss-crossed the province to 
inform people as to what our purpose and reasons were for 
forming the Saskatchewan Party. And it was just enjoyable 
having Ben along and travelling with Ben. 
 
Besides politics and serving his constituents well, Ben also had 
a passion for restoring old cars. In fact many a time, Mr. 
Speaker, Ben would arrive back in Regina, not in his car but 
with his half-ton equipped with tools, cutting torch and dolly, to 
take back home with him parts of an old car he spotted in his 
travels which would work well in allowing him to complete the 
restoration of a vehicle he was currently working on. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, on one occasion when Ben was 
undergoing treatments for his cancer, I called to see how he was 
doing. His wife, Arlene, answered the phone and when I asked 
how Ben was doing, she said very well. In fact he’s currently in 
the shop working on a car and if you give me a minute, I’ll call 
him and you can speak to him directly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ben was a family man with a tremendous love, 
affection, and admiration for his wife, Arlene. He was proud of 
his children, Ken, Lana, and Nancy, and loved his 
grandchildren dearly. And, Mr. Speaker, the last opportunity I 
had to meet and visit with Ben Heppner he was very upfront 
with me, and as he told me that he felt this was his time, that he 

would no longer be coming to the Legislative Assembly. And, 
Mr. Speaker, as only Ben could do, he also said, the only regret 
I do have is not being there to fight the next election, in joining, 
you know, that election. 
 
If I could add some words about Ben, I would have to say that 
he probably fits very well the words that Paul gave to Timothy 
when he said, “I have fought the good fight. I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe very dearly that Ben today is enjoying 
that crown of righteousness which the Lord promised would be 
his when he finished the race. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There aren’t many times in the life of a Legislative Assembly 
where you get to talk about a colleague that you have known for 
11 years. And there aren’t many times in the life of a 
Legislative Assembly where a colleague passes on. And when 
you think about the last 20 years that I’ve been a member of the 
legislature, we’ve had three colleagues in the last short while 
that have left this Assembly for the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I knew and have known Arlene longer than I’ve 
known Ben Heppner. And Arlene and I got to know each other 
when she was the Chair of the Sask Valley School Division 
Board when I was the minister of Education in the early 1990s. 
 
Ben Heppner was a husband, a father, a grandfather, a brother, 
an uncle, a teacher, a school administrator, a political colleague, 
and from my point of view Pat Atkinson’s personal tormentor, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I think of Ben Heppner I think of the longest index finger 
that ever existed in the Legislative Assembly’s history. And that 
finger, I’m sure it was a foot long and it could be seen from all 
parts of this Assembly, particularly on the government side. 
When I think of Ben Heppner I think he has the longest finger I 
ever met in my years. When I think of Ben Heppner I think of 
his grey Bonneville — I had a grey Bonneville — which he was 
very proud of. When I think of him I think of his frugalness 
because he made sure that Bonneville . . . I think it went close 
to half a million miles. And I’ll tell you a story about that 
Bonneville in a minute. 
 
And when I think of Ben Heppner I think about 800, as we 
came to know them, wooden demonstrators. And when I think 
of Ben Heppner the most I think about his passion and the fact 
that he was a hard worker and he worked hard on behalf of his 
constituents. 
 
Now I want to tell you about the grey Bonneville. I had a 1988 
grey Bonneville which I had for many years even though I had 
a cabinet car. And he had a Bonneville that was a bit newer than 
mine. His Bonneville had hundreds of thousands more 
kilometres on it and he said he was going to keep that grey 
Bonneville going. And I think there was a Sask Party 
convention and NDP convention on the same weekend in 
Regina. And I was making my way home to Saskatoon, and I 
saw this grey Bonneville on the back of a tow truck. And I 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

thought God, that looks like Ben Heppner’s Bonneville. And I 
thought I’ll just zip by because this car was going to keep him 
going until the next election, right. And I zipped by, and I look 
and there is Ben Heppner. And I sort of — you know, you have 
to tweak a bit — and I just sort of gave a little wave as I went 
by. And he wasn’t smiling at all. He was glowering. 
 
Now I want to talk about his finger and the glasses. We have all 
come to know the finger and the glasses. I used to sit on that 
side of the legislature right across from Ben. And you know, we 
had the thrust and parry of question period. And question period 
is all about a psychological game, right. And there were times 
on the government side, and I know we shouldn’t admit this, 
but sometimes we simply got whipped. 
 
And Ben Heppner would lean across his desk and just drive me 
crazy. And I of course would try and say oh, you know, blah 
blah blah. And you know, call him the, I think we used to call 
him the foghorn or the bullhorn — I just can’t remember. But 
that finger was infamous. And then he would throw his glasses 
down to the tip of his nose and just glare at you and wag his 
finger. 
 
Now I want to talk about the 800 wooden demonstrators which 
he referred to as the great weenie roast. I was the minister of 
Education and it came to my attention that some thoughtful 
person in the bureaucracy had purchased 800 kits that had been 
put together by the ministers of Education from across the 
country. And contained in those kits were 800 wooden 
demonstrators, as we so eloquently called them. 
 
And the member from Massey Place was the minister of Health. 
And in those days we had a very substantive number of 
colleagues on this side of the House. And we used to spend, try 
and spend one day in our constituency and we took turns 
Fridays and whatnot. But I was getting ready for these questions 
and I thought, how am I going to respond to this question, 
particularly when there are 800 schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan and there are several hundred Catholic schools. 
And I couldn’t imagine why some thoughtful person in the 
Department of Education had purchased 800 kits, because it 
was unlikely that 300 of those kits would go into a Catholic 
school. But nevertheless, the minister of Health was on deck if 
the question came up. 
 
And I was thinking how don’t we laugh, how don’t we laugh 
when this is raised. And of course we were dealing with HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome] and so on and so forth. So people got it 
. . . They just steeled themselves for this question. And whoever 
said earlier that this was just guffawing all over the place, they 
were absolutely correct. 
 
And then we got calls from, I think, David Letterman. I was 
worried we were going to get calls from David Letterman, 
stations all over the United States. And I chalked it up to Ben 
Heppner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I appreciated most about Ben Heppner was 
that he was a passionate member of the legislature. There are 
people that come here and their demeanour is not quite as full 
of passion and the thrust and parry of debate. Ben cared. And he 
cared deeply about his constituents. He cared deeply about his 

political views, and that’s what I’m going to miss. We need 
passionate politicians who are spokesperson’s for their 
particular viewpoint. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say this. The biggest 
compliment that Ben ever paid me . . . And it’s nice to have a 
compliment paid to someone. And he used to call me Patty 
which drove me crazy too, but anyway. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You shouldn’t tell them that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I shouldn’t tell you that, but anyway, 
I’m getting too old to care, right. Mr. Speaker, the biggest 
compliment that he ever paid me was he said, you know, you’re 
a hard worker. You never quit. And Ben Heppner, he too was a 
hard worker and he never quit. 
 
And just to make a long story short, in terms of the wooden 
demonstrators. There was some thought in the officialdom that 
we should simply get rid of these wooden demonstrators. And I 
said no, we are going to sell them. Someone will want these 
things. And I am pleased to report to the public, those wooden 
demonstrators, every one of them were sold and we even made 
a buck. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly there have been 
some very eloquent words expressed here today. I would just 
ask leave for about two minutes to comment on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s an honour to pay tribute to the family of 
Ben Heppner and to pay tribute to Ben Heppner himself. And I 
was very pleased that my wife and I had an opportunity to meet 
Arlene. We got to know her through an informal organization of 
parliamentarians in their 60s. We called ourselves the OWLS 
[order of wily legislative sexagenarians] and we would meet 
monthly during session. It was kind of a special time for me. 
And I’ll show it also that this organization, informal 
organization, the OWLS, was something that allowed us some 
camaraderie of members from both sides of the House and I 
genuinely appreciated that. Ben was a founding member of that 
little informal organization. 
 
I just wanted to add one thing as I was listening to what the 
members were saying, and that was a visit that I made to a 
school — I believe it was in Martensville — and Ben was with 
me. And we were going through the model parliament with the 
students. And as you know we set the things up so that there’s a 
question period in this. And the students are very, very well 
behaved. And so question period started and there was a couple 
of questions and a couple of answers. 
 
[12:45] 
 
And then Ben sort of got up and he says, just a minute. Just a 
minute. This is a very, very competitive part. I want you folks 
. . . I want you students to think of this as being a hockey game. 
And when you go into a hockey game you’re competitive. 
You’ve got to skate hard. You’ve got to body check. You’ve 
got to keep your head up. You’ve got to push and shove in the 
corners but watch your elbows. And you’ve got to holler once 
in a while to distract the other member and maybe even 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

intimidate him. But don’t take any penalties. 
 
And as I was listening to what the other members were saying, 
how true that was. That was his philosophy of the legislature, of 
question period in the legislature. He did speak very distinctly 
in the House. He made sure that the Speaker could hear him. He 
understood the rules of the Assembly to a tee. And he also 
understood the role of the Speaker and the psychology of the 
Speaker, knowing exactly how far he could go and what the 
Speaker’s limits were. I sincerely appreciate that characteristic 
of Ben. And I think that, as was said by many members today, 
that Ben Heppner lent a character to this Chamber that we shall 
all miss. 
 
And I want to take this moment to express my condolences 
publicly to Arlene and to his children and to his constituency 
assistant who are here with us today. Thank you, members, for 
that moment. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the motion moved by the 
Premier, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency and to the 
province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the hon. member from Melfort, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, seconded by the member for Melfort, by leave of the 
Assembly: 

 
That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I would ask at this 
time, members of the Assembly, for leave to have a 
two-to-five-minute recess and then we would reassemble again 
here shortly after that time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you, members of the House, for that welcome. It’s good to get 
to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I want to start by saying 
thank you particularly for the job that you do in chairing this 
august Assembly and the job that you do with such wisdom and 
humour. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m pleased and honoured to have this opportunity to move the 
2006 Speech from the Throne. And of course I’ll be moving the 
official wording of it in the official form at the end of my 
remarks, before the hon. member for Regina Wascana Plains 
seconds the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start by saying that my constituency, 
Regina Coronation Park, is in the north end of Regina. And I 
want to in some ways apologize to everybody — I don’t speak 
often enough of my true feelings for these constituents. We 
have in the north end of Regina, in Regina Coronation Park, 
people that are just, just absolutely salt of the earth. They call 
that area home. 
 
We’re all proud to call Saskatchewan home. They’re real people 
with real jobs and real hopes and aspirations. And we’re all 
very proud of our families. We’re proud of our city, Regina, 
and we’re very proud of Saskatchewan. 
 
It has been my honour for 20 years to represent most of those 
people, Mr. Speaker. And it is an honour to represent my 
constituents of Regina Coronation Park. I want to thank my 
colleagues for their support, friendship and the work that we all 
do together to make this government work and to make things 
better for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this speech has been in some ways days, weeks, 
years, and even lifetimes in the making. It’s taken days to write 
it, weeks to develop specific themes, years to build our 
economy so that everyone in Saskatchewan can benefit, and it’s 
taken lifetimes of planning and building values that look always 
to the future — a future we’re making now. A future where 
young people live, work, and raise families in the best place in 
Canada, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long ways in 15 
years. Fifteen years ago the Leader of the Opposition was near 
the end of his senior ministerial position with a Devine 
Conservative government. Fifteen years ago the deficit, the 
annual deficit in Saskatchewan, was $1.1 billion and the total 
debt was fifteen and a half billion dollars. Such huge debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and one million people left with the mortgage. 
 
Well Saskatchewan people rose to the challenge, Mr. Speaker, 
and now after 13 consecutive balanced budgets, 14 credit 
upgrades, things are better. Debt is being paid off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has more jobs and better job quality 
now than any time before in our history. And our quality of life 
is improving. Our economy is growing and Saskatchewan 
families are getting the benefits. 
 
The table is set and the good stuff is being delivered. We are 
doing what’s best for Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
families with actions like reducing the PST to 5 per cent 
effective midnight this evening. These things are helping make 
life better for Saskatchewan’s families and building an even 
better future. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, a credit to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’re able to do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, making Saskatchewan the best place for young 
people involves four cornerstones in this Throne Speech. Our 
agenda has four cornerstones. Our workforce has a long history 
of working hard. Our education levels are rising in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have long known that today’s Saskatchewan families need 
to balance work and family, Mr. Speaker. And in work and 
family balance we’ve announced that the third Monday in 
February is a family holiday. This helps provide that family 
time balance needed in our busy world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, by February many of us will welcome a day 
of not scraping windows and sliding to and from work in the 
dark. I’m delighted that we’re putting this family holiday into 
being and we are making Saskatchewan the best place for 
young people to live, work, and build strong futures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — We will continue to develop Saskatchewan’s 
early learning and child care program. Literacy programs will 
expand despite the federal government’s withdrawal from its 
commitments. Training opportunities are being expanded to 
meet market’s demands. And, Mr. Speaker, for the third year in 
a row university tuition fees are frozen. 
 
We will be receiving and acting upon a comprehensive review 
of access for students to post-secondary education and more. 
Mr. Speaker, these actions will address access issues for 
students and promote the exceptional range of career 
opportunities that are available right here in the best place in 
Canada for young people to live, work, and build strong futures. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party are driven by envy and 
negativity. So we’re going to continue to spread the word about 
Saskatchewan’s quality of life and strong economy and let it be 
known that our welcome mat is out. There are great 
opportunities for workers from home and from abroad. Our 
initiative to attract 5,000 immigrants annually by 2008 to the 
province is on track, and I’m delighted that we are investing in 
a program at the College of Medicine to certify international 
medical graduates living in Saskatchewan. 
 
[13:00] 
 
Our second cornerstone focuses on health care. Mr. Speaker, 
our commitment to medicare is unwavering and it’s highlighted 
by the fact that we’re the only have province in Canada that 
does not charge its citizens a health care premium. Let me 
repeat that — the only have province in Canada with no health 
care premium for its citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And of course building on that, we’re continuing 
to invest in health care and strengthening the best health care 
system for families. We are continuing to reduce wait times and 
improve access for services. In this session we will be 
introducing new measures to benefit seniors. Seniors are the 
men and women who struggled and fought for the innovative 
and forward-thinking policies — things like medicare — that 
are a proud heritage of all of us in Saskatchewan. They worked 
to create a better life for their families, children and 
grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, and we continue that work 
honouring their contributions and dedication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third cornerstone recognizes that neither 
families nor the economy can prosper for long in an unhealthy 
environment. We now have in Saskatchewan the world’s largest 
carbon dioxide sequestration project. We now have more wind 
power in Saskatchewan per capita than any other province in 
Canada. Saskatchewan will be a leader in the protection of the 
environment and the promotion of clean, renewable energy. To 
demonstrate the national leadership in conserving, protecting 
and restoring the health of our environment and our diverse 
ecosystems, we have a goal of meeting one-third of our energy 
requirements through renewable resources and in this session 
we’re going to be doing more to move us to that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be working in partnership to research the 
feasibility of the world’s first Saskatchewan-designed clean 
coal-generating facility. At the other end of the energy equation 
we’ll be implementing measures to assist in energy 
conservation. We will continue our leadership in carbon 
sequestration and wind power development, and we’ll be 
implementing the Saskatchewan Green Strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy is strong and growing stronger. Our 
Saskatchewan economy is truly far more diversified today than 
at any other point in its history. 
 
The fourth cornerstone of our agenda is ensuring that 
Saskatchewan families will benefit from our strong and 
prosperous economy. These benefits will take shape in many 
ways within communities, rural and urban alike. The new 
February Family Day is one such benefit. The sales tax 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

reduction is another benefit. 
 
Saskatchewan’s competitiveness is leading to more job creation 
and employment opportunities for Saskatchewan people. We’ve 
got more jobs here than ever before. We have better quality jobs 
than ever before, and we have a better educated, better trained 
workforce than ever before. 
 
And throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal 
economic development is significantly contributing to growing 
employment numbers among Saskatchewan’s First Nations and 
Métis peoples. In partnership with First Nations, Métis, and 
Inuit people, Saskatchewan will host a national summit on 
Aboriginal economic development to further that progress. All 
of this helps make Saskatchewan an even better place to live, 
work, and build strong futures. 
 
Our families, Mr. Speaker, deserve to enjoy our share of the 
benefits that our growing economy is providing and this is at 
the heart of our fight with Ottawa for a fair, equitable 
equalization deal. That and the fact that they told us that we had 
a deal. In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we elected 12 
Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] because they said 
fairness is what this is all about. Saskatchewan will get the 
same energy accord that Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova 
Scotia got. The election language was clear and it was driven 
home throughout the federal election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Canada’s fiscal situation has strengthened 
since then. The latest federal surplus was more than $13 billion. 
 
Our joy as Canadians is that our country, Canada, is doing well. 
Our frustration is that we thought Stephen Harper was our ticket 
in. I want to remind our Conservative MPs of their genesis in 
the Reform Party, Mr. Speaker. The Reform Party took hold in 
Western Canada because Western Canadians saw a federal 
Conservative Party turning its back on the West. Who can 
forget the fact that in 1986 the federal Conservative government 
of the day awarded a $1.4 billion CF-18 maintenance contract 
to Canadair of Montreal over Bristol Aerospace of Winnipeg, 
despite the fact that the latter tender was cheaper and superior. 
 
I say to our Conservative MPs when it comes to equalization, 
don’t turn your backs on Saskatchewan. Don’t turn your backs 
on the West in order to curry favour with Quebec. If they think 
they can get away with that, Mr. Speaker, they got another thing 
coming. And I look forward to hearing the Sask Party on a fair 
equalization deal for Saskatchewan, just like I look forward to 
hearing them condemn the federal government’s ham-handling 
mishandling of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board originated in World War I. Farmers 
immediately recognized it was putting cash in their coveralls 
and they liked it. Studies more recently show that the benefit to 
Saskatchewan farmers from Canadian Wheat Board single-desk 
marketing, selling, is the benefit for Saskatchewan farmers is 
more than $300 million each and every year. 
 
The federal Agriculture minister has done two things recently 
very wrong. First, he gagged the Canadian Wheat Board by 
directing the Canadian Wheat Board to not advocate 
single-desk marketing. Don’t talk about what you do. It’s what 
he said. 

Second, he directed the Canadian Wheat Board — this is more 
serious — he directed the Canadian Wheat Board to eliminate 
one-third, that’s one in three farmers, from the Canadian Wheat 
Board voters list. And they’ve got elections for directors 
coming up right now. This is ham-handed handling. And 
where’s the Sask Party on this undemocratic process, Mr. 
Speaker? Where are they? 
 
Well, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. We have . . . October 25, 
two days ago, I have a copy from the Leader-Post, and I want to 
quote the member for Saltcoats in that. I’ll just go straight to the 
heart of my issue in the interests of time. I’m going to quote the 
last paragraph which says, quote: 
 

“I think . . . [that] Wartman is trying to . . . create a wedge 
between the Sask. Party and the federal government,” said 
Bjornerud of the close relationship between members of 
. . . [the] provincial party and governing Conservatives. 
 
“Why doesn’t he mind his own business?” 

 
Mr. Speaker, two days ago, that’s the quote for the member for 
Saltcoats. 
 
Well let me, let me remind the hon. member for Saltcoats of a 
few of his other quotes. Let me go a little bit further back. Let 
me go to November 15, 2005, page 171 of the Hansard from 
this very institution. Well what did the member for Saltcoats 
say then? He said, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, will that government this week finally debate 
the issue . . . [of] agriculture, [and] finally help us get the 
message through to the federal government? 

 
Well there’s agriculture, and he’s saying let’s get on with 
lobbying the federal government. Or we can go to March 22, 
2006, even more recently, where the hon. member for Saltcoats 
said, quote: 
 

We should continue to lobby the federal government for 
help for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, help for Saskatchewan farmers. And now, 
now when the Canadian Wheat Board is in danger of being 
collapsed by an ideologicallydriven national government, the 
ideologues on the other side just say, argh, argh, argh, us too. 
Shame. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, I ask for opposition members to stand up 
and speak out and act in the best interests of Saskatchewan 
people. And in every instance to act in the best interests of their 
Saskatchewan farming communities. Tell your right wing. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Tell your right wing ideological buddies in 
Ottawa three things. One, deliver on the promised fair energy 
accord. Second, deliver some fairness for farmers. Stop being 
so bull-headedly ham-handed or put another way, simply let 
farmers democratically decide the future of the farmer’s 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, New Democrat MLAs . . . oh pardon me. And 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2006 

third, third thing you should tell them is, stop being so 
wrong-headedly stubborn about literacy. Stop being so stubborn 
about literacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, New Democrat MLAs 
have a hockey history of fun fundraising. Our first hockey game 
fundraiser was in Saskatoon Riversdale. We raised money for 
literacy that night. So you can imagine our collective horror 
when the federal government cut literacy funding. 
 
Leave the tragedy of that for a moment, leave that aside. Since 
adult literacy, adult literacy is taught mostly by volunteers with 
some administrative support, the federal government has said 
volunteers aren’t working cheap enough so let’s cut off that 
little bit of administrative support that they have too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the divide has never been clearer. New Democrats 
say people sometimes need a hand up. Conservatives just blame 
people and say they’re lazy or stupid or both. Shame. 
 
If anyone was uncertain about where the loyalties of the Sask 
Party lie, all they have to do is look at their shameful 
performance on equalization, the Wheat Board, and literacy — 
all areas targeted by their federal right wing buddies, all issues 
that adversely affect Saskatchewan families, all issues where 
the Sask Party has stood against Saskatchewan people and taken 
the federal government side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, some people say it doesn’t matter 
who you elect. And I can remember the Devine Conservatives 
trying to sell that snake oil in 1991. Some people say having 
all-time record high employment, having all-time record low 
unemployment, having a fast, improving educational level of 
Saskatchewan people, being the only province that does not 
charge a health care premium, having the lowest PST of any 
province with one PST, with taxes going down in some way in 
every budget for the last eight . . . And did I mention the PST is 
going down to 5 per cent effective midnight tonight? 
 
Some people say this isn’t good enough, Mr. Speaker. I say it is 
always good to do better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the lowest cost utility bundle in Canada. 
We are handling our tax money wisely. Under this government, 
Saskatchewan families are enjoying the real benefits of our 
strong economy. We enjoy many benefits, and to those good 
things we are adding the multi-year road and rail strategy. And 
to aid in that, we’re deducting every fuel dollar collected by the 
province to building and maintaining roads. And I’m pleased to 
say we will also be establishing a multi-year infrastructure fund. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, my time is I know very near the end. I 
wish to make . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I know. There’s 
much more I want to say, but I have to draw this to a close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to make the official statements of the 
motion, seconded by the member for Regina Wascana Plains: 
 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To His Honour the Honourable Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:15] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park, seconded by the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains: 
 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech that Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Why is the member 
from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member just briefly state his point. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
long-standing parliamentary principle that tax measures should 
be introduced in the Assembly before they are introduced 
anywhere else. It has come to our attention that the Minister of 
Highways violated this important principle by doing an 
interview with his local radio station prior to this morning’s 
announcement by the Minister of Finance. 
 
This member is an experienced member who knows the proper 
procedures of this House as he was first elected in 1986, and 
this information was broadcast to members hearing the 
minister’s announcement prior to members hearing the 
minister’s announcement during ministerial statements. It was 
important that we were only delivered this information when 
the minister took his feet in order for us to respond. We were 
not, on the opposition, given the opportunity to have this 
information beforehand. 
 
It is my view that these actions by the Minister of Highways 
have resulted in a breach of members’ privilege, and I would 
ask that the Speaker give us the opportunity to move a privilege 
motion referring this matter to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges for further investigation. 



October 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

The Speaker: — Speaking to the point, the Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point raised 
by the leader . . . the House Leader, I should say, of the 
opposition, it is the fact that the minister did speak in an 
embargoed . . . with an embargoed agreement with the media. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it was an understanding that was 
not honoured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will recognize two things. It has been the case, 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of Saskatchewan history that there 
was — and I can recall — a sales tax change that came into 
effect on the eve of an election, on the eve of an election, with a 
statement having been made clearly outside of the Assembly. 
The Assembly was not in fact convened at that time, Mr. 
Speaker, and that sales tax change was put in place retroactively 
by legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has, the Minister of Finance has 
announced today that he will be introducing legislation but 
made the announcement today that it will be in effect this 
evening. There is no way that anyone who heard the message 
that was given by the media, that had violated the embargo 
agreement, will be in a position in order to benefit from that. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate. It was not planned. 
 
It is a long-standing tradition that there have been embargo 
agreements with the media and there will be, I think there will 
be members of the media who will be disturbed by the conduct 
of one of the medias in this regard, Mr. Speaker. However I 
respectfully suggest that that is not a case of privilege and is not 
appropriate to bring before the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. I take matters raised as 
points of privilege in a very serious way. The rules provide time 
for the Speaker to make a decision. Under ordinary conditions, 
two hours are requested. In this case, I allowed the members to 
make their point. 
 
But I would like to at this time reserve an opportunity, reserve 
time to look at this situation in detail and bring back a ruling 
whether or not it is a prima facie . . . whether a prima facie case 
has been established. And I will do so before orders of the day 
on Monday. 
 
And we will now proceed with the debate, and the Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
to be the seconder in this great debate. But due to the lateness of 
the hour, Mr. Speaker, I would want to be proud out loud on 
Monday. And with that, I now would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:20.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Stewart ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Chisholm........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Harpauer .......................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Allchurch .....................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Kirsch...........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Merriman ....................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Duncan .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................13 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................14 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................14 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Democracy in Action 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................15 
 Death of Cancer Patient 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................15 
 Vision for the Future of Saskatchewan  
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................15 
 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................15 
 City of Prince Albert Declares Itself Violence-Free 
  Borgerson ....................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 Cabinet Membership 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 Constituent Receives Literacy Award Source 
  Iwanchuk .....................................................................................................................................................................................16 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Combatting Population Decline 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................17 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................17 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ....................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................20 
 Support for Premier’s Leadership and Government Agenda 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................21 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................21 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Tax Changes 
  Thomson ......................................................................................................................................................................................21 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................22 
 
 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Unparliamentary Language 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................23 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................23 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
CONDOLENCES 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................23 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................24 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................26 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................28 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................29 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................30 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................30 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................32 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................33 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................33 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................34 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Gantefoer (Point of Privilege) ....................................................................................................................................................38 
  Hagel (Point of Privilege) ...........................................................................................................................................................39 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................39 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


