






















































Hansard: March 17, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 22A  FRIDAY, MARCH 17, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 645 
 March 17, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise once 
again on behalf of my constituents to present a petition 
concerning the condition of Highway 32, the highway that runs 
from Cabri to the community of Leader. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these four pages of petitions are signed by 
constituents from the communities of Sceptre, Leader, 
Richmound, Fox Valley, Mendham, and Prelate. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people in my area who are very concerned about 
Highway No. 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
the Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding 
areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Edmonton, 
Saskatoon, Wynyard, Wadena, and Calgary. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today with citizens concerned about the conditions of Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from around the province 
— in Humboldt, St. Benedict, Archerwill, Drake, Bruno, Lake 
Lenore, Pilger, Fulda, St. Gregor, Watson, Spalding, Unity, and 
Annaheim. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from constituents who are opposed to any possible 
reduction of services in their health care in Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least their current level of services. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Landis, Biggar and district, and 
Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from parents in the constituency 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Kucey Crescent, Laura Avenue, 
and Cowley Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remains open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This one is signed by the good citizens from the town of 
Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today regarding a petition 
for the widening of Highway 5. And I’ll read the prayer for 
relief: 
 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Humboldt, 
Lake Lenore, Quill Lake, and Fulda. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens who are concerned with the condition and the 
lack of wideness of Highway No. 5 between Humboldt and 
Saskatoon. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
Signed by good citizens of Humboldt, Muenster, and Pilger, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

New petition concerning the highway section shop in 
Watrous, sessional paper 67; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 5, 7, and 64. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to you and through you to introduce a good friend of 
mine, a dedicated committee man from Prince Albert. His name 
is Dennis Nowoselsky. 
 
Dennis is a United and Anglican Church minister. He was a 
probation and parole officer for 24 years. He was a city 
councillor in Prince Albert for seven years. He put forward a 
motion to this city council in Prince Albert which went to 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 
later to the legislature to ban smoking in Saskatchewan. And he 
also had sent a letter to the then prime minister, Jean Chrétien, 
to support farmers during their time of stress because of low 
commodity prices and high input costs. Dennis has 11 years 
education and he’s one of the many people in Saskatchewan 
looking for a job. I would invite everyone to welcome Mr. 
Nowoselsky to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is my honour 
to introduce three people in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
fitting, this being the week of the men’s brier, to have our first 
actual curler participant of the brier there; a gentleman, Randy 
Nelson to be specific, my first cousin who is the second on 
BC’s [British Columbia’s] team. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to all of my colleagues that Randy 
Nelson grew up on a farm near Hallonquist, Hodgeville — in 
that area but near Hallonquist — has moved to Kelowna where 
he works in the fisheries and wildlife department. Members 
may want to check with the Leader-Post yesterday. There’s an 
interesting feature article about my first cousin Randy, but I’m not 
going to take up the time of the House with that. But it’s well 
worth the read. It describes much of the more exciting things that 
he’s done in his life. 
 
What I do want to describe is the pride that I felt as I watched 
Randy curl. He is a very good shot maker, but he will always be 
known to me as just an excellent, excellent sweeper. I saw him 
in the ninth end take a rock that shouldn’t have made it halfway 
down the ice — the skip’s rock — put it right on the button. If 
ever I saw a rock forced, Mr. Speaker, that was a rock forced. 
 
With Randy is his wife Lorraine and his son Darren, who is a 
curler in his own right, having been on a team that won the BC 
juniors and having two other times been at that level of curling. 
So I expect to see Darren coming back and representing BC in 
the men’s seniors for the Brier at some point in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming 
my relatives, my first cousin Randy, his wife Lorraine, and their 
son Darren, to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you 
a few people sitting in your gallery, friends of mine from 
Saskatoon. First, Tracy MacLachlan, Dave MacLachlan, and 
young Leland MacLachlan. To single out Leland, he is 
distinguished by being an accomplished athlete, a fine 
musician, and a long-time close friend of my youngest 
daughter. 
 
With the clan MacLachlan is Xavier Plamondon. Monsieur 
Plamondon is a exchange student in Quebec City, now staying 
with MacLachlans for a couple of months, visiting Saskatoon 
and our province, and today our legislature. 
 
And I hope all members of the legislature will join me in 
welcoming the MacLachlans to the legislature and Monsieur 
Plamondon to our province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
my eyes don’t fail me, I believe in the east gallery there’s a 
constituent of mine from Hafford. And I would like to welcome 
him here to his legislature and have all the members of the 
legislature welcome him here too. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my privilege today to introduce to you and through you to 
this Assembly a number of our Saskatchewan’s nearly 300 
volunteer crop reporters. These reporters are recognized today 
by Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food for their commitment 
and long service to Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry. For 25 
years each of these crop reporters has volunteered his personal 
time during the crop season to collect information about crop 
development and precipitation in his rural municipality. And 
every Sunday afternoon or evening for at least 30 weeks of 
those 25 years, each reporter submitted his information to the 
department to meet the weekly crop reporting deadline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this endeavour has been to provide 
a timely and accurate crop report about the development of 
Saskatchewan crops to all farmers and rural municipalities in 
the province and to the general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize these individuals for their dedication 
to the Saskatchewan crop reporting service. I would ask these 
crop reporters and their spouses and guests to stand as I mention 
their names: Ron Daviduk of Assiniboia and the RM of Excel 
No. 71 and his wife Nancy, David Bettschen of Broadview and 
the RM of Elcapo No. 154 and his wife Linda, David Stephen 
of Qu’Appelle and the RM of South Qu’Appelle No. 157 and 
his wife Marian, Lyle Ehrman of Leader and the RM of 
Happyland No. 231 and his wife Linda. One of the crop 
reporters, Mr. Julien Kowalchuk of North Battleford and the 
RM of Round Hill No. 467 was unable to attend today. His 
cows are calving and he thought it was better that he stay and 
supervise that operation. 
 
Would the members of the Legislative Assembly please join 
with me in recognizing these crop reporters who have 
volunteered their time and effort for the good of the province 
during these past 25 years. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join with the Minister of Agriculture on behalf of the 
official opposition in acknowledging and welcoming the crop 
reporters here today with their wives. They play a vital part in 
the agriculture industry of this province, and we very much 
appreciate the job that they do. So I ask all members to once 
again welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And not only 
are my eyes failing me but my memory is too for I forgot to 
mention that gentleman’s name. I’d like to welcome him again 
to the legislature, and his name is Michael Janostin from 
Hafford. So welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Celebrating the Gifts of the Irish 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And top 
of the morning, happy St. Patrick’s Day. Today is set aside for 
everyone, whether they have Irish blood flowing through their 
veins or not, to honour and celebrate the gifts of the Irish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s true the world can use a little more 
Saskatchewan, but it’s also true that the world has been 
benefiting for years from Ireland. Not long ago a book was 
published entitled How the Irish Saved Civilization. It tells the 
tale of how Irish scholars preserved the West’s written treasury 
through the Dark Ages and put their unique stamp on Western 
culture when they gave that knowledge back to the Continent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ireland has been rightfully described as an island 
of saints and scholars. It was the Irish who gave us Mary Harris 
“Mother” Jones — a beloved and early advocate for the rights 
of workers — musical genius running the gamut from the Irish 
Tenors to U2 to The Pogues to Johnny Cash, Mr. Speaker, and 
literary genius like that of Joyce and Beckett, Brendan Behan 
and George Bernard Shaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1905 one in ten of Saskatchewan’s population 
was Irish, and they’ve been a vital force in the evolution of our 
province and culture right to this very merry day. 
 
On St. Patrick’s Day we celebrate the rich Irish cultural 
tradition that is so plainly manifest in the Irish wit and gift for 
laughter. I’d just like to close with a wee bit of an Irish blessing, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

May the luck of the Irish enfold you. 
May the blessings of Saint Patrick behold you. 

 
Erin go bragh, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Recognizing St. Patrick’s Day 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we would like to join with the 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

members opposite and congratulate our Irish people and 
recognize St. Patrick’s Day. I want to wish all members of the 
Assembly and people across the province of Irish descent a safe 
and happy St. Paddy’s Day. It’s a day we celebrate not only all 
things Irish but the great contribution that persons of Irish 
ancestry have made to our province and our country. 
 
Last year we celebrated our province’s centennial and the 
cultures that helped to shape our province in the early years. 
The Irish people were an important part of that history and that 
building. One in ten people in Saskatchewan were Irish or of 
Irish origin at the time our province was founded. And their 
mark can be seen across the province, not just in our towns and 
our cities but also in our culture. 
 
It’s ironic today that when we think of the vast numbers of Irish 
settlers who came to our province in the early years of the 
country to escape poverty and look for opportunity that today it 
is Ireland that is the global economic leader and Saskatchewan 
is the place losing jobs and people in the middle of an oil boom. 
 
Now Ireland is a Celtic tiger that has demonstrated how 
successful you can be when you have an economic plan focused 
on competitive taxes, investment in people, and all sectors of 
the economy working together for economic growth. It is a 
lesson that this government should be paying attention to. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, if I could digress for just a moment, the 
member from Arm River has pointed out that his father’s 
birthday is today and to tie it in, I’d like to wish Joe O’Brkich 
of Bladworth a happy birthday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Prince Albert and Area Community Foundation 
Gives Grants 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and top of the 
morning to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert and Area Community 
Foundation has presented seven charitable organizations a total 
of $49,000 in grant money to help them continue their good 
work. 
 
The awards ceremony was held at the Saskatchewan Forestry 
Centre and included a dance presentation by the St. Mary High 
School dance program. 
 
The grants awarded ranged from the $400 received by Wesley 
United Church and West Flat Community Centre for the West 
Flat Explorers, to the $18,000 that went to the Prince Albert 
Safety Council for improvements to the multi-use recreational 
trail. 
 
Other grants went to the Self Help and Recreational Education 
or SHARE program, the Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan, 
the Prince Albert Gymnastics Club, the Prince Albert Group 
Home Society, and Prince Albert Children’s Festival. 
 

Following the grant presentations, community fund board 
member Bryan Rindal presented the foundation with a cheque 
for $25,000 on behalf of his mother-in-law and father-in-law. 
 
In keeping with the organization’s practice of not spending 
donations but rather investing them and using the earned 
income to support local projects and initiatives, the money will 
go into the Knute and Muriel Hemstad Legacy Fund, and the 
interest collected each year will go toward worthwhile causes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank all the community groups and in particular 
the Prince Albert and Area Community Foundation for their 
ongoing contributions and good work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Rosetown & District Chamber of Commerce Awards 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
tell the Assembly about an event I attended in Rosetown on 
March 1. 
 
The Rosetown & District Chamber of Commerce honoured the 
community’s Citizen of the Year, Florine Klassen, at its annual 
general meeting. Florine Klassen has distinguished her life by 
serving others in Rosetown. She was employed for many years 
as a housekeeper at the hospital, but that was just the beginning 
of her efforts. The list of Florine Klassen’s volunteering 
activities include the Red Cross committee, the senior citizens’ 
choral group, the Rosetown Dance Club, the music festival, the 
high school band, the cemetery beautification committee, Meals 
on Wheels, and Sunday school. Yet she still had lots of time for 
people. And at 81, she’s not finished. Her next challenge is to 
get the community hall rejuvenated. Congratulations to Florine 
Klassen for being Rosetown’s Citizen of the Year. 
 
At the same function, the chamber of commerce announced its 
Business of the Year. Nominated were West Central Air, 
Western Sales, and Red Rose Restaurant. Red Rose Restaurant 
was awarded the Business of the Year Award. The Employee of 
the Year was Elaine Domes of the Royal Bank, and Student 
Employee of the Year was Janea Dawson of the Rosetown 
Co-op. 
 
Congratulations to all the nominees and winners, and well done 
Rosetown & District Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

The Friar’s Briar 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Earlier this week I welcomed all 
participants to the Tim Horton’s Brier. Today I’m sharing with 
you the Brier isn’t the only curling action going on in the Queen 
City. Across town at the Caledonian Curling Club, 22 rinks 
from British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 
Ontario have gathered to play in the Friar’s Briar. 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

Mr. Speaker, the Friar’s Briar has been happening pretty much 
on an annual basis since 1978. Usually this tournament is held 
around the same time and in the same place as the Brier, but not 
necessarily. Sometimes only a few rinks show up to compete 
and sometimes as many as two dozen. 
 
Even for curling, Mr. Speaker, it’s all pretty relaxed. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that the only real rules of the Friar’s Briar 
over and above the basic rules of the game is that three of the 
four players on each rink has to be a member of the clergy from 
all denominations, and every player on every rink has to have a 
good time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Monday it was my great pleasure and 
honour to take part in the opening ceremonies of the 2006 
Friar’s Briar and to help throw the opening rock of the 
tournament. I can tell you it was a lot of fun, and I want to 
thank the organizers of this grassroots event, in particular my 
constituent, the Rev. Gerry Borkowsky, Co-Chair of the Regina 
host group, for allowing me the opportunity to be part of their 
wonderful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Olympic Gold Medallist Colleen Sostorics 
Honoured at Community Supper 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure today to speak about one more of Saskatchewan’s most 
recent Olympian gold medallists. I speak of Colleen Sostorics, a 
member of Canada’s gold medal women’s hockey team. 
 
This past week Colleen was honoured at a community supper in 
her hometown of Kennedy. While in the area, she took time to 
visit a couple of schools and show off her gold medal. It is said 
her love for the game is clearly evident in her face as Colleen 
Sostorics tells students of Kipling School about her team’s 
successful defence of the women’s hockey gold medal at last 
month’s Olympic Games. 
 
Her love for her country also becomes clear as she describes the 
pride she felt at the opening ceremonies as the Canadian 
athletes entered the stadium at Turin, Italy, led by her hockey 
teammate and Team Canada flag-bearer, Danielle Goyette. In 
fact there was a great sense of camaraderie among all Canadian 
athletes at the Games, whatever the sport, Colleen says. 
 
Colleen encourages students to set goals, to focus on those 
goals, and prepare to complete their goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Colleen keeps a rigorous regime which includes 
cardiovascular and strength training. She told a young 
questioner that lifting weights is her favourite form of exercise. 
She trains to be in the best condition she can be to best 
represent Canada, Saskatchewan, and her hometown of 
Kennedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations, Colleen Sostorics, Saskatchewan 
Olympian, gold medallist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Congratulations to Winners of SaskEnergy’s 
Adopt-A-Junior Program 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as a way to get Saskatchewan 
youth even more involved in the Tim Hortons Brier, 
SaskEnergy initiated Adopt-A-Junior program. This program 
provided Saskatchewan curlers aged 11 to 19 the opportunity to 
become honorary fifth members of the 12 national teams that 
competed in the Brier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners of the Adopt-A-Junior program are: 
Ashton Kallechy of Beechy Curling Club; Amy Adair, Melissa 
Huys, Trevor Donison, and David Carnegie of the Tartan Club 
here in Regina — David also plays out of the Creelman Curling 
Club; Gregory Shiplack of the Montmartre Curling Club, Chris 
Collins of the Lumsden Curling Club, Jillian Dukart of the 
Lampman Curling Club, Jessica Brost of Maple Creek Curling 
Club, J.D. Cole from the Gainsborough Curling Club, Aaron 
Lindgren of the Watrous Curling Club, Kelsey Dutton of the 
Gull Lake and District Curling Club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did these juniors practise with Canada’s 
best, they received team jackets, tickets to the Brier, and photos 
with the team. Nearly 100 juniors entered the contest, and the 
winners were those who spoke of the role that they play in their 
own curling communities, their aspirations for becoming 
competitive curlers, and even some of their favourite players. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these up-and-coming Saskatchewan curlers and in commending 
SaskEnergy for its innovative approach to community 
involvement and support of volunteers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Highway Maintenance and Storage Depots 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the possible closure of section 
shops and satellites by the Department of Highways poses a 
serious threat to the safety of travellers and workers in 
Saskatchewan. If these closures proceed, staff using road 
clearing equipment will have much further distances to travel. 
That means roads will not be cleared as frequently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government even considering a 
proposal that may jeopardize the safety of motorists and 
workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member opposite and to this House that this government has no 
intentions of closing the rural maintenance shops. I think it’s an 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

obvious process that management would take to review on a 
regular basis the changes in demographics, the changes in road 
use, the size of the equipment that’s used and the job that it can 
do. I think that’s a prudent thing to do. I want to say that road 
safety and road maintenance is very much a priority of ours, 
and it’s reflected in the Department of Highways budget on an 
annual basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately 
the people of Saskatchewan just do not believe the Minister of 
Highways. We have in our hands a copy of a map outlining the 
closures of section shops and satellites, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A recent report from the Department of Highways outlines this 
government’s plans for the equipment storage facilities and 
road clearing over the next decade. This report states some 
buildings must be closed because years of NDP [New 
Democratic Party] underfunding and neglect have left them in 
poor repair. In other cases like Churchbridge, the shop is 
described as being in good condition yet is being considered for 
closure. In Watrous the shop is in good condition yet still being 
considered for closure as well. Mr. Speaker, none of this makes 
any sense. It’s contradictory. 
 
Can the Minister of Highways assure this Assembly that he will 
halt any plans to close these facilities as outlined in this strategy 
document? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say again the 
government, the department is not planning any shop closures. I 
can tell that member that I’ve met with members of SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 
who represent the workers. I have communicated to them what 
our plans are. I can also tell the member that the process is and 
will remain that any closures that take place will have to be 
signed off by the Minister Responsible for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation, and I have no intention of 
signing any such documents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a letter 
from the previous minister of Highways. It’s dated December 
22, 2004, and in that letter the minister assures me that there are 
no plans to close the Lucky Lake highways depot. Yet this same 
depot is listed in the department’s central region equipment 
storage strategy as being slated for closure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s confusing. Who is right? Now the Minister of 
Highways has been in his position long enough he should know. 
Who’s telling the truth? My question is, is the former minister 
of Highways and the current minister telling the truth, or is the 
author of that equipment storage strategy telling the truth? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to 
the member opposite what I have just previously said. There are 
no closures going to take place. Any of these would have to be 
signed by myself. I have no intention of doing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You can imagine 
how confusing this is for the people who are affected and need 
to depend on these highways. They have Highways department 
staff telling them that the depot is going to be closed in three to 
five years, and they are concerned that the safety of the roads 
are in jeopardy. On November 24 of this past year in 
supplementary estimates, Mr. John Law, the deputy minister of 
Highways, repeated the early assurances that the Lucky Lake 
highways depot would not be closed. And yet the department’s 
own strategy document reaches the exact opposite conclusion. 
 
I ask the Minister of Highways again: can he assure this House 
that he is correct in saying that the Lucky Lake highway depot 
will not be closed? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you’ll have to forgive 
us for not taking that minister’s word, definite word, because if 
we go back to the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] fiasco, if we remember what happened 
there, someone in this House misled the public for a number of 
years over what happened with SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: Churchbridge and Stockholm in 
my area are also on that closure list, but we could go on and on 
and on. There’s Glaslyn, Green Lake, Shellbrook, Watrous, 
Kelvington, Porcupine Plain. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and 
on. And if my understanding is right, in my area if these 
satellite shops are closed, they’ll be ran out of Yorkton and 
Melville, which is about 60 miles from the Manitoba border. 
 
I guess my question to the minister is, Mr. Speaker: do we have 
to have a busload of school kids hit head-on with a semi before 
we realize that this is a safety issue, not just a monetary issue 
but a safety issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, that is a prime 
example of why the Saskatchewan Party has no credibility with 
the general public — because the inflamed rhetoric, the 
misrepresentation on occasion of the facts, I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, is well documented and well known. I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that public safety is a primacy for this department, the 
people who work in it, the men and women who prepare our 
highways as best that they can on a daily basic for traffic north, 
south, east, west. It’s their responsibility to ensure that we do 
the best that we can within our budgets to have safe highways 
and safe roads. 
 
With respect to the document that the members . . . [inaudible] 
. . . refer, obviously within a department there will be a review. 
There will be an analysis. There will be some drafts that will be 
prepared that will prepare information for senior management 
and for the minister’s office to peruse. I think that’s a normal 
course of action, and it’s an appropriate thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister, Churchbridge sits on the junction of 
Highway 16, 80, and 8. They service all those areas, and a few 
years ago there were seven men worked out of that department. 
Now there’s two. And if this plan follows through, there will 
none left there. And that will leave about 60 miles for either 
Melville or Yorkton to service. 
 
A load of salt in my understanding, Mr. Speaker, when the 
roads are icy, will do about 15 miles. So what that tells me is 
that’s four truckloads of salt going back empty, coming out and 
doing . . . and it’ll take much longer to salt these highways. 
 
Right now we see at this time of year where our highways are in 
terrible condition. We’re having accidents happen out there 
with the situation as it is now. If we close down more of these 
satellite depots out there in the Highway department, the 
problem is only going to get worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where is this going to save dollars? And when does the safety 
factor come in to it? Mr. Speaker, let’s not close down rural 
Saskatchewan completely. And the minister says there’s no 
such a report. Who initiated this report, and who do we listen to, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, I truly do appreciate his analysis and his 
recommendations in terms of how to manage the operations of 
the Department of Highways. But I would have to say that I 
would prefer to rely on the professionals, the people who do 
this on a regular basis. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt in my 
mind why the members opposite have chosen to make this day 
highways day. And I want to tell you why. Every day this week 
has been about the economy with the exception of today. But 
you know what, Mr. Speaker, they woke up, and they read the 
Regina Leader-Post, and it said, “Boom times ahead; economy 
to grow.” Mr. Speaker, that’s what this province is about. 
 
This is an infrastructure this Department of Highways manages. 
It helps to build this economy in rural and in urban 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, let there be no mistake. This 
government will lead this province in economic development 
tomorrow and next week as it has in the past. The Department 
of Highways will be part of that infrastructure. And we will 
take advice from members on that side of the House, but we 
prefer to rely on our professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

SaskTel International’s Project in Trinidad and Tobago 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as members on this side of the 
House are well aware, there’s a lot of areas in Saskatchewan 
that are still waiting for cellphone coverage. But last July 
SaskTel announced that it had signed a $125 million contract to 
bring cellphone coverage to the Caribbean islands of Trinidad 
and Tobago. 
 
Could the minister please tell us the status of that contract. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
SaskTel International does do deals out and work on projects 
outside of Canada. But their first commitment, first and 
foremost commitment is to Saskatchewan and the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say, how are we 
doing? Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? We’ve got the best 
high-speed Internet coverage anywhere in North America. And 
we also . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And we also have the highest percentage 
of population coverage for digital cellular service anywhere in 
North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, the member can say, 
how are we doing? Well SaskTel is doing fine. Cellular service 
in the province of Saskatchewan is doing fine. And the people 
of Saskatchewan will continue to benefit. 
 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, sadly it doesn’t appear like the 
minister is aware of the status of that contract, so let us tell her 
what we’ve learnt. Last week SaskTel’s Trinidad partner, 
LaqTel, abruptly cancelled the contract. When SaskTel signed 
the contract just last July, the government made a big 
announcement and issued a news release that that minister 
should have been aware of. However when the contract was 
cancelled just last week, the NDP had nothing to say about it. 
We had to find out about it by reading the Trinidad Express. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was the contract abruptly cancelled? Was 
SaskTel paid in full for the work that it has done so far? And 
how much money are Saskatchewan taxpayers out as a result of 
this botched deal in the Caribbean? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take note of the 
question and respond later. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think this is a 
significant contract at $125 million, and perhaps the minister 
should check into this fairly shortly. 
 
It is also our understanding that SaskTel actually moved a 
number of employees to Trinidad to work on this project. 
They’ve moved there with their families as the contract was 
supposed to last four or five years. We were told that the 
Trinidad company simply ran out of money and it stopped 
paying its bills, so the contract was cancelled for those reasons. 
 
And now all of these employees will have to be moved back to 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, does the minister know how many 
of her employees were moved to Trinidad? Who’s on the hook 
for moving all of these employees back to Saskatchewan? Is it 
true that SaskTel’s partner in Trinidad stopped paying its bills, 
and that’s why the contract was cancelled? And the bottom line 
again, how much money have we lost on this deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I do know this was a 
consulting contract. There was some problems with bills being 
paid. The contract was cancelled. But, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
normal course of business. When SaskTel is doing a consulting 
contract . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, order. Order. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a consulting contract 

where companies will hire SaskTel because of their high regard 
for SaskTel’s expertise and knowledge and some of the 
groundbreaking work that SaskTel has done around the world, 
not just here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has gone onside, offside. 
Get rid of the Crowns. That was their first song and dance. 
Then they stood up in this House and said they supported the 
Crowns. Mr. Speaker, all they have to do is look at SaskTel’s 
record, and that speaks for itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this contract deal went 
sideways in less than a year. In less than 12 months, it was 
already botched. I hardly think that that’s normal business 
practice, or is it for SaskTel International? And if it is, that’s 
concerning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another article in the Trinidad Express that 
indicates many of the cell towers being put up by SaskTel and 
LaqTel were actually illegal. Is that also normal business 
practices? The article states these towers were not authorized by 
the government, and as a result they’ll have to be torn down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned before, there’s many places in 
Saskatchewan that we don’t have cell coverage. So maybe the 
minister can check it out and see if we can bring these towers 
back home and set them up here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, instead of putting up illegal 
towers in Trinidad and Tobago, does the NDP plan on putting 
up a few legal towers here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this leads back to a basic 
debate we have had with the Saskatchewan Party for many, 
many years. They have no credibility when it comes to speaking 
about the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, which have 
been in place for many years, which have provided top-notch 
value and service for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some of the highest coverage — digital 
cellular coverage — anywhere in North America. We have the 
largest coverage for high-speed Internet anywhere in North 
America, Mr. Speaker. But we get the backhanded, sly 
comments that are supposed questions that are absolutely 
ridiculous, and they do discredit to the people who work for 
SaskTel and the people who operate the company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have a minister that’s just 
given an incredible rant on credibility when she didn’t even 
know a thing about this contract. She couldn’t answer the 
questions at all. She had no clue. So she’s one to talk about 
credibility. 
 
How on earth did SaskTel make this $125 million contract and 
move a whole bunch of employees all the way to Trinidad only 
to have the deal fall apart a few months later? Mr. Speaker, was 
there any due diligence done before this contract was signed? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will say again that it is the 
consulting contract. I do not micromanage SaskTel or SaskTel 
International but, Mr. Speaker, I have made the commitment 
that I will get the information that’s necessary . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I would ask members 
to allow the minister’s response to be heard. The Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this goes back to an age-old debate that we have had 
with the Saskatchewan Party and the New Democratic 
Government of Saskatchewan about the value of the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have hopped all over the map on this. They 
support them; they don’t support them. They disagree with civil 
servants. They like the Crown corporations; they support them. 
They support legislation being put in place to protect them, but 
they continue to talk about core operations. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when I look across, what does that mean? What’s core 
operations to this group? Well it’s dial-up and it’s rotary dial 
phones. And, Mr. Speaker, the world has moved on and 
SaskTel will move with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Job Vacancies in Nursing 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Health stood in the House and wanted 
to talk about credibility. I watched the tape this morning, and it 
really looked quite funny when he jumped to his feet and talked 
about credibility and then just stood there silent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but there is definitely an issue of credibility when 
it comes to this minister because later on he had the audacity to 
question the credibility of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses] and the numbers that they have regarding nursing 
vacancies. He also went on to say yesterday that he had been 
working with SUN and he co-operated with all of SUN’s 
requests when it came to talking about the vacancies. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that couldn’t be further from the truth. 
 

We have a number of letters that SUN cc’d us that went to the 
minister — letters that were sent in March ’04, letters that were 
sent in September ’05, a letter was sent in October ’05, letter 
sent in January ’06, and another letter sent recently in February 
’06 — none of which has this government answered. There’s a 
real issue with credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When will the minister submit the information that SUN has 
requested regarding the vacancies in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
have indicated since the beginning of this debate, I intend to 
meet with representatives of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
before the end of this month. We will discuss the letters that 
they have sent. We will discuss the vacancies, and we will 
discuss how we go about ensuring that there are more nurses 
employed in this province next year and the year after than 
there are today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, what a bit of 
public embarrassment will make this minister do. For two years, 
five letters, absolutely no response from the minister. Now after 
a couple of days of questioning and in some pretty rough news 
scrums out in the rotunda, now he’s going to meet with SUN 
and disclose the information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s other issues with credibility this minister has. He’s 
talked about meeting with SUN. We’d like to know when that 
meeting is going to be because quite frankly I’m not so sure that 
that has been planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that this minister has a real fear of setting 
a target because he knows he can’t reach it. But SUN is talking 
about setting targets for recruitment and retention. Will that be 
part of the discussion when he does meet with SUN — targets 
set for recruitment and retention of nurses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
understand it, the meeting was originally scheduled for March 
31 at the request of SUN. We are trying to find an alternate 
date. Apparently that date does not fit their circumstances. We 
are in the process of setting that up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to indicate my pleasure with the 
amount of time that the media did spend with me the other day 
to discuss the seriousness, the seriousness of this issue. While 
the members opposite may stay up all night trying to think of 
different ways to misquote me, Mr. Speaker, I applaud the 
media for being fair in their reporting on this subject. 
 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It’s interesting that he enjoyed the time that 
he had with the media. It seemed like after that length of time 
he finally submitted to saying that he will supply numbers, that 
he will meet with SUN. Unfortunately it takes a tough news 
scrum to get the minister to that point. 
 
But we’ll be interested to find out what his numbers are. He’s 
talking about releasing the number of vacancies in the province. 
We’d be very interested in knowing what that is because we’re 
talking about the number of registered nurses — I know there’s 
an issue with LPNs [licensed practical nurse] as well and 
vacancies there — but just the number of vacancies for 
registered nurses. 
 
SUN’s numbers are showing that there are 65 vacancies in the 
Regina Health Region alone, another 42 in Prairie North which 
is around Prince Albert, and 37 in Saskatoon. These are all 
spots that need to be filled with registered nurses. 
 
Will the minister commit today to filling the positions that are 
vacant within the province, in other words, setting a goal that 
within the next budget cycle these vacancies will be filled 
within Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, we have acknowledged that 
filling the vacancies is the first priority of this government. Mr. 
Speaker, we also acknowledge that there is additional work to 
do. That’s why we developed the action plan that was issued in 
December of this year in consultation with representatives of 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, since 2002 we’ve had many successes in this 
regard and have made great progress in employing nurses. 
There’s been an increase in the number of nurses working in 
Saskatchewan since 2002. There’s a higher number of RNs 
[registered nurse] per 100,000 population working in 
Saskatchewan than in any other Western province. 
Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of RNs working 
full-time than in any of the other Western provinces. And 81 
per cent of registered nurses employed in Saskatchewan were 
trained in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these are incredible 
successes. We’ve got to build on our success and go forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is we are losing 
nurses out of the province. We are training nurses for other 
jurisdictions. Only 66 per cent of the nurses that we train in this 
province end up staying here and working here. One out of 
three nurses leave the province for work outside. And the 
reason they’re leaving is because of some of the working 

conditions in our province. They are so short-staffed that there’s 
issues of burnout. There’s issues with WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] claims. There’s issues with the whole 
work environment and morale because this government is 
forcing nurses out of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will he take seriously and set some targets, 
some numbers on when you’re going to accomplish filling the 
vacancies and what the number of vacancies are in the 
province? Until we know what the exact numbers are and when 
they are going to fill them, Mr. Speaker, this government can 
flounder on and on again. When will the minister stand up and 
do his job and set targets that can be measured? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, by the member’s own 
numbers, the majority of nurses are remaining in Saskatchewan 
and working for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken this issue very seriously. We have 
targeted the issue of nursing shortages in this province. We’ve 
built an action plan around that. We are working with 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and others in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We are serious about employing nurses in this 
province. We increased the number of seats in the nursing 
education program. There’s now 400 students in the nursing 
education program, Mr. Speaker, and we will offer employment 
to every single one of them when they graduate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 33, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/ 
Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 34, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 39, The Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move that Bill No. 42, The Respiratory Therapists Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 42, The Respiratory Therapists Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: —The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation 
Technologists Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 43, The Medical Radiation Technologists 
Act, 2006 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 43, The Medical Radiation Technologists Act be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 
the next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 44, 
The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
45, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 45, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With pleasure, I 
move that Bill No. 204, An Act to recognize Telemiracle in 
Saskatchewan be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill No. 204, The Recognition of 
Telemiracle Week Act be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

Health Care System 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to put on the record today our government’s opposition 
to the proposals that come from many parts of Canada and from 
members opposite for more privatization in the health care 
system. And at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 
moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that parallel private health 
care would not alleviate pressure on Saskatchewan’s 
current health care system, but would fundamentally 
undermine it, causing it to be less accessible, less efficient, 
and more expensive. 

 
Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying that I am very concerned 
about what I see happening in other provinces in Canada with 
respect to growing support for privatization of health care. And 
I think one of the very important roles that our Premier has 
played on the national stage is that the Government of Manitoba 
and the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have been 
the two leading voices in Canada standing up for a publicly 
funded, publicly administered health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m proud of the role that our Premier has taken in 
federal-provincial conferences, Mr. Speaker, emphasizing our 
support for a not-for-profit system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what we see, Mr. Speaker, developing across the country 
in the last few months is growing support for privatization. 
We’ve had the ruling of the Supreme Court in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, on the Chaoulli case. And in response to that the 
Government of Quebec has released a consultation document 
just a few weeks ago that proposes to allow patients to buy 
private insurance for elective procedures, Mr. Speaker, clearly 
opening the door more to privatization. 
 
We have recently had a federal government elected, Mr. 
Speaker, that unlike the previous administration, we have a 
Prime Minister now who has clearly signalled that he is willing 
to look at options that would increase the role of the private 
sector in medicare. 
 
In the province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker, the headline in the 
March 2 Globe and Mail is Premier “Klein willing to defy 
Ottawa”, is what it says, Mr. Speaker. And I want to quote from 
page 1 of The Globe and Mail on March 2 where it says very 
clearly that Premier Klein is prepared to “ . . . violate the 
Canada Health Act.” Mr. Speaker, quote, Mr. Klein tells 
reporters that his proposals, quote, “. . . may violate the Canada 
Health Act.” 
 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

[11:00] 
 
And Alberta is putting forward a proposal that will allow 
doctors to work in both the public and the private system 
simultaneously, and that will permit patients to have 
non-emergency services done more quickly if they’re prepared 
to pay for them — in other words, jumping the queue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In Ontario we’re now seeing the establishment of more private 
clinics. The Copeman Healthcare Inc., which is a private clinic 
in Ontario, Mr. Speaker, recently announced its intentions to 
develop three more clinics in that province whereby individuals 
would pay a fee to become registered with the clinic. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I note that the response of the Health critic 
for the Saskatchewan Party is interesting in this regard, because 
the Health critic for the Saskatchewan Party in commenting 
about Mr. Copeman’s plans in Ontario, Mr. Speaker, says, and I 
quote from the Indian Head-Wolseley News on January 24, 
2006: “We should find out more and have an open public 
debate about the appropriate ratio of private clinics in the 
province,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on our side of the House we’re very clear 
about the fact that we don’t want to see more privatization. We 
want to see a greater role for the public system. And we’ll have 
that debate, Mr. Speaker, as the morning unfolds. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Health critic for the Saskatchewan Party 
isn’t the only one commenting about private clinics. The 
member from Martensville, a member of the Saskatchewan 
Party in this House, said to his local paper, The Village Press, in 
1999: “Private clinics may actually be far more efficient than 
the public system and that reduces costs,” Mr. Speaker. Well 
that’s not our view, Mr. Speaker, of what private clinics do. Our 
view is that they will increase costs in the health care system. 
And I’ll have more to say about that in a minute. 
 
The member for Wood River, Mr. Speaker, speaking to the 
World Spectator on March 23, 1998 said: “ The whole health 
care system needs a review. I’m in favour of private clinics,” 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the former leader of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. I 
would just ask members to allow the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone to be heard, and any side debates should happen 
behind the bar. Member for Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member for 
Rosetown, Mr. Speaker, is on the record in an interview with 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] in his capacity at 
that time as leader of the Saskatchewan Party. When he was 
asked, Mr. Speaker, about the role of private clinics and 
whether doctors should be allowed to operate outside of the 
public system and charge a fee for services opposed to the 
medicare system, his response was, and this is the quote: 
 

If it doesn’t impact negatively on the principle of 
affordability, yes we would. We think this would improve 
the quality of health care and would remove a lot of pain 

and suffering in the province. 
 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown is 
clearly on the record that he would allow private health clinics 
where doctors would actually be allowed to operate outside of 
the system. That was the question asked of him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are just four examples, Mr. Speaker, of the position of 
Sask Party members opposite on this question of privatization 
of health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that there was a nominating convention which the 
member for Lloydminster made reference to on the first day of 
the sitting of the House earlier this week in which Mr. 
McMillan, Mr. Speaker, was elected as the candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the Lloydminster constituency. And it’s 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, from a debate that the Lloydminster 
newspapers reported on in Pierceland a few weeks ago that Mr. 
McMillan is squarely on the record in terms of supporting 
two-tier medicine in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly on the record. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have increasing privatization developing in 
other provinces. We have a federal government that is now 
clearly more open to privatization of our health care system 
We’ve got our neighbours in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, which are 
. . . The Government of Alberta is absolutely and unequivocally 
putting on the record their belief, Mr. Speaker, in a two-tier 
health care system. And we have several members opposite 
who are also, Mr. Speaker, on the record in terms of support for 
more privatization of health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to lay out in the minutes that remain for me in this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, my reasons for believing that increasing 
the amount of health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is . . . 
increasing the amount of private health care in Saskatchewan is 
not the way to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, increasing the amount of private health 
care will not reduce waiting lists. England and New Zealand 
both have parallel private hospital systems, Mr. Speaker, and 
they have longer waiting lists than the public system does in 
Canada. And I think this is important to note. 
 
The fact that Canada and New Zealand introduced parallel 
private systems has done nothing to reduce the waiting lists in 
their public health system, Mr. Speaker. In fact, they’ve gotten 
worse. Studies in England and Australia have found that the 
more health care is provided in a region by the private sector, 
the longer the waiting lists for that region are in the public 
sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And members opposite need only look at the European 
Economic Review, which has published many articles on this 
subject, Mr. Speaker. And it simply is good common sense that 
if you take your doctors and your specialists out of the public 
system and allow them to operate in the private system, Mr. 
Speaker, then there are less doctors that are available to patients 
who are being served in the public system, Mr. Speaker. And 
that is clearly not in the public interest. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that increasing the 
amount of private health care is just bad public policy because it 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

takes doctors and nurses — badly needed doctors and nurses — 
away from the public system. And we saw examples of this in 
Manitoba and Alberta when they allowed private cataract 
surgeries. Large numbers of doctors moved to the private 
system for delivering cataract surgery and there were fewer 
doctors available in the public system. And the results of this, 
Mr. Speaker, were that waiting lists for the private and the 
public doctors actually increased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The total waiting lists in both provinces increased. And one of 
the very simple reasons for this, Mr. Speaker, was that the 
doctors in the private health system who were delivering 
services around cataract operations actually saw fewer patients 
than the doctors in the public system, and the waiting list grew 
in both provinces. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that increasing 
the amount of private health care always increases 
administrative costs. And the best example of this is the United 
States, which has the highest administrative cost for delivering 
health care system, Mr. Speaker, in the industrialized world. 
 
Free enterprise health care is always less efficient and one of 
the reasons for that, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s for-profit health 
care. And there is always a profit built into the costs that have 
to be paid for, Mr. Speaker, and that inevitably leads to 
additional expense. 
 
For-profit hospitals for instance in the United States bill $8,115 
per patient on average. And in contrast, Mr. Speaker, the small 
number of non-profit hospitals in the United States bill $7,490 
per patient for exactly the same treatments, Mr. Speaker. A 
differential, Mr. Speaker, of more than $600 per patient. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the fact that for-profit 
medicine is never in the interest of the public when it comes to 
total expense and is always more administratively expensive to 
deliver. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, although the United States 
system leaves 40 million Americans unserved, the amount of 
money that is spent on health care through private delivery far 
exceeds on a per-patient basis what is spent in the public system 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker. It’s a much, much more expensive 
system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to leave no mistake about the 
position of our government with respect to allowing services 
that are currently delivered under the Canada Health Act to be 
delivered by private, for-profit medicine. We stand four-square 
against such proposals, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud that our 
Premier is taking that message to Ottawa and to 
federal-provincial conferences at a very critical time in our 
nation’s history on this debate, Mr. Speaker — a very critical 
time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m firmly of the view that Canadians and the 
people of Saskatchewan are best served by a publicly funded, 
publicly administered system, Mr. Speaker, that provides 
accessibility to all on the basis of need and not on the basis of 
what they’ve got in their pocketbook, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is the principle that we stand for under our 
government, Mr. Speaker. The public side of health care has 
gradually been expanded in our province and we are very proud 
of that history, Mr. Speaker — very proud of it. And we will 

stand against any attempts by members opposite to introduce 
more privatization into this fundamental service for Canadians, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to move: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that parallel private health 
care would not alleviate pressure on Saskatchewan’s 
current health care system but would fundamentally 
undermine it, causing it to become less accessible, less 
efficient, and more expensive. 
 

And I move that, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview: 

 
That this Assembly recognizes that parallel private health 
care would not alleviate pressure in Saskatchewan’s 
current health care system but would fundamentally 
undermine it, causing it to become less accessible, less 
efficient, and more expensive. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion of 
the member from Saskatoon Greystone, and I will be putting 
into the record some facts in three main areas. Number one, 
Saskatchewan has one of the most efficient per capita health 
care systems in Canada. Two, public health is a comparative 
advantage — that’s why businesses choose to set up in Canada. 
And number three, private health care will result in forcing 
people to pay even when they can’t afford it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it becomes necessary to defend our health care 
system even right here in the province where medicare was 
born. Even after the entire country adopted the medicare model, 
and even after the people of Canada voted Tommy Douglas as 
their greatest Canadian, that opposition Sask Party continues to 
want to tear the very fabric that unites this province and this 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party talks about taking 
Saskatchewan forward, they say they support all people in 
Saskatchewan. But what about some of their new candidates? 
What kind of political candidates are they attracting? Mr. 
Speaker, let me quote from the Lloydminster Meridian Booster 
on Wednesday, March 1, 2006. Mr. Speaker, they’re discussing 
the public-private health care and the successful candidate, a 
Mr. McMillan, goes on to say, “he sees nothing wrong in 
working hard, making good money, and receiving quick care 
for his wife and daughter.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this sounds innocent enough until you have some 
time to think about it. Mr. Speaker, I have a question for that 
opposition Sask Party and Mr. McMillan. I wonder what they 
would say to the senior widow living on a pension. I wonder 
what they would say to her. Would they say she didn’t work 
hard enough? How would she get a quick health care? What 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

would they say? 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder what they would say to the young person 
starting out on minimum wage. Would they say, you should 
work harder? Would they say, perhaps you should get five jobs? 
And how quick will these young people get their health care? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very clear what Mr. McMillan, the Sask 
Party, say when they are for everyone in Saskatchewan. It was 
on this basis that Tommy Douglas saw the suffering of those 
who could not afford health care, those who suffered financial 
hardship when they paid their medical bills. Mr. Speaker, some 
of those people lost their farms. And I wonder perhaps if the 
Sask Party is saying that they did not work hard enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can gauge ourselves and our society by the 
way we care for the less fortunate. And, Mr. Speaker, we on 
this side will not give up the right of access to health care for 
every citizen of this province or this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrast that to our plan. We have a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, to grow a green and prosperous Saskatchewan 
economy, to provide jobs and opportunities for our young 
people, to provide quality public health care — the best in 
Canada — and make Saskatchewan the most affordable place to 
live, work, and raise a family. 
 
We have a vision and a plan for Saskatchewan that ensures no 
one is left behind on the path to opportunity. We don’t put 
politics before principle. Mr. Speaker, it is our principle to 
make sure no one is left behind on the path to opportunity, 
while disagreements to the Leader of the Opposition politics 
isolates you and the party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to point out a 
very salient fact that is often overlooked in this debate. If you 
look at the research paper produced by the Canadian Institute of 
Health Information, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest 
per capita spending on health care of any province. Per capita 
we spend 160 per person compared to for example Ontario 
which only spends $80 per person on health care. 
 
Now the opposition will tell you that this is an example of how 
bad our system is, Mr. Speaker. They would claim that with all 
the money that we spend we should be getting better outcomes. 
But here is the part they gloss over. Here is the part they gloss 
over. According to the same report, Saskatchewan has the 
lowest administrative cost per capita in Canada. The only 
province that spends slightly less is Nova Scotia. Alberta, with 
their higher concentration of private health care, has slightly 
lower spending per capita, but five times the administrative 
costs per capita. In other words, Mr. Speaker, per capita our 
system is five times as efficient as the Alberta system. 
 
That’s right, Mr. Speaker. Our political system is five times 
more efficient than the less public system in Alberta. Not only 
that, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan is tied with Alberta, 
Quebec, and BC with having the lowest median wait times in 
Canada to see a specialist. 
 
For all the talk about unacceptable wait times that we have here, 

we actually have a pretty good record. And again, all those 
provinces spend three to five times the amount per capita on 
administration expenses. So for every dollar that we spend here 
in Saskatchewan, we get a better value for that dollar than most 
other provinces. 
 
Also Saskatchewan has the lowest percentage of people who 
report difficulties accessing immediate care for minor health 
problems. This is just another fact that points out that, although 
the opposition likes to point out all the problems and criticism 
of the public health care system, whereas in reality, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan’s actually doing pretty well on a 
number of key indicators. 
 
The opposition likes to talk about how we need a brand change 
in this province. Mr. Speaker, they claim that we are unfriendly 
to business. But it is exactly the NDP and our history of 
supporting public health care that has made Canada good for 
business. 
 
Public health care is what economists call a comparative 
advantage. That’s why businesses choose to set up in Canada. 
Let me give you some examples. The president of General 
Motors said that it costs GM [General Motors] $1,500 per 
vehicle to cover medical costs for employees and retirees in the 
United States. But in Canada it only costs $500 per vehicle. 
That means that GM is better off setting up plants here in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public health care creates jobs. John Finlayson of 
the Business Council of British Columbia, which represents a 
quarter of all jobs in BC, says, and I quote, “No one in the 
world wants the US system, it’s unbelievably expensive.” He 
feels that from a business perspective, public health care is 
worth defending. Public health care creates a positive business 
environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how about this one? One of the main reason that Toyota 
moved a major plant from Alabama to Ontario was public 
health care. To quote Paul Krugman, a top US [United States] 
economist, “In America, basic health care is a privilege, in 
Canada, it is a right. And in the Auto Industry, the good jobs are 
heading north.” That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. Public health 
care is luring business jobs north across the 49th parallel, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me reiterate these three points again, Mr. Speaker. Public 
health care creates jobs. Public health care creates a positive 
business environment. Public health care is luring business and 
jobs across the 49th parallel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the idea that no 
one is left behind. Our defence of the public health care stems 
from that commitment. Private health care will result in forcing 
people to pay even if they can’t afford it. Even expansion of the 
private health care will force the situation of people in 
Saskatchewan. For example a 2005 report from the 
Commonwealth Fund reveals that almost 40 per cent of US 
adults had difficulty paying medical bills. More than 27 per cent 
of people with problems paying medical bills in the US reported 
that they were unable to pay for necessities like food, heat, or 
rent. 
 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

But we don’t have to go all the way to the US to find this kind 
of tragedy, Mr. Speaker. Stan Marshall, who is a senior 
researcher with CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], 
has a number of examples of this type of profits before people. 
Allison Lavigne, a young woman who was rushed to hospital 
because she was having a miscarriage of her pregnancy, with 
. . . The doctor ordered a ultrasound. But the technician 
wouldn’t perform the ultrasound because she didn’t have 
money. Her husband had to go and use his credit card to get 
some funds so that she could have her ultrasound. Mr. Speaker, 
that is unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public medicare system remains the most 
cost-effective means of delivering health care. In Saskatchewan 
we are moving in the right direction with respect to health care 
reform and we will continue our efforts to provide timely, 
quality health care that Saskatchewan residents require through 
the medicare system. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
certainly glad to enter into this debate, the 75-minute debate on 
the subject of health care. And I applaud the government for 
bringing this issue forward so that a number of the inaccuracies, 
the misquotes that the members opposite are using, can be 
corrected if they choose to sit and listen to what we have to say 
on the medical . . . on the health file. Because certainly we hear 
it all the time, misquotes. And you know it’s always the big 
scare tactic. The mediscare tactic comes forward right off the 
bat. And that’s certainly what they want to talk about. 
 
Well we can certainly clear up a lot of that if they choose to 
listen to the words that our members speak when we talk on this 
issue. Because it is an issue that we know on a regular basis . . . 
When polling is done, one of the most important issues people 
find all the time is health care. It’s usually number one because 
it’s on people’s minds. The economy may go up and down and 
agriculture may be up and down and there’s a lot of other 
issues, but health always tends to be the number one issue. 
 
And it’s interesting that the NDP would come up with the issue 
and put the P-word, the privatization word, in their motion 
because quite frankly I don’t think we would even be talking 
about privatization at all if the health care system that we had in 
our province served people better. The only reason people start 
looking at other options or talking about other options is 
because they don’t have the care; they’re unable to access the 
care they feel they need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know for a fact that we have some of the 
longest waiting lists. We have people going out of province to 
get procedures. We have people waiting for government to 
approve or deny drugs coming onto the formulary. The reason 
people look for other options is because they are not getting the 
service they feel they need here in Saskatchewan. And I think 
this government should be ashamed of that. 
 
They stand in the House on a regular basis and say they are the 
defenders of medicare. They are the only ones that have any 

idea of how the whole system should run. But when they look at 
it, if they were to look at it . . . And I mean maybe it’s just our 
offices that get the phone calls. But I can tell you, since I have 
become Health critic, between myself and mostly my 
constituency assistant, Vonni . . . have received phone call after 
phone call after phone call of people that aren’t getting the care 
they need. And this government should be ashamed of that, that 
they’ve allowed the health care system to get into such a state 
that people look for options. People will not look for options if 
they get timely care, if they have access to the medications that 
they feel, that the medical professionals feel they need to save 
their patients. 
 
I mean the classic example has been the Terry Rak case. And 
it’s absolutely . . . it should be an embarrassment to this 
government to see what has gone on with that man and a 
number of others that have come to this Assembly on this very 
case of Avastin. The government talked that it would tell us one 
way or the other whether they would be accepting and paying 
for the drug Avastin — back in, I believe it was, November. 
And they waited and they waited. 
 
And finally we held another news conference and pushed the 
government to make a decision because the cancer society . . . 
First of all, it’s covered in other provinces. But the cancer 
society said this drug should be covered. In most jurisdictions, 
it is the standard of care — the standard of care, not exceptional 
care — the standard of care with colon cancer. It is the drug that 
is the standard of care. But instead of making a decision right 
off the bat, this government delayed and delayed and delayed 
and delayed, and finally about a week or two ago decided they 
would make the decision and said that they won’t fund Avastin, 
even though now they’ve allowed people to pay for it on their 
own. 
 
The hypocrisy of the members that spoke before me, talking 
about the fact that we don’t have a two-tiered health care 
system, is absolutely appalling, absolutely appalling. So what 
do you call it when Mr. Rak can go and pay for Avastin at 
$3,000 a week? $3,000 a week, you’re allowing him to pay for 
the drug for $3,000 a week. 
 
And so you’re saying to somebody else who perhaps doesn’t 
have the financial means like Mr. Rak does . . . he doesn’t have 
the financial means like Mr. Rak does to pay for the drug. So in 
other words, that person who cannot pay for the drug — which 
is administered through the hospital — that person that cannot 
pay for the drug does not get the standard of care. Now what 
type of a system would you call that? 
 
What type of a system would you call it when somebody has 
the money to pay for a drug that will be administered through 
the hospital . . . and he’s worked hard and he’s saved his 
money, and he has the money to pay for that drug and he can 
buy it and have it administered through the hospital like Mr. 
Rak is doing? But the next person, which the member that 
spoke just before me said, you know, the person maybe didn’t 
make as much money — he was making minimum wage or 
whatever — and doesn’t have the financial means to buy the 
drug but is in the same position as Mr. Rak is and they cannot 
access that drug. Now do you call that a two-tier system or not? 
 
You know, when a person can pay for the drug and have it 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

administered through the hospital and extend his life but the 
next person who doesn’t have the financial means cannot, is 
that not a two-tier system? To stand in the House and lecture us 
on the fact of whether it’s a single tier or two tier and not admit 
to the fact that they’re overseeing a two-tier system today, 
they’ve allowed the system to get to that point . . . is appalling, 
is hypocritical. 
 
The former minister . . . But the member from Saskatoon was 
talking about private health care. Again the hypocrisy because, 
you know, if you look at the health care system today, 
compared to the way it was 15 or 20 years ago, this government 
has allowed privatization to come into the health care system. 
You’ve allowed it. And to stand here and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just remind the member, making his remarks 
through the Chair please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — This government allowed that to happen. A 
number of services are delivered privately in the public system. 
If I am phoning an ambulance in Saskatoon and the ambulance 
comes and picks me up and takes me to the hospital, who owns 
the ambulance in Saskatoon? Is it the health authority or is it 
owned privately? 
 
To stand in the House and say there is no private delivery of 
health care services in the public system is an out and out 
fabrication. I can’t use the word I want to use. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Because if the member from Saskatoon phones an ambulance 
and he gets picked up and taken to the hospital, who owns the 
ambulance? Does the health authority? No, they don’t. A 
private deliverer owns the ambulance. If I go and have a 
prescription, to have an X-ray or an ultrasound, something like 
that, if I go to a clinic here in Regina and have an ultrasound, 
who owns that clinic? It’s owned privately in a public system. 
So for this government to say that there is no private delivery is 
absolutely wrong. 
 
Should there be more private delivery? I don’t think so. But it’s 
this government that’s got us to the point. It’s this government 
that has allowed privatization of the health care system. And to 
stand here and lecture us on the fact that whether it should be a 
Copeman clinic or not is absolutely hypocritical. 
 
Because the member from Saskatoon also went and said, you 
know, if I go see a doctor in a private clinic, well who owns the 
building the doctor is in right now? If I go and see my general 
practitioner, he runs a business; he’s probably incorporated. He 
has his own facility. I would say that’s a private deliverer 
within a public system. So to stand here and say that there is no 
private delivery is absolutely ludicrous. 
 
And then the absolute hypocrisy, the absolute hypocrisy of this 
government to stand here and say they’re the defenders of 
medicare when every one of them campaigned for a leader in 
the last federal election that accesses his health care in a private 
clinic . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McMorris: — They like to run off and talk about Harper 
and the Conservatives or Ralph Klein and the Conservatives in 
Alberta. Neither one of them have accessed private health care 
in a private clinic but the Leader of the NDP Party certainly has. 
So to stand and say they are the defenders of the medicare 
system and then because they need care, they walk around the 
system and use a private clinic, I don’t know what else you call 
that but pure hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that a publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care system is what we need in this province that operates under 
the Canada Health Act. We’ve said it before and we’ll say it 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure to 
be able to get in on this debate of public health care versus 
private health care which is something that’s so critical and 
crucial not just to the citizens of Saskatchewan but to all 
citizens of Canada as this debate wades on throughout the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has done a masterful job of 
convincing the media and the general public that there’s a crisis 
in health care. They have an extreme right wing ideology on 
this issue that they try to hide behind the platitudes and false 
pretences of actually caring about the public health care system. 
 
They are completely ideological, Mr. Speaker, and although my 
hon. colleagues on this side of the House have given fact after 
fact, statistic after statistic, argument after argument, it is all in 
vain because the degradation of our health care system — in 
fact the degradation of our entire province — is all that the 
members opposite know how to do. They are in love with their 
reckless policy on privatization that favours the wealthy no 
matter how damaging it would be to the province. 
 
Members across the way have called for private MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging], private clinics, the privatization 
of other health care services, the privatization of support 
services, the want to allow hospitals and doctors to do extra 
billing of patients. And above all, they want their friends to get 
their noses in the public troughs. 
 
They offer nothing but platitudes. They say trust us, Mr. 
Speaker; we don’t want two-tier health care. Never mind all the 
statements they’ve made in support of exactly that type of 
system. They say, we support the Canada Health Act. But when 
their right wing colleagues in Alberta passed legislation that 
even the Premier of Alberta acknowledges will contravene the 
Canada Health Act, the opposition does not condemn it. In fact 
they continue to sing the praises of Alberta. 
 
When their right winged colleagues in Ottawa say nothing 
about the Alberta package but promise to study it, does the Sask 
Party stand up and say, we support the Canada Health Act so 
what you are doing is wrong? No of course not. They smile and 
wink and nod at their right wing friends in Alberta and Ottawa 
and go back to tearing down this province in every speech they 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

give and every question they ask. 
 
As a former Conservative cabinet minister of this province said, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition are too easily taken in by simplistic 
right wing dogma. Perhaps that is why they didn’t let him run 
for them in the last election in Saltcoats. Someone who has 
actually ran this province and knows the challenges wouldn’t fit 
in with their attack on the very institutions of this government. 
 
This simplistic right wing dogma is nothing new, Mr. Speaker. 
In the 1980s Ronald Reagan pounded home one of the most 
potent slogans of all times, quote “. . . government is not the 
solution to our problem; government is the problem.” And the 
Sask Party would be happy to agree, Mr. Speaker, but this is a 
problem for them. 
 
If you think government is the problem, you’ll have problems 
governing. People who think government can do no good will 
be no good at running government. This blame-government riff 
is running out of gas conceptually and ethically and is getting 
very tired for the people on this side of the House who are 
trying to move this people and its province forward. 
 
So that is why they now hide their views on health care, Mr. 
Speaker. Their blame-government ideology is such that they 
want to and have attacked the public system. But they know 
that people don’t want to hear that, that the citizens of 
Saskatchewan are proud of their health care system, and they 
want to promote it and make it better. So they cover up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They have twisted their positions and their beliefs into ugly, 
unrecognizable rationales, putting politics ahead of principles 
so that they can grasp at the reins of power like a dying man 
grasps at air. And let me tell you that there would be more 
people grasping at air under the Sask Party’s health care system, 
Mr. Speaker. We have all heard the horror stories of people who 
die on the very steps of a hospital because they could not pay 
for a doctor’s care. It happens, Mr. Speaker. It happens. 
 
But let me go back to my point that their beliefs on health care 
stem from their beliefs on government. It stands to reason, Mr. 
Speaker, that if you don’t like government at all, you won’t like 
the government providing health care. As the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale said when he was running for leader of their 
party that the government could never do anything more 
efficiently than the private sector can do, he was pointing their 
ideology when he later said the government should be redefined 
because it cannot offer all the same services it does now. He 
was once again pointing out their ideology. When the former 
leader of the party talks about his core services review, he is 
pointing out the ideology of their party. 
 
Yet the facts are indisputable, Mr. Speaker. In terms of 
administrative costs, the public system in Canada is just far 
more efficient than any private system in the world, and per 
capita the public system in Saskatchewan is the most efficient 
in Canada. But the members across the way simply cannot 
accept facts, Mr. Speaker. They have to deny the truth because 
the facts disagree with their ideological message. 
 
And we are staring here to something very interesting in the 
media and from the right wing these days, Mr. Speaker. They 

are starting to invoke the social democrat systems in Europe as 
their new model. I guess they got tired of us pointing out how 
inferior the US private system was, so they have retreated to the 
slightly higher ground of Europe. 
 
Well let’s make some comparisons with Europe, Mr. Speaker. 
Let’s compare Canada with some of the most social democratic 
countries over there. Iceland, Norway, Switzerland — all spend 
per capita more on health care than we do. In terms of 
percentage of GDP [gross domestic product], France, Germany, 
Greece, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands spend 
more than we do. They all have some mix of public and private 
systems, but their per capita growth rates are staggering, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Canada has a per capita growth rate on health care of 3.6 per 
cent — which is very sustainable; it is basically the cost of 
inflation — whereas most of these countries have two or three 
times that growth rate. If there is a correlation between 
out-of-control spending costs and more private expenditure on 
health care, I think that’s where it is. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, health care is a market failure. Private 
health care simply cannot by definition be as efficient as a 
single-payer system. Government or not, it is the single payer 
that makes the system work. If there was only one health care 
monopoly in the United States then they would have a far better 
system than they do now, but we all know that that’s not going 
to happen. The only way for a monopoly to be fair is for that to 
be a government monopoly. 
 
Again this flies in the face of the government-is-the-problem 
ideology of the right wing, Mr. Speaker. This flies in the face of 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale’s assertion that the private 
sector can always do things better. This flies in the face of the 
simplistic right-wing dogma that passes for serious policy 
discussion on that side of the House. 
 
And so as I said at the start of my speech, they try to claim that 
there’s a crisis, Mr. Speaker. They try to claim that the current 
system is broken, that the only injection of private resources 
will fix it. It doesn’t matter that all the evidence, all the reports, 
all the statistics show that the current model is the most efficient 
and the most sustainable. They have to deny the truth to 
promote their ideology. They have to ignore the facts to 
advance their agenda, and they have to dismiss the facts so they 
can continue on their campaign of gloom and doom. Well the 
people of this side of the House know better, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know better. 
 
When it comes to the topic of approving Avastin, for instance, I 
have to tell you this is something that would be again very near 
and dear to my own heart. I lost my mother just slightly over a 
year ago to breast cancer, and had someone told me at that time 
that I would have had the opportunity to extend her life by 
anywhere from 1.8 to 5 months — which is the life extension 
prediction of what Avastin can do — I would have done 
somersaults. Had someone told me that it would have then cost 
the public coffers of this province approximately $6.5 million 
annually, I would not have done such great somersaults, 
knowing full well that that $6.5 million annually in not 
providing a curative solution, would then take away from 
potentially preventative care and finding curative solutions. 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

So I understand the notion of wanting to prolong life. I would 
have given any amount of my own personal resources to have 
extended her life by days, let alone months, but the fact of the 
matter is that there are a hundred other drugs out there right 
now, Mr. Speaker, that are looking for potential approval at 
some point in the future. 
 
And there is only so many resources that this province can 
provide, and so therefore those resources have to be applied in 
their most beneficial manner. And so I have great sympathy for 
the families that are having to pay out of their own pocket for 
this particular drug. But the fact that they are able to purchase 
the drug at least and have it ministered in the province, I think 
is a humane thing to do, not to mention something that I feel 
that I’m very happy that they were able to do. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand in support of the government 
motion and clearly stand here to support public health care 
system in a publicly administered, publicly delivered fashion 
with absolutely no creeping privatization whatsoever. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had a couple of 
reasons why I wanted to enter this particular debate, one of 
which most members in the House are well aware of. I used to 
be a health care worker. I worked in the publicly funded health 
care system and valued the opportunity to do so, to help 
patients. 
 
I found it very interesting to listen to the previous speaker who 
obviously having never worked in the publicly funded health 
care system such as I have, is so happy to tell me how I think 
and what I believe in and making it up as she goes, which is 
pretty bizarre I must say. Her speech was rather bizarre. I 
enjoyed my years . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Once again I’d ask the 
members to allow the member for Humboldt to be heard. 
Member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I enjoyed the work 
that I did in the public health care system. I was a medical 
laboratory technologist at the Royal University Hospital. And I 
believed in the system then and believe in it now. 
 
What I don’t believe in is the deterioration that I’ve seen. I’m 
still in touch with a number of the caregivers at the Royal 
University Hospital — colleagues that I used to work with. And 
I’ll tell you back when I worked in that hospital we didn’t have 
hallway wards. We didn’t have emergency backups the way that 
we do now. So it has deteriorated. There still are problems, 
considerable problems, within the health care system. We’re 
getting more and more stories of mismanagement. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And instead of addressing those problems, we have a 
government that’s too busy trying to put mediscare messages 
out there because they don’t want the public to talk about 

what’s wrong within the system and how it can be fixed. They 
want to scare the public into believing that if someone else gets 
in power it’s going to get even worse. They’ve got nothing to 
base that on. The member that just spoke from Regina Walsh 
Acres is making this up as she goes, or her speech writer makes 
it up. She has no clue. She has never listened to any one of us in 
what we have to say. She obviously isn’t interested in anything 
that we’ve actually stated as a fact, but she’s going to decide 
how we think, what we believe, and she’s never even worked in 
the system. I find that absolutely amazing, absolutely amazing 
that she feels she has the right to do that. 
 
You know who suffers when you have a government that is so 
wrapped up in ideology and they’re so busy trying to message 
mediscare more than fix the problems? The people who suffer 
are the patients. The patients within this province are suffering, 
many of them elderly, many of them with families. And what 
we’re seeing, as much as they deny it and don’t want to do 
anything about it or set targets or fix anything, is that more and 
more people are being forced out of the province for treatment. 
More and more people are left on longer and longer waiting 
lists, and more and more people are being expected to pay for 
their own drugs. 
 
The member opposite again brought up her own personal story 
of her mother, and I’m very sad to hear that story. However, 
there are a number of cases and we are not funding Avastin. So 
how is that not two-tier health when some people can afford to 
fund it themselves and others cannot? And she feels that it 
should not be funded because it is not preventative. So fine. I 
have a constituent out my way who will have to use some 
medical equipment for the rest of his life. Yes it will not cure 
him, but he can live a long and productive life if this particular 
catheter was subsidized for him — except it’s not, and he can’t 
afford it. And it’s costing him thousands of dollars a month to 
try and take care of his medical condition. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s being left behind. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — He’s being left behind. But you know who 
else is being left behind, Mr. Speaker? His children. His two 
young girls are being left behind because they have to go 
without. There’s no figure skating lessons or piano lessons or 
any extras for those girls because this man has got to pay for his 
own medical equipment. That’s two-tier health care. That’s 
two-tier health care and that is a sign that a government is not 
even beginning to address the problems that exist. 
 
If there wasn’t so many frustrations on those stories and many, 
many others — people on waiting lists, people losing loved 
ones on waiting lists, and I can give you names if you want of 
people that have experienced that — if there wasn’t the 
frustrations that were building within the public, there would be 
no discussion on privatization. They can blame us for it all they 
want. The fact is the people out there are looking for 
alternatives. They’re looking for going out of province. They’re 
looking for going out of country in some cases because they 
cannot get the health care that they need here in this province. 
 
The frustration in my own constituency is quite unbelievable, 
and that’s the second reason why I wanted to enter this debate. 
The people in the Humboldt constituency and Humboldt and 
surrounding area do not believe that this government can be 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

trusted when it comes to handling health care issues, and they 
do not believe that their word is always on track of what they’re 
going to do. 
 
Humboldt has been promised a new hospital now for just about 
two decades. It’s been a great photo op for the Premier and for 
the minister, and it’s been . . . You know they’ve come out there 
time and time again. They basically told the Humboldt people 
that this was not going to be a problem; there’s going to be a 
new hospital as long as they’re in power — as long as they’re in 
power. And that’s what it’s about. It’s about keeping power. It’s 
not about getting a health care facility in the city of Humboldt. 
It’s got nothing to do with that. 
 
It was interesting when I went back through some articles 
through the Humboldt Journal. On February 12, 2005, there 
was an ad in the Humboldt Journal. And after waiting 18 
months for a new hospital, in December 2, ’04 the Health 
minister indicated to the community and surrounding area that 
St. Elizabeth’s Hospital project is slated to follow the timeline 
as outlined as follows: budget approval March 2005, functional 
program May/June 2005, architectural drawings 
February/March 2006, groundbreaking March 2006, grand 
opening July 2007. 
 
I’m going to repeat one of those lines: groundbreaking March 
2006. We’re here. We’ve arrived — it’s March 2006. There’s 
absolutely no groundbreaking happening in Humboldt for this 
new hospital. March 10, 2005, the Humboldt Journal quotes the 
Premier saying that the new hospital’s on track. It’s on track. 
Well here we are, March 2006. And what happened in 
Humboldt as we approach March 2006? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be more than delighted to tell the 
members opposite. And this is why people are getting frustrated 
in Saskatchewan, because they do not trust this government. 
There was a meeting called in Humboldt. The mayors and the 
reeves and the representatives from 27 municipalities in the area 
were called together on February 24, and they were advised that 
the project has risen from $19 million to $33.5 million in just 
five years. That’s the cost rise. 
 
The communities, the municipalities, people of Humboldt and 
area had already raised their money. They had been lobbying 
the government year after year to please build this hospital, the 
costs are going to go up of constructing a hospital if we don’t 
do it now, we’re not going to have enough money. Well guess 
what? The people out in Humboldt were right. They were right. 
And you know how fair this government was? Do you know 
how fair they were to the people of Humboldt? On February 24 
they informed the people of Humboldt that they have to have an 
additional $5.217 million put together and committed by April. 
That’s absolutely insane. Insane. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan where we are struggling because of the 
agriculture economy in a slump right now; we’re struggling to 
just make ends meet. The small towns and villages are 
struggling. The rural municipalities are struggling. And this 
government goes to them and says, you know, you got a few 
months, just come up with another $5.2 million. And if they 
can’t, if they can’t, it’ll be yet another excuse for this 
government not to bother, to delay the building of the Humboldt 
hospital, to announce it yet again, but to do absolutely nothing 

about it. 
 
And reasons like that is why people are getting so frustrated 
with our health care system. It’s got nothing to do with publicly 
funded or privately funded. The only one who brings up 
privatization quite frankly are the NDP government who want 
to bring it up continuously, constantly, for absolutely no reason. 
It’s because they want to distract from the fact that they’re 
mismanaging the publicly funded system that we have right 
now today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to enter into this debate about health care in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been 
consistent and clear in its position that we support the Canada 
Health Act and that we have worked tirelessly, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve the current health system, the public health system 
which Canadians enjoy here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record speaks for itself, that the Saskatchewan 
Party is a supporter and an ally of the health care system in 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, we will do all we can and much 
more, Mr. Speaker, when we form government, to fix our health 
care system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the public health care system 
under the NDP. Fact number one: people have died in 
Saskatchewan waiting to get the urgent health care that they’ve 
needed. We’ve raised these issues in the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. Family members have come in to support this fact in 
order to get the NDP government to act, hoping that there 
would be some compassion on the other side, there would be 
some intelligence on the other side, and that the NDP would 
realize that it was imperative that the failures in our current 
system be corrected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was under the NDP that hospitals, 50-some 
hospitals — 53 I believe hospitals — were closed here in 
Saskatchewan. What has resulted out of these hospital closures 
are obviously . . . One thing is more distance travel to get to 
acute care facilities. This travel occurs in ambulances at cost to 
the patient. It doesn’t matter whether the patient has a heart 
attack and it’s a struggle to get to that health care facility in 
time. The bill is applied to the patient, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That certainly is a failure of our public health care system. It’s 
something that the NDP needs to address. And so instead of 
getting sanctimonious about being the defenders of health care, 
they should show that practically they are the defenders of 
health care by fixing these kinds of problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, beds have been closed. And the reason the beds 
have been closed in our health care facilities is because of lack 
of health care professionals to make sure that proper care is 
provided to those who need the care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve debated as recently as the day before 
yesterday the shortage of nurses in the province of 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

Saskatchewan, and the fact that the Health minister has 
absolutely no plans, no goals, no initiatives to correct the 
shortfall in nurses, to the point that the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses has become very public in its frustration and concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result, people have had to seek health care 
outside of the borders of Saskatchewan simply because they 
couldn’t access health care here in the province of 
Saskatchewan on a timely basis. One of the tenets of the 
Canada Health Act is that health care be accessible, that we 
have access to health care. And in Saskatchewan, that portion of 
the Canada Health Act is not being met in a satisfactory 
manner. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan 
often is trailing in the list of all provinces, even though the NDP 
are the government and they claim to be the champions of our 
public health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Madam Speaker, I apologize. Didn’t see the 
change in the Chair. 
 
Madam Speaker, I was at a Roughriders game and you can’t 
imagine how disconcerting it is to hear the announcer on the PA 
[public address] system, when he’s giving credits, announce 
that the official MRI service for the Saskatchewan Roughriders 
is a clinic in Edmonton. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what that tells me is that when health care 
really counts, when it really matters, our professional football 
team has to go to Edmonton to get timely and adequate MRI 
services. That speaks volumes about public health care under 
NDP-run Saskatchewan when our professional football team 
cannot access the MRI service it needs here in Regina, here in 
the province of Saskatchewan — has to fly its football players 
to Edmonton for timely access to MRIs. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, in the community of Rosetown, the 
community has been lobbying for a better long-term care health 
facility. And long-term health care is one of the most important 
facets of health care in the province of Saskatchewan. Those 
people are placed in a basement in the hospital, in the Rosetown 
hospital. And Rosetown has been crying for years, begging for 
years, that the Minister of Health, the NDP Minister of Health 
would correct this situation. 
 
They’re prepared to put up their share of the money. They have 
been for a long time, Madam Speaker, because they don’t think 
it’s right that senior citizens and those who need long-term care 
be sentenced to live out their remaining years in a basement. 
It’s almost like being put in a dungeon, Madam Speaker — the 
citizens of Saskatchewan who’ve contributed so much. And I 
tell you, Madam Speaker, a lot of those people have voted for 
the NDP and their families are appalled at what the NDP has 
done to health care. 
 
They’ve got a hundred reasons. You got to go through 19 steps 
to get this approved and the NDP won’t even take the first step. 
They won’t even take the first step to show respect to these 
senior citizens and people who need long-term health care in the 
community of Rosetown. 
 
Madam Speaker, the biggest threat to public health care in 
Saskatchewan is the negligence of the NDP and the 
mismanagement of the NDP of our current public health care 

system. That is the biggest threat, Madam Speaker, to our health 
care system here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Speaker, it was very insightful in the last federal 
election to find out that of the three major party leaders — we’ll 
leave Mr. Duceppe out of it because he’s isolated himself to 
Quebec — but Mr. Harper, Mr. Martin, and Mr. Layton, the 
three leaders of the major parties, only Mr. Harper had not used 
a private hospital. Mr. Martin, the Liberal leader, had used a 
private hospital and Mr. Layton, the NDP leader of Canada, has 
used private health care system. He thought that the public 
system wasn’t good enough or wasn’t fast enough or something 
and chose a private hospital over the public health care system. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Why do these people have the nerve? How do they have the gall 
to get up and point the finger at everybody else when they are 
the major threat to the public health care system in 
Saskatchewan? They need to look inwardly, Madam Speaker, 
they need to look at themselves. They are the problem. They 
will not fix the weaknesses in our health care system. They 
need to have a reality check, Madam Speaker. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Question period. I recognize the 
member of Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Regina Walsh Acres. She 
stood on her feet and talked about health care, of course. And at 
the end she was talking about Avastin and she used a personal 
story. It would be interesting to know what she thought when 
Herceptin wasn’t covered, wasn’t covered for a long time. 
Finally we had a news conference and it was covered. That was 
one drug that would extend the person’s life. And it will extend 
it for quite a period of time. 
 
But then she went on to say that Avastin, for example, was only 
five months. So what is her time frame for extending a person’s 
life so that the drug would be covered? She stood there and 
said, well it was only five months, about a month to five 
months, and I really don’t think it should be funded then. 
 
Can she please tell me, what is the length of an extension of 
someone’s life worth? Should it be more than five months? If it 
was eight months would it be okay to cover Avastin then? If it 
was a year, is that okay to cover Avastin then? Please tell me 
how long a drug has to extend someone’s life before it would be 
covered in NDP country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I like how 
everything gets contorted and distorted from the side of the 
opposition. Clearly that was not entirely my intent in terms of 
what I was saying. What I was saying was that, when you look 
at the cost factor involved and the fact that the drug is not 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

completely passing all rigorous safety qualifications, not to 
mention that it is by our best evidence prolonging life for 1.8 to 
5 months, that’s where I get the information from. 
 
But further to that, Madam Speaker, I’m wondering since Mr. 
McMorris has also said that . . . Oops, sorry. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I know the member in her emotion 
didn’t understand that she was using the name of the member, 
but we refer to the constituency of the members present. 
 
Ms. Morin: — My apologies, Madam Speaker. The member 
for Indian Head-Milestone was quoted in the Fort Qu’Appelle 
Times on January 24, 2006 as well as the Indian Head-Wolseley 
News as saying that there should be “. . . debate about the 
appropriate ratio of private clinics in the provinces.” That 
sounds a whole lot different than someone who’s saying he 
doesn’t want to have a two-tier system in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
My question is for the member for Regina Walsh Acres. She 
gave a passionate speech against the use of private health care, 
Madam Deputy Chair. I wonder how she squares SGI and WCB 
utilizing private health care services in other jurisdictions such 
as Alberta for its clients. When we asked the minister of SGI 
about this last year in committee he said, whatever was in the 
best financial interest of the corporation. 
 
So to the member for Regina Walsh Acres: how do you square 
supporting a government which uses its Crown corporations to 
subsidize and to support private health care services for people 
— clients of SGI and WCB — when it’s in the best financial 
interest of the corporation and not for the best health care for 
those clients or for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Once again, Madam Speaker, the opposition is 
displaying that it has no credibility in its line of questioning 
according to the information it already has on this particular 
issue. 
 
And I want to point out something else where they show no 
credibility on, Madam Speaker, and that’s on the issue of 
whether Jack Layton attended a private clinic during his 
lifetime. And just in case the members on the opposite side 
don’t know, the Shouldice Hospital which Jack Layton attended 
is not an example of private health care as an alternative to 
public health care. The Canadian Health Coalition, a public 
health care advocacy group, has no problem with the Shouldice 
clinic due to its non-profit status, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — To the member from Rosetown-Elrose: 
Sask Party policy papers say your party will allow private 
surgical clinics to open in the province. My question is then, 
which surgeries would you be allowing to operate in private 
clinics and what kind of private hospitals will you be allowing? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. The member 
is I think reading some fiction because that’s not the position of 
the Saskatchewan Party. The Saskatchewan Party has never 
talked about having private clinics that would do surgeries in 
the province of Saskatchewan, so I don’t know where the 
member got that from. In fact just about everything I’ve heard 
on the other side has been fabricated, has been far from the 
truth. And, Madam Speaker, the members on the other side lose 
all credibility when they make statements that are unfounded 
and absolutely untrue. 
 
Madam Speaker, it reminds me, their statements remind me of 
their national leader, Mr. Layton, who went around during an 
election campaign and criticized private hospitals and accused 
everybody else of being in favour of them. And then when the 
truth be known, here it was Mr. Layton that actually used the 
private hospital. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I can’t answer the question because it’s 
based on a false premise. There’s no truth to what the member 
says. So all I can suggest is that he do better research when he 
asks his next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Saskatoon Greystone. My 
question is around MRIs and the issue around MRIs. Right now 
currently in Saskatchewan we operate our MRIs on about a 
16-hour shift, about two-thirds of the capacity of MRIs. 
 
There’s talk of an MRI opening on a First Nation. Does he 
agree with that since, as the member from Cannington had 
mentioned, we’re sending people out of our province? SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], government agencies 
are sending people out of province to get timely MRIs. Does he 
believe that maybe another private MRI should operate in the 
province, or do you think you should use the MRIs to capacity 
because certainly there is extra room? Because if you don’t 
operate to capacity, you’re inviting private clinics. You’re 
inviting that. So do you not think that they should be operating 
full-time? Or do you think that there should be more 
privatization like you’ve done with X-rays and ultrasounds? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Well 
let me just say to the member opposite that the sensible way to 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

go about dealing with MRIs is through public investment. And 
that’s exactly what our government has been doing over the last 
two years. We’ve added another MRI in Regina and another 
MRI in Saskatoon, so we now have four medical resonance 
imaging machines in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In my home city of Saskatoon in the last two years, Madam 
Speaker, we’ve reduced the waiting list for MRIs by 34 per cent 
between 2004 and 2006, Mr. Speaker . And the way to go with 
MRIs is an ongoing public investment, just like our government 
has been doing. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My 
question is to the member for Rosetown. On April 22, 1998 on 
CBC, the former leader of the Saskatchewan Party, the hon. 
member for Rosetown, was asked, and this was the question: 
 

Would you still allow something like a private health 
clinic, where doctors would actually be allowed to operate 
outside of the system and charge fee for service as 
opposed to the medicare system? 
 

And the hon. member for Rosetown answered, and this is the 
quote: 
 

If it doesn’t impact negatively on the principle of 
affordability, yes we would. We think that this would 
improve the quality of health care and would remove a lot 
of pain and suffering in the province. 

 
My question to the hon. member is: does the member in fact 
still believe that more private health care clinics should be 
allowed? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I’ve been 
very clear in every public statement that I’ve made that 
everything that is done within our public health care system — 
within our health care system — has to be done under the 
auspices of the Canada Health Act. 
 
Now we already know that dentists, for instance, are private 
health care providers. We know that optometrists are private 
health care providers. And I see the hon. member, like myself, 
has glasses, and he should be aware of that. That is not, as I 
understand it, contravening the Canada Health Act. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, in all of my utterances I have said that I 
wanted health care delivered in Canada within the Canada 
Health Act, within the auspices of the five pillars of the Canada 
Health Act. I’ve never changed or equivocated on that. And as 
the member noted in his own comments there, that my concern 
has always been that health care be accessible, affordable, 
available to all citizens regardless of where they live, regardless 
of their ability to pay. That is the Canadian system, and that is 
the system that I support. 

But what we’re seeing in Saskatchewan is the very opposite. 
We’re seeing people who can’t afford a drug like Avastin are 
not being able to access that drug while someone with money, 
with dollars, is able to. We’re finding people get ambulance 
bills that they’re not able to pay. What are they supposed to do? 
Are they supposed to stay at home and die under the NDP 
government’s proposals? 
 
Madam Speaker, let’s look at what the facts tell us. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The time has now elapsed for 
the question and answer period, and as the debate ended sooner 
than the period of 60-minute debate prescribed by the rules, the 
question on the motion will now be put before the Assembly. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion before you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Opposed? A recorded vote has been 
requested. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:12 until 12:34.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Greystone, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that parallel private health 
care would not alleviate pressure on Saskatchewan’s 
current health care system but would fundamentally 
undermine it causing it to be less accessible, less efficient, 
and more expensive. 

 
Those who favour the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 50] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Wartman Forbes Prebble 
Crofford Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Taylor Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Addley 
Morin Borgerson Toth 
Elhard McMorris D’Autremont 
Hermanson Bjornerud Wakefield 
Chisholm Hart Harpauer 
Gantefoer Eagles Weekes 
Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert Allchurch 
Kirsch Brkich Dearborn 
Morgan Kerpan  



668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
50; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried with nobody 
dissenting. 
 
Why is the member from Carrot River Valley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Carrot River Valley. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today proudly 
to introduce to you and through you to all members in the 
House two members in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, both from 
Saskatoon, and both I believe from the constituency of 
Greystone — Mr. Jeff Korte and Georgina Keen. 
 
I’d just like to add, Mr. Speaker, that both have been very active 
in Saskatchewan Party politics and look forward to the day 
when we’re on the other side of the Chamber. I’d like to 
welcome them to their Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Motion No. 1 — Government’s Performance 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
will be introducing a motion of non-confidence later on in my 
speech. 
 
One of the things I wanted to talk about right off the top is that 
it’s kind of with mixed emotions that I raise this 
non-confidence. Mixed emotions because I’m very pleased to 
be able to talk about the inadequacies of the government and the 
road they’ve been taking or the distinct lack of road they’ve 
been taking, but it’s sad that we have to do this because they 
have no plan or no vision and don’t know where they’re going 
and I believe have lost the capacity to govern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read to you from Hansard, and I quote: 
 

My central point is that we have a crisis of confidence in 
the province of Saskatchewan, [and] that we have a 
government that has been stripped of its credibility, a 
government that has no longer the confidence of the 
people, a government that no longer seems to have a 

vision or a clear direction; in short, [and I’m quoting] Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I believe, a government that has lost the 
capacity to govern. 
 
And in a democracy — I repeat — in any democracy or in 
any nation, in any nation when a government has lost the 
confidence of its people, when a government is stripped of 
its credibility, when a government has no vision, then it is 
time to defeat that government and give another group of 
men and women the opportunity to govern. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that was a quote from Hansard, March 
27, 1990, by the current Premier. Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
is the situation we are in today in this province. We have a 
government that has lost the capacity to govern. They have no 
vision. They know not where this province is headed. 
 
All we have to do, Madam Deputy Speaker, is look at some of 
the specific issues. Let’s look at the economy for an example. 
We see some numbers on the economy that are rising but why, 
why? And how under their direction can we lose people in an 
economic boom? How is it possible when we lose people in an 
economic boom? Stats Canada show that the province is down 
2,356 people from October of last year to October of this year 
— 1,100 in the last quarter alone. An economic boom and 
losing that number of people, how can anyone on that side of 
the House say that this is good for the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the NDP promised that net youth 
in-migration to Saskatchewan by 2005 in their partnership for 
poverty . . . or prosperity document four years ago. And this 
government can’t even sustain our current population, never 
mind living up to its promises from before. That’s sort of a trait 
with this government right now. They are unable and incapable 
of living up to their provinces. 
 
And one of the sad realities, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the 
people that we’re losing. I just want to give you a couple of 
numbers here. In 2004 Saskatchewan lost 3,000 residents with a 
post-secondary certificate and diploma and 2,100 people with 
master’s and higher level degrees in 2004, with the majority of 
these skilled workers going — where, I may add? — to Alberta. 
Totally unbelievable. 
 
And one of the reasons is the depth of our job market in 
Saskatchewan. Now we hear rhetoric from the other side that 
there’s jobs available. But look at the upward mobility jobs. 
Look at the jobs and the people with degrees that are leaving 
this province. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s clearly obvious to me that 
the communistic policies of the NDP are really what’s creating 
this. And right from the manifesto which is still on the NDP 
website and it says, “No C.C.F. government will rest content 
until it is eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full 
programme of socialized planning . . .” 
 
Well is it any wonder, is it any wonder that people are leaving 
this province? How can we sustain a population when we have 
negative growth? And it’s quite interesting to note that 
population growth is actually essential for economic growth. 
It’s essential. Even Bill Clinton used to carry in his pocket a 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

note. And it said, it’s the economy, stupid. 
 
Without taxpayers or growing economy, a government cannot 
sustain the social services or infrastructure people have come to 
expect. Now that’s something the other side should listen to — 
that taxpayers and growing population means that we have 
more taxpayers, and there’s more money to supply our social 
services. 
 
A growing economy, and I give you a quote of his: a growing 
economy is not about facts and figures or stats: it’s about 
people. That’s what’s missing from that side of the House, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s about people — jobs and careers 
to support families, building blocks of the community, building 
blocks of an economy. If you don’t have one, you don’t have 
the other. 
 
Forty-four hundred jobs lost in the last year, 4,400, the sixth 
straight month of job loss. And we hear from the other side 
some adjectives. It’s been a glitch. It’s been an aberration. It’s 
been something or other. With so many, so many months in a 
row, they’ve run out of adjectives. They don’t even wish to 
comment on it as of now. It’s extremely . . . it’s disturbing that 
here we are with their figures that we’re in an economic boom, 
and we’re losing all of these jobs. How on earth can they 
subscribe to that? 
 
I’d like to go on because we talk about some of the things that 
this government has done, and I’d like to give you a couple of 
figures. On social issues, 40,000 children live in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. How can anyone in this province have 
confidence in a government that allows this to happen, that we 
have 40,000 children in poverty? 
 
[16:15] 
 
And I’d like to read another quote, Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

We in this . . . [country] dream of a province where at the 
turn of the 21st century, like the soup kitchens of the 
1930s, the food banks of the 1980s and ’90s will be a thing 
of the past. 

 
That was said by the current Premier in 1991. How has he lived 
up to that statement? By increasing it to 40,000 children living 
in poverty, 24,600 people rely on food banks, half of whom are 
children. Food bank usage increased by 6.5 percent from 2004 
to 2005. But, but, our socialist friends say that we’re in a 
booming economy and they think it’s great. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the economy at a parliamentary 
session that I was at, and talked about civil society, and kind of 
relating the economy and growth to poverty. And here’s some 
statements that came out of this convention. Growth is a 
necessary condition for broad and sustained poverty reduction. 
Sustained economic growth requires macroeconomic stability. 
That, Madam Deputy Speaker, is why we need growth in this 
province. 
 
I also now want to talk a little bit about where this government 
has been heading. Let’s look at some of their business deals. 
We know, we know, that there have been numerous business 
failures by this government. And how can anyone have 

confidence in a government that loses so much taxpayers’ 
money, so much taxpayers’ money? 
 
And I just want to put into the record some of these. SaskTel for 
an example, we heard earlier on today about SaskTel, another 
one of their money-losing ventures. But let’s look at 
tappedinto.com, Persona, Navigata, Retx, Craig Wireless, NST, 
Clickabid, Soft Track, Ag Dealer, BWI [Business Watch 
International]. Madam Deputy Speaker, this totals up to $126.7 
million lost by SaskTel — $126 million. 
 
How about SPUDCO? We all know about SPUDCO, another 
great loss. SaskPower total loss, 17 million. SGI 16.1 million. 
Mega bingo — isn’t that a good one? — mega bingo 8 million. 
Pangaea 3.5 million. And let’s not forget about the Belle Plain 
ethanol deal. How can anyone have confidence in a government 
that goes through the antics that it did with the Belle Plain 
ethanol? That has set the ethanol industry back in this province 
substantially, and it was done — what we think is — on a 
similar deal to SPUDCO. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the numbers that I have just 
given you add up to a total of $207 million, and that’s not 
counting the 500 per cent over budget, Information Services 
Corporation lost. Now they had about a $20 million budget, and 
it’s well over $100 million. 
 
Now let’s look at money lost by another great investment of the 
NDP government, the Meadow Lake pulp mill — $800 million. 
Add those up, Madam Deputy Speaker, and you have over $1 
billion in lost taxpayers’ money by this NDP government. How 
can anyone have confidence in this government when they lose 
that much money needlessly? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we look at crime and we look at where 
the NDP have failed to keep their election promises from 1999. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Quorum. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — How can we have confidence in . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I have a quorum call in the House, 
and in that call I would instruct the Sergeant-at-Arms to tile the 
doors and a vote will be conducted. Attendance will be taken. 
 
I would now request the members rise for a call of attendance. 
 
Yates Toth McMorris 
D’Autremont Hermanson Bjornerud 
Chisholm Hart Eagles 
Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert Kirsch 
Brkich Kerpan  
 
Clerk: — And, Madam Speaker, the number of members 
present is 15 including the Chair. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The debate will continue. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to keep on with the debate on the non-confidence, 
but at this time, I would like to read my motion into the record 
and have the opportunity for my colleague from Moosomin to 
second the motion. 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2006 

So, Madam Speaker, I present the following motion, seconded 
by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
the Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative 
and its failure to address the issues that are most important 
to Saskatchewan people, as demonstrated by ignoring the 
crisis in agriculture, the inability to set spending priorities 
consistent with the province’s needs, the failure to grow 
the economy and create economic prosperity by not 
delivering much-needed services leaving many people 
behind, by forcing others to move out of the province for 
health care, and by forcing people to pursue their careers 
and dreams elsewhere because they cannot find jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion has been presented 
before the Assembly. Would the members take the motion as 
read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and just to raise a few 
concerns that people across this province have brought to the 
attention of myself and my colleagues and to join with the 
member from Wood River in his views regarding this 
government and how well it represents the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to see that a 
number of government members are also taking the time to 
listen to my comments. And I trust, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that as my colleague has already mentioned and as I relate a 
number of concerns that are continually brought to my 
attention, that the members opposite will actually take heed of 
the concerns that are being raised on an ongoing basis. 
 
That while this province, as many government members would 
try to tell us is doing very well economically, the people of this 
province continue to struggle and to suffer as they work to build 
this province because they have so much confidence and 
because they believe in the province. And yet at the same time, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they have to watch painfully as their 
young families — their sons and their daughters — continue to 
leave the province to go to other provinces. 
 
And my colleague was talking about the economy of the 
province of Saskatchewan and how well it’s working. And yet, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we recently received a Stats Canada 
report regarding jobs and job opportunities. And of all the 
provinces in Canada — and most notably the four Western 
provinces — Saskatchewan, despite the economic boom that we 
have in the oil and gas sector in this province, continues to lose 
jobs. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ve been continually criticized 
for always pointing the finger to the west, to our neighbours to 

the west, to Alberta and the 64,000 jobs that have been created 
in that province or the 70-some-thousand jobs created in the 
province of BC. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, even the 
province of Manitoba, the province of Manitoba which happens 
to have an NDP government at this time, grew in the last period 
where the province of Saskatchewan continues to lose jobs — 
and not only lose jobs, lose people. 
 
And you ask yourself, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I’m sure 
the government has to be asking themselves exactly what’s 
going on. They have almost $1 billion more in additional 
revenue this year and yet we have people in the agricultural 
community continuing to struggle to survive this economy. And 
you have to ask yourself why. Why are agriculture producers 
continuing to struggle? 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when I talk about agriculture 
producers I also want to reiterate the fact that agriculture, while 
it may not play the important economic forum in the province 
of Saskatchewan that it had at one time, it still impacts more 
people in the province of Saskatchewan than many of the 
economic sectors. 
 
And you can go, whether it’s our small rural communities, 
whether it’s our larger rural communities, or whether it’s even 
our cities, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are services, there are 
agencies that reach out and provide services to the agriculture 
community that are struggling to survive because of the plight 
of the agriculture producer. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, let me just bring to your attention, or 
to the attention of those who are paying attention at this time, 
that the leadership this government is showing is desperately 
lacking. And producers across this province are seeing that even 
as of this moment, as of this moment as they open the packages 
they’ve received from Crop Insurance and are invited again to 
take out insurance protection under the crop insurance program 
in this province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the province of Alberta just put an 
additional $20 million into their crop insurance program to 
reduce the premiums to producers because of the difficulties 
we’re seeing in the grains and oilseed sector. They also, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, increased the bottom line of insurance 
coverage that producers in Alberta can carry. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Ontario looked at the plight of their 
agriculture producers and they put more money into their 
program. 
 
However what are we seeing from this NDP government in the 
province of Saskatchewan? We’ve seen that, as producers open 
the envelopes with the invitation to look at the crop insurance 
program and to apply for the program, that they’re actually 
going to be paying a higher insurance premium this year. It’s 
going to cost them more, Madam Deputy Speaker, while at the 
same time they are going to be getting less protection under this 
crop insurance program in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it behooves this government to look at 
the plight in agriculture. And I believe the Minister of 
Agriculture just yesterday commented about how they are going 
to reach out to the agriculture community and they’re going to 



March 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

put more of an emphasis on dealing with agricultural issues. But 
as of today, with the deadline fast approaching, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, agriculture producers are still stuck with making a 
choice between a higher premium for less insurance in the crop 
insurance program. 
 
So yes, if you were to ask agriculture producers today what they 
think of how well this province is managing the agricultural 
economy or managing the economy in this province, they 
would tell you they are giving this government a failing grade. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague talked about health but I 
want to raise a concern regarding education. This government 
asked for local school boards to join together and amalgamate. 
And then shortly after they did that, they indeed forced their 
own amalgamation program on school divisions and school 
districts across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, how well is that serving the 
people of Saskatchewan? How well is that serving communities 
like Grenfell and Moosomin and Kennedy and Kipling? And 
those are just a few in my constituency. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, people across this province are 
becoming very annoyed and angered at the way this 
government continues to mismanage the province of 
Saskatchewan in light of the fact or especially at a time when 
we have an economy that is booming as a result of oil and gas 
revenues. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I could go on in this debate. But I 
move at this time to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All right. Being 1 o’clock, being the 
hour of 1 o’clock, I now would say that this House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on Monday. The House stands 
adjourned. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................646 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................646 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................646 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................646 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................646 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................647 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................647 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................647 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................668 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Celebrating the Gifts of the Irish 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................647 
 Recognizing St. Patrick’s Day 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................647 
 Prince Albert and Area Community Foundation Gives Grants 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................648 
 Rosetown & District Chamber of Commerce Awards 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................648 
 The Friar’s Briar 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................648 
 Olympic Gold Medallist Colleen Sostorics Honoured at Community Supper 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................649 
 Congratulations to Winners of SaskEnergy’s Adopt-A-Junior Program 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................649 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Highway Maintenance and Storage Depots 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................650 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................650 
 SaskTel International’s Project in Trinidad and Tobago 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................651 
 Job Vacancies in Nursing 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................653 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................654 
 Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/ Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................656 
 



 

 Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................656 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Health Care System 
  Prebble ...............................................................................................................................................................................656, 666 
  Iwanchuk ...........................................................................................................................................................................658, 666 
  McMorris...........................................................................................................................................................................660, 665 
  Morin .................................................................................................................................................................................661, 665 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................663 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................664 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................666 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................667 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Government’s Performance 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................668 
  The Deputy Speaker (Quorum Call) .......................................................................................................................................669 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................670 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


