
















































Hansard: May 04, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 53A  THURSDAY, MAY 4, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1505 
 May 4, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents in the Cypress Hills 
region concerned about the condition of Highway 32, especially 
the stretch between the communities of Leader and Cabri. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by constituents of 
Cypress Hills as well as other communities around the province 
including Saskatoon, Assiniboia, and Swift Current. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are really concerned about the price of gas. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that a portion of provincial 
windfall of oil and gas revenue be used to reduce the 
provincial gas tax. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Foam Lake, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents of Meadow Lake who are 
worried about the safe driving conditions on Highway No. 3: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Mervin and Livelong. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with conditions of 
Highway No. 3. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Turtle 
Lake, Spruce Lake, and Livelong. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from my neighbouring constituency. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain 
open as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who would be 
affected by such possible closure. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Watrous, 
Manitou Beach, and Young. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also join my 
colleague on calling on the government to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Simpson, and Stalwart. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on a 
petition on autism spectrum disorder which are some of the 
most vulnerable citizens in our province. The prayer reads: 
 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Saskatchewan minister of Health, the Hon. John 
Nilson. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present yet another petition regarding autism 
spectrum disorder. I will read a small portion: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the recommendation 
made by the Government of Saskatchewan caucus 
committee on human services to the Minister of Health. 
And those recommendations include: continue to provide 
intensive behavioural intervention and other therapies for 
as long as an individual’s lead medical professional deems 
it to be required; to increase the early diagnosis of children 
with autism spectrum disorder; and to provide respite and 
family support, accessible based on need. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received: 
 

A petition concerning Davidson and Imperial health 
centres, that’s sessional paper 741; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 638, 639, 669, and 738. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Human 
Services Committee to report Bill 49, The Police and Peace 
Officers’ Memorial Day Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 49 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

request a leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 
Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Public Safety. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Police and Peace Officers’ 
Memorial Day Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — I move that this Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 49, The Police and 
Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Human 
Services Committee to report Bill No. 60, The Evidence Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 60 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 60 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 



May 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 60, The Evidence Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Human 
Services Committee to report Bill No. 61, The Evidence 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 61 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 61, The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 
2006 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is my pleasure 
to bring to your attention that today we have 16 Saskatchewan 

Olympians and Paralympians from the 2006 Olympic and 
Paralympic Winter Games in Torino, Italy who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery and on the floor of the House. By leave of the 
Assembly, I will call upon the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition for remarks, and then I will recognize the members 
of the Assembly as they introduce their constituents. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a very significant day in the life of our legislature, indeed in 
the life of our province, when we can welcome to the provincial 
legislature those men and women who represented our nation 
— and in this case very particularly our province — at the 
Winter Olympics and the Paralympics in Torino, Italy this year. 
We will have much more to say, Mr. Speaker, as you know, as 
we move post-session this afternoon to a reception and a 
ceremony in the rotunda. And I’m certain that all members will 
want to be there to share in that reception. 
 
I want to just, at this point, to very formally on behalf of the 
government welcome these citizens of our province, of whom 
we are so proud, to this Chamber, to this legislature for the 
purpose that we want to honour, recognize, and thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of those who, from 
Saskatchewan, participated in the Winter and Paralympics in 
Torino who could not be here today. At the conclusion of the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] introductions, I 
will ask your leave to take my place again and speak to those 
who could not be here today. We want their names to be 
recorded and recognized as well. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
with the Premier today on behalf of the official opposition in 
welcoming this very, very special group to their Legislative 
Assembly, the 16 Olympians and Paralympians, members of the 
mission staff. Obviously as the Premier has pointed out, when 
we watch the Olympics on TV we’re cheering for Canada, 
looking for where the Canadian teams might be. And then when 
we see it’s someone from our own province, there’s that much 
more pride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their efforts in Torino were often measured in 
centimetres and seconds. But you couldn’t possibly measure the 
pride that we all feel for what they did there and their 
representation of our province. On behalf of the members of 
this side of the House, we want to join with the Premier in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 
to the Assembly Mr. Morgan Alexander, member of the 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2006 

four-man bobsleigh team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to introduce to the Assembly today Ms. Jamie 
Cruickshank, member of the two-man bobsled team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Mr. Chris Dornan, member of the 
mission staff for Team Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the member for Kelvington-Wadena and 
myself, it is my privilege to introduce to the Assembly Mr. Ken 
Kotyk, member of the four-man bobsleigh team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce in 
the House today Ms. Regan Lauscher, a competitor in the 
women’s luge single event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Mr. Reid Morrison, member of the 
mission staff for Team Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to the House Mr. Daryl Nixon, coach of 
the women’s Bronze Medal curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 

to the Assembly today Mr. Jason Parker, silver medallist in 
men’s speed skating, long track pursuit. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Ms. Meaghan Simister, competitor in 
the women’s luge singles event. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair once again recognizes the member 
for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly this afternoon Ms. Kerry Simpson, 
competitor in the women’s 500-metre speed skating long track 
event. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Colleen Sostorics, 
gold medallist in women’s hockey 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Mr. Max Thompson, competitor in 
the individual men’s Nordic combined event. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to 
introduce to the Assembly Ms. Mavis Wahl, massage therapist 
for the Gold Medal women’s hockey team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Ms. Kim Weger, competitor for the 
women’s speed skating long track event. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



May 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose it’s my privilege to introduce to 
the Assembly Kaspar Wirz, coach of the Nordic ski team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would at this time recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 11 more 
winter Olympians who were not able to join us here this 
afternoon, whom I would like to introduce in their absence. And 
at the conclusion I’ll ask members, after I’ve introduced these 
11, to show our appreciation I hope in a loud enough fashion 
that they might hear us wherever they may be today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those not able to be with us today are: Mr. Roger 
Archambault, team leader for Biathlon Canada; Mr. Mark 
Habscheid, assistant coach for the men’s hockey team; Ms. 
Shannon Kleibrink, skip of the Bronze Medal women’s curling 
team; Ms. Amy Nixon, third on the Bronze Medal women’s 
curling team; Mr. Wade Redden, played defence for the men’s 
hockey team; Mr. Robyn Regehr, played defence for the men’s 
hockey team; Ms. Jennifer Spencer, who served as video 
technician for the Gold Medal women’s hockey team; Mr. 
Denis Sproxton, goaltender coach for the Gold Medal women’s 
hockey team; Mr. Justin Warsylewicz, silver medallist in men’s 
speed skating long track pursuit; Dr. Marni Wesner, one of the 
physicians for Team Canada’s health care support team; Ms. 
Hayley Wickenheiser, a member of the Gold Medal women’s 
hockey team. And also not able to be with us today, Ms. Colette 
Bourgonje, bronze medallist in Nordic skiing 5-kilometre 
freestyle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these could not be here. In their absence and in the 
presence of the athletes and support, people who are here, let us 
together show our appreciation. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. And through you to all 
members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 22 guests seated 
in the west gallery. These are grade 12 students from O’Neill 
High in Regina Coronation Park. 
 
It will be my pleasure to meet with the 21 grade 12 students and 
their teacher, Brian Marin, after some time, about the time that 
question period ends. And we’ll be having pictures and then a 
little meeting. And I think I’ve even arranged a boxed orange 
juice for us all at that time. It’s just astounding all of the great 
things that can happen in here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all colleagues, all members to welcome the 
grade 12 students from O’Neill. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all the members of the Assembly and on behalf of our 
good friend and colleague, the member from Martensville, I’d 
like to introduce a group of 34 students from grades 8 and 9 at 
Osler School, Osler, Saskatchewan. I believe the group is sitting 
in the east gallery. I haven’t had a chance to meet with them yet 
but I expect to do so momentarily. But we’d like to welcome 
them here today. They’re in the accompaniment of Glen 
Osmond and Grant Elke, the teachers for those two grades. And 
they’re chaperoned by Tammy Guenther and Dawn Samuel. 
And we’d like to welcome them here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly someone 
seated in the west gallery, and perhaps he could stand and wave 
as I mention his name. His name is Rod Ashfield. He’s the 
secretary of the Saskatchewan Employment Equity and 
Diversity Association. He is also with the Neil Squire 
Foundation, who was the community host for the first annual 
EDDY Awards that were recently held in Regina, and were a 
very integral part of the EDDY Awards. So I want to welcome 
him to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also 
want to take the moment, the opportunity to welcome the 
students from O’Neill High School. It is the most awesome high 
school in Regina. It’s the one that I attended. And I hope you 
have an enjoyable day here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery as well, while we’ve already recognized Colleen, there’s 
two very special people in her life, Lanny and Jean Sostorics 
from Kennedy who have come in to join us this afternoon. 
Actually Lanny was Colleen’s coach for a number of years, 
coached my son as well as they played together. And, Mr. 
Speaker, just a little secret. While Colleen was a good skater 
and played with the fellows, one thing she thoroughly enjoyed 
and was really looking forward to when we got to midget 
hockey was really being able to flatten those guys. She never 
quite got there. Welcome, Jeanie and Lanny to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, in the 
west gallery, the grade 3 and 4 students from École St. Pius 
school. And these students, accompanied by their music 
teacher, Madame Holly Flude; and their accompanist, Mr. Chris 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2006 

Hamilton; and their conductor, Madame Joan Pratchler, who is 
also the principal of the school, are here to help celebrate today. 
And they will be singing some songs in the rotunda and they’ll 
be singing the national anthem for us in English and French. 
 
And I ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the legislature a group of nine students and two teachers from 
the wonderful Scott Collegiate — possibly an even better 
looking group of students than the ones from O’Neill. That 
could be. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, they’re here today to observe 
the events with the Paralympians and the Olympians and to 
perhaps draw some inspiration as they themselves are aspiring 
athletes participating in basketball, volleyball, softball, and 
even in dance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Jennie Davies who 
coaches basketball, and Deanna Pelletier who coaches dance 
and softball. Please welcome them to their legislature, hon. 
members. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well following in the vein of my colleague 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre, I am proud to introduce an 
extremely good-looking constituent from the constituency of 
Regina Wascana Plains who is seated behind the bar, Mr. 
Speaker. Clayton Gerein is with us. Pilot Butte is very proud of 
Clayton and has a sign up outside the community. And most 
times when I’m driving in, Clayton’s passing me at a 
remarkable speed as he’s practising up for the next medal he 
could possibly contend for. 
 
My colleague from North Battleford, the Minister of Health, 
also has mentioned that he was recently inducted into the North 
Battleford wall of fame for his contribution to sport. And it’s a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, Clayton Gerein. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
honour of attending the fifth annual MJBEX [Moose Jaw 
Business Excellence] Awards banquet put on by the Moose Jaw 
Chamber of Commerce and several business sponsors 
 

MJBEX Awards were presented to Moose Jaw businesses in ten 
categories, including a community involvement category which 
went to Independent Medical Rehabilitation; customer service 
category to Yvette Moore Gallery; young entrepreneur category 
to Sterling Fitness Centre; business innovation category to 
Wells Camera and Sound; marketing category to Wrapture Spa 
and Salon; exports category to Raider Industries; new ventures 
category to CJAY Trailers; job creation category to Tim 
Horton’s; pioneer award to the Moose Jaw Co-op Association; 
and finally, business of the year to Triple 4 Advertising 
Limited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event was attended by over 350 people, an 
encouraging signal to the Moose Jaw business community. 
Congratulations to all of the nominees, the Moose Jaw Chamber 
of Commerce, and thanks to the sponsors of this great event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

IPSCO Celebrates 50 Years 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last night I along with the Premier, a number of our colleagues 
from this side of the Assembly, and a huge crowd of 
well-wishers including former premiers Blakeney and 
Romanow gathered at the Turvey Centre in the constituency of 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley to attend IPSCO’s 50th anniversary 
gala. 
 
We were there to celebrate the history and accomplishments of 
a company that is not only one of Saskatchewan’s great 
corporate citizens but also one of Saskatchewan’s great 
economic success stories. 
 
Fifty years ago this province was introducing natural gas, and 
Premier Tommy Douglas wanted the pipe to be produced here 
at home. 
 
The combination of Premier Douglas’s desire to encourage 
industrial development in the province, the vision and business 
acumen of Bill Sharp, the company’s first president, and the 
expertise and resources of Jack Turvey, the first 
secretary-treasurer, resulted in the Prairie Pipe Manufacturing 
Company — the enterprise that would grow into IPSCO, one of 
the world’s leading producers of steel plate and pipe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years IPSCO has expanded its operations 
into five provinces and seven states and directly or through its 
subsidiary companies employs 2,700 people. Last year the 
company earned over $500 million on sales of over $3 billion. 
IPSCO and IPSCO employees are generous supporters of local 
charities, and the company is a responsible environmental 
citizen as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
IPSCO’s management and staff on a great first 50 years and 
wishing them every success in the future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Stepping Stones Career Fair 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
my colleague, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, and I had 
the privilege of attending the Stepping Stones Career Fair held 
in the exhibition grounds here Regina. 
 
The purpose of this fair is to create a career gathering for 
Aboriginal youth. The organizers of this event spent a 
tremendous amount of time contacting businesses and 
professional organizations, inviting them to come and set up 
booths where they could display employment opportunities 
available in the business and professional community to the 
young people who attended the fair. 
 
As a result of their effort, more than 1,200 youth who came to 
the fair from across the province had the first-hand experience 
of speaking directly to potential employers or career groups 
about their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were more than 90 exhibitors giving the 
young people gathered the ability to talk about careers in police 
work, the Armed Forces, tourism, the health field, construction, 
along with many other fields of opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the organizers of the fair hope that events of this 
nature may open the doors for young people to choose 
meaningful full-time employment rather than continuing down 
the road of dependency or a life of drug addiction and crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we extend a special thank you to the organizers 
and the many sponsors for supporting and hosting such a 
tremendous event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
[14:00] 

EDDY Awards 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
recently had the opportunity to attend the inaugural 
Saskatchewan Employment Equity and Diversity Association 
Diversity at Work Awards here in Regina. The EDDY Awards 
recognize individuals and organizations that have shown a 
commitment to advance and support a diverse workplace. 
 
Over 50 individuals and businesses, Mr. Speaker, were 
nominated in four categories for 12 awards. The categories for 
nomination included business interests, voluntary sector, 
government, and youth-oriented activity. I am proud to say that 
one of the fine constituents of Regina Walsh Acres, Ms. Barb 
Dedi was awarded an EDDY award for her work with Spring 
Free From Racism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the food was wonderful, and the atmosphere was 
tremendous. Along with my colleague, the member from 
Regina Rosemont, I had the pleasure of a group of people 

absolutely committed to employment equity. Mr. Speaker, 
equity and diversity are such important issues to our society, 
and this cannot be stressed enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SEEDA [Saskatchewan Employment Equity and 
Diversity Association], the organizer of the awards, is a 
provincial, non-profit organization established in 1986 to 
promote employment equity and diversity across Saskatchewan. 
Membership includes individuals of background ranging from 
equity practitioners, human resource personnel, managers, 
employers, union representatives, job seekers, corporations, and 
government agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
in congratulating SEEDA for organizing the first annual EDDY 
Awards, Barb Dedi for her award-winning work with Spring 
Free From Racism, and all of the other winners and nominees. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Provincial Mental Health Services 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Mental Health Association’s National Mental Health 
Week is this week, May 1 to 7. This year the country-wide 
awareness and education campaign will build on last year’s 
theme, practising mind and body fitness. 
 
With Canadians becoming increasingly aware of the importance 
of good mental health, the CMHA’s [Canadian Mental Health 
Association] goal this year is to motivate people from across 
Canada to improve their mental fitness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the mental health sector is 
similar to many other sectors in health care — it’s short of 
professionals. An article in the paper this week goes on to say: 
 

A long-term plan is needed to address the province’s 
patchy mental health services, says the executive director 
of the Canadian Mental Health Association in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
“Mental health has a patchwork quilt of services,” Dave 
Nelson said . . . 
 

He goes on to say that outside of Regina and Saskatoon, the 
workload for psychiatrists is horrendous. Mr. Speaker, I call on 
this government to deal with the issue of the shortage of 
professionals in our province, not only in the mental health field 
but in so many other health sectors in our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

United Way Tribute Luncheon 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few days ago I 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2006 

had the pleasure of attending the United Way of Regina’s 2006 
Tribute Luncheon to honour those who significantly support the 
United Way’s goal to improve lives and build community. As 
Chair of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative, I’m 
continually impressed by the commitment of organizations, 
businesses, labour, and individuals who give so much on behalf 
of those in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Distinguished Corporate Philanthropy Awards 
recognize corporate partners for their exceptional contributions 
to the United Way and the community. This year’s winners are 
CUETS [CU Electronic Transaction Services] and PCL 
Construction. Winners of the United Way of Regina’s 
President’s Awards given to individuals or groups for their 
outstanding contributions to the organization and the 
community are Gordon Rawlinson and Robert Haynes. 
 
The Investor Group Volunteer Awards recognized two people 
for their sustained and ongoing commitment as volunteers. This 
year’s winners are Deborah Regan and Brenda Mercer. The 
Regina and District Labour Council, through its partnership 
with United Way Regina, presented the 2nd annual United Way 
Labour Community Service Award to George Britton of the 
Canadian Union of Postal Workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Vic Huard, Tracey Mann, Dan 
McMurtry, and all the staff and volunteers of United Way 
Regina for their commitment and hard work. And I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the recipients of this 
year’s United Way Tribute Awards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Dogs’ Breakfast Raises Funds for Huskies 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I had 
the occasion to enjoy breakfast with the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs and the member for Saskatoon Southeast. And I 
can say that I did enjoy the breakfast — that wouldn’t normally 
necessarily be the case with these gentlemen — because I was 
at the Sixth Annual U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
Huskies Football Dogs’ Breakfast in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Dogs’ Breakfast began six years ago. This 
fundraiser put on by the Huskies Football Foundation began six 
years ago with about 600 in attendance. I happened to be at that 
one. And at this particular event this morning in Saskatoon at 
the Prairieland Exhibition, 1,670 people enjoyed themselves at 
the breakfast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The breakfast included some opening remarks by Chair Hugh 
Vassos who has done an excellent job and has been involved for 
some time; Todd Peterson, chairman of the foundation and also 
participated with an auction; Glen Suitor was on hand; as was 
Saskatchewan Roughrider great, Bobby Jurasin who also were 
part of the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brian Towriss then introduced new recruits from 
this year, the head coach of arguably the finest college football 
program in the country. 

We want to pay special tribute to the work of the foundation in 
raising money, scholarship money for the program. We want to 
especially pay tribute today to Ron Graham, a former 
quarterback from 1959 who was on hand for the breakfast as 
well. He was there to donate $1.2 million which will go towards 
a new Huskie clubhouse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was a great event that will lead to, at the Potash Vanier Cup 
later on this year, it’ll lead to the Huskies on a brand new field 
hoisting that Vanier Cup. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Provision of Oxygen for Cancer Patients 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
short and simple. Can the minister tell this Assembly, Minister 
of Health tell this Assembly how his government and Sask 
Health defines palliative care? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 
has a dictionary and whatever the definition in the dictionary 
would probably fit Sask Health. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
55-year-old Linda Stonehouse lives in Arborfield. Last August, 
she was given 9 to 12 months to live. She has lung cancer. 
Linda has frequent episodes of extreme shortness of breath and 
difficulty breathing. Her family physician and the oncologist 
said she requires oxygen to avoid these episodes, yet Sask 
Health will not allow the cancer clinic to provide oxygen free of 
charge because Linda is not considered in the end stage of 
palliative care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this system denying terminal cancer 
patients comfort in their last few months? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
regions and the agencies have responsibility for the day-to-day 
administration of care. Mr. Speaker, each of the regions and the 
agencies have quality of care coordinators who deal directly 
with patients and families on matters like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have confidence in the quality of care 
coordinators within the cancer agency and within the regions 
and I would ask the member opposite to ensure that the family 
and the patient take this matter up with those who are best 
qualified to deal with it at the local level. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 



May 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the 
family has done. Linda’s daughter, who’s in the gallery today, 
has called both the quality care coordinator and the patient 
advocate at the Canadian Cancer Society. Both said that giving 
oxygen would be the suitable and compassionate thing to do. 
But they could not help in this situation so they referred the 
family to Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, or SAIL. 
Linda’s physician wrote SAIL requesting oxygen. The 
organization denied the doctor’s request. Linda only has a few 
months to live and cannot afford the oxygen that both her 
physician and the oncologist have recommended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister again: can the minister tell us why 
terminal cancer patients who are considered at the end stage of 
palliative care are being denied oxygen by Sask Health as 
requested by their physician and oncologist? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
program that the member opposite talks about, SAIL, has been 
serving Saskatchewan residents for a number of years. It has 
very specific guidelines that it works with, Mr. Speaker. I urge 
the member opposite in his consultation with the family and I 
urge the family to continue working through the processes that 
are in place to see that assessments are done properly and that 
whatever guidelines are in place are followed as requested. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s that minister’s guidelines 
that has brought their family, Linda’s family, to the Assembly 
today. When Linda Stonehouse has an episode, she must be 
rushed to the nearest hospital to get oxygen in the emergency 
room. That means, in Linda’s case, a frantic 45-minute drive to 
Nipawin, which is stressful for Linda and her family. Not only 
does that result in increased cost to the system because Linda is 
now in the emergency room, it’s not a very good environment 
when her immune system is depressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Linda’s doctors say that having oxygen at home 
would allow her quality of life for the time that she has left. At 
only $250 a month, that’s minimal cost to the health care 
system. Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to 
reviewing his own department’s policies when it comes to 
oxygen for cancer patients when they’re in the end stage of 
palliative care? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite knows that we are constantly and 
continually reviewing policies and guidelines. We do so during 
the course of the year when cases are brought to our attention 
that may require some changes in guidelines, and we do it every 
year in the budget building process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would urge the member opposite to ensure that 
when he has matters like this come to his attention, that he 
ensure that my office is aware of matters like this when he finds 
out about them, so that we might take action if we’re in a 
position to do so as quickly as possible. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re asking the minister 
today to review his policy and change the guidelines that are set 
out for SAIL because they’re just not acceptable. 
 
Linda’s family is frustrated. They believe that if the doctor has 
ordered oxygen for a patient that the system shouldn’t be able to 
deny that request, especially when it’s a patient with terminal 
cancer. Linda’s family is saying denying her of oxygen is taking 
away her ability to function as best as she can these last few 
months, to spend quality time with her family and 
grandchildren, again during these last few months. 
 
Will the minister do the right thing, the sensible and 
compassionate thing, and provide oxygen to terminal cancer 
patients who require it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I indicate to the member opposite that when matters are 
brought to our attention we, whether it’s internal to the 
Department of Health or whether it’s to the minister’s office, 
when matters are brought to our attention we review them with 
the intention of looking at guidelines and processes. 
 
I also indicate to the member opposite that there are guidelines 
and processes that have been in place, have served to provide 
services to Saskatchewan people for quite a number of years, 
and that continue in their state of evolution, and get changed 
when matters allow them to be changed or when resources 
permit. 
 
Again I suggest to the member opposite that when he heard 
about this case he should have brought it to our attention 
immediately, and we would have begun review on the case 
earlier than he’s suggesting today. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Condition of Highway 368 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
spring now in Saskatchewan which means one thing. We see 
the crumbling roads of this province, the demolished and unsafe 
highway that this NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
presides over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of my constituents has come to me with huge concerns 
over Highway 368 from St. Brieux to Muenster. His name is 
Don Folden and he is with Tillage Tools. He says the road is 
impassable which causes a problem, Mr. Speaker, since 
Bourgault Industries, Ag Solutions, Dry Air, Tillage Tools, and 
Assie Industries ship millions of dollars worth of equipment 
from this town and employ hundreds of people. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister even promised last year that he would 
go and visit to see for himself how bad this highway is. I quote 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2006 

from Hansard, November 29, 2005: 
 

. . . my commitment is that we’ll attempt to be out there 
shortly . . . I’m hoping we can do it before Christmas. 
 

But he still hasn’t gone, Mr. Speaker. My question: when does 
the minister expect to have Highway 368 fixed so all the 
industries and all their employees do not have to risk their own 
personal safety? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
that member and to members of the legislature that he is 
correct. It is spring. And with spring brings thaw, and with the 
thawing of roads brings heaves and potholes. It’s an annual 
event, Mr. Speaker. And the member from Cannington 
obviously has some thoughts on this regard and if he wants to 
get up and ask me a question he can do so after I’ve done my 
response, but I’d appreciate his attention while I’m attempting 
to answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways this year has a 
record amount within its budget — $345 million which is a 15 
per cent increase. But I want to say to all members of the 
House, in northern Saskatchewan we’ve got particular 
conditions caused by high moisture levels, high water levels, 
and it is raising havoc with our highways. Highway 969 is one 
example and I can give him others besides the one he raised. 
The department is working on these. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the story 
of economic development in St. Brieux is a David versus 
Goliath story; one small town fighting against a monolithic, old 
NDP government. And this small town prevails by building 
some of the most successful businesses in the province that 
employ hundreds and pour thousands of tax dollars into 
provincial coffers. You’d think the government could fix their 
road. But this minister refuses because Highway 368 is not on 
the department’s 2006 or 2007 highway construction schedule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has a mountain of extra 
cash and they give nothing back to those who create jobs and 
pay taxes. Mr. Speaker, when will the minister commit to 
giving the citizens of St. Brieux a decent, safe highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Why has this NDP government not given this 
area a decent road? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that that 
member has taken rhetoric lessons from the Leader of the 
Opposition. He’s learning quite quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the members will know, Department of 
Highways and contractors will get to the roads as they can when 
moisture conditions will allow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways officials, I think, do 
a very good job on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Weather conditions sometimes disallow the work to be done 
when that member may want to have it done or when we would 
want to have it done. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, that with respect to this particular road, 
I will check with the department to see what kind of attention 
it’s going to receive and when it will, and I promise that 
member I’ll report to him directly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to bring to the minister’s attention, as well as the Premier, that 
their offices are about to be flooded with letters from angry 
residents of St. Brieux and Lake Lenore. 
 
Scott Lessmeister told the Humboldt Journal this morning, and 
I quote: 
 

[I’m] asking everyone to write a letter to government 
officials, including [the] Minister of Highways Eldon 
Lautermilch and Premier Lorne Calvert . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people are fed up with this government, are 
demanding action be taken. But this NDP government has 
turned their back on the citizens of St. Brieux. Mr. Lessmeister 
says, “The more letters we can send, the more ammunition the 
Opposition has to pressure the government on this issue. Let’s 
help them help us.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister — or better yet the Premier — 
explain to Mr. Lessmeister why he won’t fix Highway 368? 
Can the Premier tell him and all the other residents why they 
must risk personal injury in order to leave their home? What . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member that I certainly do appreciate his questions, because it 
does create awareness. And I want to say that this is an annual 
event in the spring. The roads will deteriorate and we will wait 
for the right conditions to get the reconstruction crews out to be 
able to do the work. And, Mr. Speaker, this spring is no 
different. 
 



May 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

But what I would want to create is a little awareness from 
members of the opposition. They now are so closely tied to 
their federal counterparts in Ottawa. There was a budget put 
down by the federal government just a couple of days ago. And 
I’d like to ask that member if he has bothered to sit and write a 
letter to his federal counterparts in Ottawa to see what they 
might want to do about a national highways program that this 
country very much needs that would allow us to focus on other 
areas of need as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Terms of Appointment at Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Labour. It’s been 24 hours since I 
drew to his attention allegations of political interference raised 
by the former Vice-Chair of the Saskatchewan Labour 
Relations Board. 
 
Working men and women in our province must know their 
rights are being protected by an independent board. Men and 
women willing to invest in our province and create jobs must 
also know that there is a level playing field. Mr. Speaker, in the 
last 24 hours what has the Minister of Labour done to 
investigate these very serious allegations of political 
interference in the Labour Relations Board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let 
me be clear. There is no political interference in the workings of 
the Labour Relations Board. I want to also remind and inform 
the members of this House and the people of Saskatchewan, the 
former Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board finished his 
term, his appointment. On February 28, 2006, he completed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am deeply concerned about the allegations that 
were made in this House and not made outside the House. This 
is very troubling about the kind of way the members opposite, 
the Sask Party, operates. They work within the protection of 
this House, but yet refuse to make the same allegations outside. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Matkowski makes serious 
allegations. The former Vice-Chair, Mr. Speaker, the former 
Vice-Chair of Labour Relations Board alleges he was removed 
from his job because rulings angered unions. Mr. Matkowski 
states, and I quote: 
 

On June 24, 2005, Craik [that is deputy minister of 
Labour, William Craik] telephoned me and advised me 
that I would not be reappointed on March 1, 2006, and that 
he thought I should resign . . . Craik advised me that some 

of the unions had been complaining about my decisions. I 
asked Mr. Craik what were the Unions saying about me, 
and he would not say, advising me that this was “hearsay”. 
I stated to him that it was obviously effective hearsay, to 
which he agreed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what has the minister done to investigate these 
serious allegations of political interference? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we are on the same fishing 
trip we were on yesterday. I have some serious concerns about 
the allegations that are raised inside this House but won’t be 
raised outside this House. The Vice-Chair’s term expired on 
February 28, 2006. He completed his term. Mr. Speaker, I have 
some real serious concerns about the credibility of the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Speaker, this 
matter can be cleared up in a few minutes. All the minister has 
to do is talk to his deputy minister — in fact the very gentleman 
that was here last night. All the minister has to do is ask Mr. 
Craik if he told the Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board 
that Mr. Matkowski would not be reappointed as he requested 
because the unions didn’t like his rulings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I have been assured, and I 
believe there has been no political interference. But yet again I 
will say, the Vice-Chair’s term expired on February 28, 2006. 
He completed his work. And that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am deeply concerned about the way the members operate, 
making allegations inside this House but not willing to make 
the same allegations and quote the same document outside this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the affidavit of Mr. Matkowski 
was clearly outside of this House and we read from it yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker. I can’t believe that the Minister of Labour won’t 
take a very simple step. He won’t ask the deputy minister of 
Labour what happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this minister completely uninterested in the 
political independence of the Labour Relations Board? Or does 
he not want to hear the answer? Mr. Speaker, when will this 
minister give these allegations of political interference the 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2006 

serious attention that they deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we of course take this very 
seriously, these questions of allegations. And of course the 
member opposite uses the word affidavit. I find that very 
interesting. Will he call it outside the House an affidavit? 
Outside the House he calls it a document. Here is a document 
that . . . unsigned. We need to have more details here. Why 
won’t he quote from the document outside, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Here we have folks like that working from a document like that, 
calling into question the work of Legal Aid Commission, the 
prosecutions branch. This is the way these folks operate over 
here. And I’m very concerned about credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
Who has any credibility when they operate like that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Minister of Labour 
doesn’t want to confront the deputy minister of Labour because 
this minister is still relatively new to his portfolio. Perhaps he 
should ask his cabinet colleague, the former minister of Labour 
for her assistance in this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is alleged this interference took place in June 
2005. Mr. Speaker, will the current Minister of Labour 
undertake to ask the former minister of Labour if the 
Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board was asked to resign 
and was not to be reappointed because, quote, “. . . some of the 
unions had been complaining . . .”? 
 
What will he say about his decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I find 
this passing strange. We were in estimates last night. We could 
have had this question in estimates here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the members there has been 
no political interference. But really the question is, why is the 
member here operating from a position of political protection 
and won’t go outside and make these same allegations, Mr. 
Speaker? If there’s ever a question of credibility, that member 
suffers from that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday when I quoted from the affidavit of Mr. Walter 
Matkowski, I stated very clearly that that was his affidavit. 

These were concerns that he raised. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
when I presented that document to the press, members of the 
press, two of the members phoned Mr. Matkowski and Mr. 
Matkowski’s lawyer to verify that in fact this was his affidavit. 
So these are his words, Mr. Speaker. They’re not my words. 
They’re Mr. Matkowski’s words who alleges that there was 
interference. 
 
Can the minister stand in this Assembly and say that Mr. 
Matkowski’s allegations of political interference are wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think I’ve answered that question in terms of political 
interference. I’ve answered it several times. But the member 
opposite, the critic, continues to dodge the question about, will 
he take these allegations and be specific in here, out there? 
 
I am very concerned about the kind of attacks that these folks 
undertake against the people in Saskatchewan that make sure 
labour laws are followed. This is a very important board that we 
have and the credibility and the nature of the board must be 
protected. And here we have a member attacking it. This 
concerns me very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister in an earlier response indicated that the member of the 
board, Mr. Matkowski, had finished his term. And I want to 
read from The Trade Union Act, section 1.2 of clause 4, that 
says: 
 

If the term of a member of the board expires after the 
member has begun hearing a matter before the board but 
before the proceeding is completed, the member may 
continue as if his or her term had not expired for the 
purpose of completing this proceeding. 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, can 
the minister after having read Mr. Matkowski’s affidavit in 
which Mr. Matkowski says, and I quote from page no. 4, that 
“. . . Mr. Craik had instructed that I no longer be scheduled as 
Vice Chair.” 
 
That is a statement made on July 12, 2005. Can the minister 
state that there was no political interference by the deputy 
minister of his department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 



May 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review the facts. The 
person in question completed his term the end of February — 
February 28, 2006. It was a complete term. And as the member 
opposite read out the quote, the operative word was may. As I 
stated yesterday that’s the operative word, may. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has on several 
occasions now taken fishing expeditions attacking several 
different people. And we’re concerned about that. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite, and frankly the whole opposition, suffers 
from a real lack of credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 1,068 to 1,085 
inclusive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,068 to 1,085 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
recognition of Saskatchewan Olympians and Paralympians as 
well as to enable the policy field committees on Human 
Services as well as Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:35.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1506 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1506 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor....................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 49 — The Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1506 
 Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1506 
 Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................1507, 1509 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................1508, 1509 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................1508, 1509 
  Hamilton ........................................................................................................................................................................1508, 1510 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
 IPSCO Celebrates 50 Years 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
 Stepping Stones Career Fair 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
 EDDY Awards 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
 Provincial Mental Health Services 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
 United Way Tribute Luncheon 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
 Dogs’ Breakfast Raises Funds for Huskies 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1512 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Provision of Oxygen for Cancer Patients 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1512 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1512 
 



 

 Condition of Highway 368 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1513 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1514 
 Terms of Appointment at Labour Relations Board 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1515 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1515 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1517 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


