
















































Hansard: April 11, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 39A  TUESDAY, APRIL 11, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1107 
 April 11, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege and 
duty to present a petition on behalf of individuals from the 
communities of Prelate and Swift Current today with regard to 
the condition of Highway 32. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to cause the government to take immediate 
action and make necessary repairs to Highway 32 in order 
to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the urgency of this petition is indicated by the full 
complement of signatures I present today. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased to rise again today on behalf of people who are 
very concerned about Highway No. 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Kuroki, Margo, Fishing Lake, Saskatoon, St. Benedict, and 
Wynyard. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
several pages of a petition of citizens concerned about the safety 
of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Naicam, 
Wadena, Quill Lake, Landis, Bruno, Humboldt, Bradwell, 
Clavet, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

another petition from citizens of Wilkie who are concerned 
about the reduction of health care services in their community. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie, Landis, and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are all from 
Spiritwood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Bladworth and Kenaston. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 
petition regarding autism spectrum disorder. I will read a 
portion of it only: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendations made by the Government of 
Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services 
regarding autism. 

 
And I will read a portion of that: 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

Ensure autism spectrum disorder adult services and 
supports are accessible and based on need rather than an 
IQ or physical disability and to encourage and support 
autism-related research in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. This is signed by the good citizens 
from Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 7, 8, 12, 64, 67, 638, and 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 44 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education: as of April 11, 
2006, what is the length of time a student must wait on a 
waiting list before they will be offered a seat in the 
following programs at SIAST: combined laboratory, x-ray 
technician; cytotechnology; medical laboratory 
technology; medical radiologic technology; practical 
nursing; industrial mechanics; welding and electricians’ 
training? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 44 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Property 
Management: what company or group of companies, 
organization, municipality, or other purchased the Echo 
Valley Conference Centre? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 44 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management: what was the appraised value of the Echo 
Valley Conference Centre? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 44 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Property 
Management: what was the sale value of the Echo Valley 
Conference Centre? 

 
I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 44 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: how much funding has been 
provided for pre-kindergarten programs and services in the 
2006-07 provincial budget, and how much of that funding 
is being provided directly to school boards? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — For introduction of guests, members 
of the Assembly, it is my pleasure today to introduce to you a 
very fine-looking group of 42 students from Prince Albert 
seated in the west gallery. 
 
These students are from École Vickers intermediate school. 
They have been attending music workshops, and they’re taking 
some time off to visit us here in the legislature with their 
teachers, Mr. Perry Acorn and Madame Cecile Elliot. 
 
And I might mention that amongst them is a future politician. 
One of the grade six students, Alana Toles who is the daughter 
of Brent Toles, an active member of SSTI [Saskatchewan 
Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy], has played the role of Speaker in her grade five 
class’s model legislature. 
 
Please help me, members, in welcoming this group. And also 
with them is chaperones Ms. Gerrie Johnson, Ms. Sally 
Rybalka, Ms. Annette Henbid, Ms. Tammy Sanderson, and Mr. 
Brian Gauthier. Welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, within 
that group are two very special girls, and I’d like to introduce 
Alyssa and Mackenzie Hickie, if they’d stand up and give us a 
wave. They are the daughters of Darryl Hickie, the Sask Party 
candidate for P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton. So we welcome here 
to the House, and I’d wish everyone to join with me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery is, I’ll give them a few minutes to sit down. It’s 
in . . . Again very special women from Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Of course I introduced my new assistant at my office, Irene 
Pedersen. But with Irene is her friend from Buffalo Narrows, 
Therese Daigneault. And Therese’s an avid canoeist. She’s 
travelled many, many miles on many of the rivers in northern 
Saskatchewan. So even though she’s above 40, she’s still, she is 
still a very, very active young woman. And I’d mention and ask 
all members of the Assembly to welcome these very special 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

guests from Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Western 
Regional Championship 

 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
couple weeks ago I had the honour to stand in the House and 
talk about the Prince Albert Mintos winning the Saskatchewan 
AAA midget hockey championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again today I’m happy and excited to report that 
the Prince Albert Mintos AAA midget hockey team won the 
western regional championship that was held in Tisdale this 
past weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know you’ll be happy to hear that Prince Albert 
handled themselves very well right throughout the tournament, 
both on and off the ice, Mr. Speaker. There were four teams 
involved in the championship: Thunder Bay, Winnipeg, the host 
Tisdale Trojans, and of course the Prince Albert Mintos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Mintos played the Winnipeg Thrashers in the 
final and won with a score of 5 to 3. It was a great hockey 
game: lots of speed, lots of action, and just the right amount of 
physical contact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MVP [most valuable player] of the 
championship was Dustin Tokarski, the goaltender for the 
Prince Albert Mintos who hails from Watson, Saskatchewan. 
But, Mr. Speaker, they were all really stars in my mind as I 
watched the game, including my friend Bobby Spigott who 
comes from Outlook, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to congratulate the players, the 
coaches, the fans, the parents, and everyone involved on their 
championship. And, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Mintos are 
now off to Charlottetown on April 24 to participate in the Telus 
Cup national championship. And I’ll have a report shortly 
following that championship as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

Reducing Poverty in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial budget brought down by our government last 
Thursday makes a major investment in reducing poverty in 
Saskatchewan, and I’m very pleased with the measures that are 
being taken. 
 
The adult basic allowance under the Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan is being increased by $40 a month to $445. That will 
provide a central resources for the purchase of food, clothing, 

and personal items in a household. And this change will benefit 
16,200 adults, the majority of whom have a disability. It’s a 
very positive change. 
 
Disabled persons will also be eligible for extra help with 
housing costs. The disability housing supplement increases by 
over 40 per cent to a maximum of $150 per month. 
Low-income families with children will benefit from a 33 per 
cent increase in the family housing supplement. And, Mr. 
Speaker, from improvements in child care subsidies, Mr. 
Speaker, under the new provisions in the budget, low-income 
families will have 85 per cent of their child care costs covered, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
These measures in total, Mr. Speaker, result in an increase in 
the Department of Community Resources’s budget of $43 
million, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good budget for low-income 
families in our province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Celebratory Weekend in Moosomin 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend, the Moosomin Chamber of Commerce held its first 
agricultural fair. And, Mr. Speaker, for this first fair I know that 
all the organizers were very pleased as they had more than 40 
exhibiters. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, having the opportunity to attend the fair, it 
was not only a pleasure to visit with the exhibiters, but the 
many people who came to just see what the wares and the 
opportunity to get involved in agriculture and what the fair had 
to show to the people of the Moosomin area. 
 
The chamber also celebrated its annual dinner, and they had 
over 250 people gather for a tremendous dinner provided by 
Carol’s Catering. Mr. Speaker, 250 people actually is fairly 
crowded in our hall and, as the mayor noted, it’s almost time for 
a new hall in the community of Moosomin — that, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re working on as soon as the new hospital is up 
and running, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge the special 
accomplishment of one lady in our community as well. On 
Saturday I had the privilege of joining a number of folks as they 
gathered to celebrate with Peggy Turnmire, 103 years young. 
As I was chatting with Peggy and congratulating her on 
reaching this milestone, she said to me, yes you were at my 
birthday celebration last year. And I said to her, and at the rate 
you’re going and how young you look, I’ll be there again next 
year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
[13:45] 
 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

Engineering Students Display Projects and Creativity 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, creativity was on 
display this past weekend in Regina, and I would say from what 
I saw and experienced, creativity is alive and well in 
Saskatchewan. The occasion, Mr. Speaker, was Project Day 
2006, the event which showcases final engineering projects by 
students enrolled in engineering studies at the University of 
Regina in the areas of electronic systems, industrial systems, 
environmental systems, and petroleum systems. This annual 
event was hosted by the Regina Engineering Society and the 
University of Regina Faculty of Engineering, with the 
assistance of the Regina Engineering Students’ Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you add creativity to engineering 
know-how, the result is a very impressive display of projects. In 
total there were 47 projects in the four engineering disciplines. 
My favourites included the lawn mower-mounted ice resurfacer 
that will effectively clean and resurface a sheet of ice. Brushes 
sweep the ice and a film of water is then applied for resurfacing. 
If you can’t afford your own Zamboni, this easy-to-install and 
removable attachment is the answer. 
 
I was also impressed with the heating-cooling travel mug, a 
portable beverage holder that utilizes thermal electric 
technology and rechargeable batteries to maintain the desired 
drinking temperature of a liquid whether it’s hot or cold. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, a voice-controlled car which simulates the 
actions of a voice-controlled wheelchair in which the user 
controls the speed and direction of the car with voice input, 
offers great potential for people with some disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating University of Regina engineering students for 
their excellent projects and their display of creativity. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

A Phenomenal Season for the Wilkie Midget 
Outlaws Hockey Team 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Wilkie Midget 
Outlaws hockey team. The Outlaws had a phenomenal season, 
taking on numerous adept teams in the league and coming out 
of the regular season with a perfect 22 and zero record with an 
outstanding 164 goals for and 32 goals against. During the 
course of the season, the Outlaws entered a city tournament of 
the A calibre and showed that small-town grit can go a long 
way as they claimed first prize in the A final. 
 
This brought the Outlaws to the league playoffs and some stiff 
competition. Wilkie once again came up victorious as the 
league playoff champions. The Outlaws also went on to claim 
the Saskatchewan Hockey Association provincial B playoff 
title, taking the first game against Assiniboia, champions of the 
South Central Minor Hockey League Midget 1 division in 
Assiniboia, and showed the heart and determination and skill of 
small-town Saskatchewan as fans packed the Wilkie arena for 

the second and final game of these playoffs. Although they lost 
this game, they took the title with the total series score. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating the coaches, 
manager, players, and fans of the Wilkie Midget Outlaws for an 
incredible season and posting an overall season record of 39, 1, 
and zero. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Centennial Canoe Quest Wins Saskatchewan  
Tourism Awards 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, one of the most talked about 
events of last year’s centennial celebrations was the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Canoe Quest. Mr. Speaker, the Canoe 
Quest was more than just a race. It was a cultural showcase and 
a demonstration of northern hospitality and spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Centennial Canoe Quest has been honoured 
with not one but two Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of 
Excellence — the first for promotion and marketing, and the 
second, the Spirit of Saskatchewan Award. It’s a special 
honour, Mr. Speaker. It’s the first time in the 17-year history of 
the Saskatchewan Tourism Awards that a finalist has won in 
two categories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan should be 
very proud. I want to thank every member of the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Canoe Quest for their talent, time, and skill they put 
into this great event. I would like to especially thank Sol and 
Renee Carriere of Cumberland House and Sid Robinson of La 
Ronge for coming up with the idea. I also want to thank the 
organizers and volunteers in each of the 13 host communities 
for their generosity, northern hospitality, and for showcasing 
the vibrancy of life in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating all those involved in this memorial event. These 
two Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence are a special 
recognition of their accomplishments. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Conditions of Rural Roads 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well how can you tell 
it’s springtime in Arm River-Watrous constituency? All along 
the highways there’s little red flags popping up all over the 
place. 
 
On 19 highway and Highway 15 running east from Kenaston, 
they’re in deplorable state. Even a section of Highway 15 is 
closed down right now. I’ve been contacted by concerned 
constituents indicating that the pavement is seriously breaking 
up in many places along these highways. Drivers are attempting 
to avoid the gaping holes in an attempt to avoid major damage 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

to their vehicles. This poses a clear risk to traffic safety 
including school buses and public transit, not to mention vital 
economic transportation. What about provincial 911, ambulance 
service, and other first responders? 
 
Each spring we have to urge this government to act on the same 
issues which are of such great concern for people’s safety. 
Taxpayers are once again left wondering how the Highways 
minister can ignore these terrible highways especially since 
everyone knows that there is $1 billion extra this year. So why 
are they not on top of this now? Does it take a serious accident 
or even a death on our provincial highways before this 
government notices rural road conditions? 
 
This is just another sign of this government abandoning rural 
Saskatchewan. This NDP [New Democratic Party] is always 
talking that they care about people. Well I would advise them to 
take a trip outside Regina to see if they can make that statement 
with a clear conscience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Waiting Lists for Training 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
we discovered last week, not only do Saskatchewan students 
often have to wait for an education, they have to pay to wait for 
an education. I asked the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment about a $20 annual wait fee at SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 
The minister said that SIAST was reconsidering the wait fee 
and yet the communications director of SIAST said that that 
was not the case. The fee was going to go ahead. Mr. Speaker, 
can the minister tell us today if SIAST is still planning to 
impose a $20 annual wait-list fee for five of its programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can indicate to the members opposite is that I have 
received a letter from the president and CEO [chief executive 
officer] of SIAST indicating that they’re reviewing their 
waiting list policy at SIAST, including the $20 wait-list fee for 
the five programs in question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Amanda Thompson of Bienfait 
has been told that she’s number 224 on the wait-list for the 
medical radiological technicians program. This program, Mr. 
Speaker, accepts 16 students a year including three candidates 
from designated equity categories. Now at this rate, Mr. 

Speaker, Amanda Thompson will have to wait 15 years for the 
training that she’s seeking. Mr. Speaker, why is this 
government making Amanda and other students like her wait up 
to 15 years and why does she have to pay to wait? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, SIAST regularly reviews the 
labour market in the province to determine the numbers of seats 
that need to be allocated within various programs. I understand 
that in terms of the labour market, they believe at present that 
they are educating enough MRTs [medical radiation 
technologist] in our province for our internal consumption. And 
I would point out to the member opposite that yes, there is an 
MRT program in Alberta. They don’t have a wait-list. Do you 
know why, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Because they take people based on the highest qualification 
from each applicant. In the case of Saskatchewan, what we do is 
that we determine if people qualify and if you qualify, you go 
on to the list. And in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, what they do is that 
if you don’t get through the door, you still have to pay an 
application fee. And you don’t go on a wait-list; you reapply 
next year and determine whether or not you’re eligible for 
entrance into that program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Richard Thompson is Amanda 
Thompson’s father, and he’s not happy that his daughter is on a 
15-year wait-list for her SIAST program. Mr. Thompson 
wonders if he should have to put in an application for Amanda 
maybe when she was in kindergarten. Mr. Speaker, this 
situation is absolutely ridiculous. Will the minister begin 
addressing these impossibly long wait-lists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan we look at our internal market and determine 
whether or not we need to increase the number of spaces at our 
SIAST program. I’m advised that there are enough people 
coming through the program each year to deal with our internal 
consumption. We’re planning for our own labour market. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has said, well they can 
go to Alberta and get in. Well, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta it’s 
based upon the most highly qualified people getting into the 
program. They have to pay an application fee each year. And if 
they don’t go in, they apply again for that program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a reason why they don’t have any 
wait-lists, because they only take the people into the positions 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

that have the highest qualifications. Our policy is not that. We 
take everyone based upon their qualifications. They’re eligible 
to go on to the wait-lists. And, Mr. Speaker, SIAST is 
re-evaluating its wait-list policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Former Member’s Employment with the Legal Aid 
Commission 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Labour: is he aware of a letter written by the labour standards 
branch to former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
Jack Hillson on September 30, 2004? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
terms of that specific letter, I am not aware of that letter. So I 
would take that under advisement. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of that letter from 
the labour standards branch that states that the Legal Aid 
Commission acted contrary to the requirements of section 80 of 
The Labour Standards Act. This letter states that public 
prosecutions in the Department of Justice chose not to proceed 
with the prosecution in the Jack Hillson matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was that decision made and who made that 
decision? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite surprised at the 
improvement in the behaviour of the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. His usual practice, his usual practice in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, is to make an unfounded allegation for 
which he has no evidence as to who made the decision, even in 
the face — even in the face — of a contradiction by the 
decision maker as to who made the decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, now we have had 
this allegation from the member of Saskatoon Southeast before, 
that decisions made by prosecutors were made by politicians 
and that prosecutors were directed by politicians to make those 
decisions. The member from Saskatoon Southeast is making 
those allegations again today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it does not bode well for that 
member to stand opposite and accuse us of doing anything. We 
asked a simple question. We asked who made a decision. And 
according to this letter, Saskatchewan Labour concluded that 
the Legal Aid Commission broke the law. The labour standards 
matter then referred the matter to the Department of Justice to 
consider prosecution. The case was never prosecuted. Was a 
written legal opinion supplied? Why not? What happened with 
that matter? Where did it go, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The prosecutors made that decision, 
and if the member wants to allege that anybody else made that 
decision, he should have some evidence. 
 
And I again remind the member from Saskatoon Southeast that 
he is an officer of the court. He is governed by something more 
than the Sask Party’s code of ethics which is not worth more 
than the paper it’s written on. He is governed by a code of 
professional conduct. And if he is so confident that this decision 
was made by anybody other than prosecutors and cares to back 
it up, I again challenge him to repeat his allegations outside this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast.  
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is a fair question to ask who 
made a decision and how the decision was made. We have the 
Department of Labour saying that a law was broken. Then they 
sent the matter over to the Department of Justice to consider 
prosecution. A law was broken and the Department of Justice 
took no action. Why? And will the minister table any written 
documentation that he has with regard to that decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered the 
question. Prosecutors made the decision. They made the 
decision as they usually do in these cases because there are 
other recourse than prosecutions, Mr. Speaker. That’s how they 
made the decision. That’s how they always make the decision in 
these cases. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this time — today — 
the member take his questions, his written questions, outside the 
House with him so he remembers what he said in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is now painfully clear that the 
Legal Aid Commission was breaking the law. The labour 
standards branch said so and now a judge has also said so. The 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

people are asking the question: why did the Minister of Justice 
do nothing? John Gormley asks and I quote, “Did this sorry 
story have anything to do with the fact that Hillson was a 
Liberal MLA?” 
 
Randy Burton writes, quote, “You have to wonder if an NDP 
MLA would have been met with the same treatment.” 
 
The StarPhoenix editorial board says the commission’s actions, 
quote, convey the impression of a political vendetta; and quote, 
what appears to be a political vendetta. Why did the minister 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. Would the 
member just restate the question please? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Why did the minister allow this to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say something 
for the gentlemen, Mr. Burton and Mr. Gormley. They had the 
courage to make their allegations where they were not protected 
by the immunity of this House. I would encourage the member 
opposite to have the same courage and, to assist him, to take his 
written questions outside the House with him.  
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast has not just said that the 
Law Reform Commission was mistaken, in the view of a 
Queen’s Bench judge, in their understanding of what the law 
was — which is the circumstance. The member from Saskatoon 
Southeast has said in the past — in Hansard, it’s recorded — he 
has said that they deliberately, deliberately broke the law. And 
while he’s withdrawing statements he has made about them, he 
should withdraw that one as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

SaskPower Investigation of Financial Irregularities 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
minutes ago a press release was brought to my attention from 
SaskPower. And it reads, “SaskPower investigating financial 
irregularities.” 
 
“SaskPower is currently investigating a case involving 
financial irregularities by an employee.” Can the Minister of 
SaskPower please provide any further detail about this 
missing money? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is investigating a 
case of financial irregularities. It comes as a result of an internal 
audit investigation and the total amount involved is less than 
$100,000. But this matter is being dealt with. It has been 
referred to the Provincial Auditor, to the external auditors, and 

they’re assessing the internal audit report at this point. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, considering the number of 
fraud cases that we’ve seen, this is of some concern. And the 
press release goes on to say that “. . . the matter will be 
forwarded to the RCMP for further investigation.” 
 
So obviously this is a fairly serious case of fraud. How long has 
the minister been aware of the allegations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been aware of it since 
last night and the matter was discovered by the internal audit on 
March 29. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The press release 
goes on to say that the employee is currently on leave with pay. 
And so could the minister please tell us why the employee is on 
leave with pay? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is under 
investigation; that’s obvious. And at this point the member is 
with pay while the investigation continues. This is being 
reviewed on a daily basis. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Funding Allocations for School Divisions 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the other shoe is 
starting to drop on K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] funding 
throughout the province. The new Chinook School Division in 
the Southwest has now been given its grant amount for the 
coming year. And compared to what they used to receive before 
the school board amalgamations, they will see their grant cut by 
$3.35 million or 47 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this amounts to a 
hidden NDP tax hike in last week’s budget. 
 
The Chinook School Division says, and I quote, “This 
substantial financial impact will be felt fully and immediately 
by education property tax payers . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this NDP government cutting funding and 
raising property taxes in southwest Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this province has undergone the largest changes in our 
education system in the last 60 years. Over this past year the 
amalgamation of school districts, the review of the foundation 
operating grant, and reassessment have all had an effect on 
school divisions, the amount of grant that goes to those school 
divisions. Mr. Speaker, there’s been many changes over the past 
while but the school boards and the school divisions are 
working through this quite well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association was worried about on 
budget day. SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] 
president, Lance Bean, said, and I quote, “Until we receive 
documentation that shows where the funding is being allocated, 
it’s difficult for boards to know the actual impact of each of 
them.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, school boards are now starting to receive that 
information, and in some cases that news is certainly not good. 
The Chinook School Division has seen its grant cut by $3.3 
million. That money has to come from somewhere, so it 
probably means a property tax hike in the coming days. 
 
Why is there a hidden tax agenda in last week’s NDP budget? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know by the 
questions from the opposition that how . . . I mean there’s just 
absolutely no credibility when it comes to this issue. The school 
boards . . . Mr. Speaker, when the amalgamation of the school 
boards and the restructuring of the divisions began, one of the 
large focuses was to remove the zero grant boards, to work with 
the larger divisions so we would have more equity and fairness 
across the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the professionals that work in the school divisions 
knew that there would be a shift in the operating grant because 
of the zero grant boards, because of the assessment, and because 
of the decline of student population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in southwest Saskatchewan 
this NDP budget amounts to a hidden tax hike. Education grants 
have been cut by $3.35 million or 47 per cent. The school board 
says this cut will be felt by the property tax payers in the 
Southwest. The question is, what else is happening across the 
province? 
 
The minister says that everything is in hand and under control. I 
wonder if the minister would be kind enough to table for this 
Assembly the foundation operating grant formulas for each of 
the school divisions so people across this province will know 
the impact of their misguided amalgamation. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, one of the processes that 
we’ve gone through in the last year has been a review of the 
foundation operating grant. Mr. Speaker, this foundation 
operating grant has been . . . I mean quite commonly it’s called 
FOG [foundation operating grant] for a reason, Mr. Speaker — 
that it is confusing, Mr. Speaker, that it has been confusing. 
 
There is many factors that are involved in the foundation 
operating grant. Mr. Speaker, the Department of Learning, with 
advice from many of the organizations within learning, have 
begun a review of the foundation operating grant to make it 
clearer, more transparent, and more accountable to educators 
and the education system across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Allegations Regarding Wascana Rehabilitation Centre 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday Sandy 
Tokar told a Regina radio station that her father, a resident of 
the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, was allegedly left in soiled 
sheets and clothes and had unexplained bruises. Mr. Speaker, 
can the Minister of Health confirm whether these reports are 
accurate? Have residents at this home been left in soiled clothes 
and sheets? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
day-to-day operations of the Wascana centre are the 
responsibility of the regional health authority. Mr. Speaker, the 
regional health authority has received and responded to 
information that has come forward from patients and families. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the folks at the regional 
health authority will be answering to the patients and their 
families to the allegations that have been raised. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It takes a lot of 
courage for a family member like Sandy Tokar to come forward 
and go public and talk about the concerns she has about the care 
that her father has been receiving. And the minister continues to 
give no answers and continues to fail to respond to this 
situation. As the Minister of Health, I think his responsibility is 
the quality of care of all citizens in this province. That’s that 
minister’s responsibility. 
 
This is not the first time these concerns have been raised about 
this facility. Sandy Tokar goes on to say that she thinks an 
independent review of the Wascana Rehab Centre is needed. 
Will the minister commit to an independent review of Wascana 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

Rehabilitation facility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
certainly do appreciate the question. I think the member 
opposite would have more credibility if he knew what had 
actually been done to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the responsibility of the regional health 
authority. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the regional health authority has 
engaged external consultants in order to address the issues and 
implement immediate short- and long-term initiatives. 
Discussions are under way with a mutually agreed upon, 
independent mediator to work towards addressing the issues. 
The region has contracted an independent consultant to 
complete care plan reviews and audits. And the region will 
contract an independent consultant to conduct a number of 
activities for information gathering and further planning 
purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authority is doing its job. It’s 
doing the work that it needs to do to ensure that the people, the 
families, and the patients receive the care that they deserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, he continues to talk about 
credibility and saying that we don’t know what the Regina 
Health Authority has said in this issue. 
 
Let me tell you the first two things that the Regina Health 
Authority has said, and I quote, “It is staffing shortages, high 
sickness time because of limited staff . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the same issue that we have been raising in 
this House for weeks. It’s not only this facility. It’s facilities 
around the province that are facing staffing shortages, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s that minister’s responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lynne Rieben told the Leader-Post this morning, 
and I quote: 
 

“The short staff situation lead . . . to several incidents of 
involuntary [confinement] confining residents . . . [to 
beds]. We are not animals and should not be treated as 
such!” 

 
That’s what she goes on to say about staffing shortages. When 
will the minister start setting some targets and dealing with the 
real issue? Not the Regina health care issue, the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Authority’s issue, but this minister’s 
responsibility of retaining and recruiting nurses. When will he 
start setting targets and deal with the issue that’s his 
responsibility? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
his own admission the member opposite may have discovered a 
nursing shortage a couple of weeks ago. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has been acting on nursing shortages for several 
years. Mr. Speaker, in the year 2000 we put forward an action 
plan to address this issue. In December 2005 this government 
took further action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when fully implemented, the plan in front of the people of 
Saskatchewan will improve Saskatchewan’s self-sufficiency in 
training, create employment opportunities for newly trained 
professionals, improve our ability to recruit needed 
professionals, build a more representative workforce, provide 
continuing education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan has been in place for two years. It’s 
taking action. It’s having success. And, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t 
find this out two weeks ago. We’ve been working on it for 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is absolutely 
incredible. To stand in the House and say that we’ve finally 
brought up the issue of nursing shortages two weeks ago is an 
absolute joke. This is an issue that this Sask Party has been 
raising in this House for the last six years, Mr. Speaker. And 
this minister has failed to address that issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he says that they’ve been working for the last two 
years to put in a plan — a plan that has no targets. How are you 
doing on that plan, Mr. Speaker, when you don’t have any 
targets? 
 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses have said that they need 
600 nurses to fill the void in the province. This minister fails to 
think that’s what they need, but won’t give any targets. When 
will he stand in his place and do the right thing and give some 
targets so that he can be held accountable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Goodness gracious, Mr. Speaker, now the 
member of the opposition is taking credit for our action plan. 
This is incredible, Mr. Speaker. I just can’t believe this, that he 
would stand to take credit for our action plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite continues to talk about the 
need for replacing, recruiting, and retaining nurses in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge the shortage that’s in 
place. We challenge the member opposite to bring forward the 
unemployment rate for nurses. Are there nurses in 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

Saskatchewan today unemployed, ready to take on those 
positions? No there are not, Mr. Speaker. But there are 1,500 
nurses in training programs across this province, Mr. Speaker, 
who are in position to take those shortages, to fill those 
vacancies in the months and years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 

Restrictions on Sale of Crystal Meth Precursors 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, as you may be aware, 
crystal meth is a growing issue in Canada and the United States. 
While the number of crystal meth users in Saskatchewan 
remains relatively low, this highly addictive drug has 
devastating consequences for individuals, their families, and 
society as a whole. 
 
As part of an overall strategy to combat substance abuse, our 
Premier announced the Premier’s Project Hope initiative this 
past August. Through this multi-year project our government is 
demonstrating its commitment to build on the existing network 
of professionals, volunteers, and agencies to ensure 
Saskatchewan has one of the most integrated and 
comprehensive systems of preventing and treating substance 
abuse in Canada. 
 
One of the goals of Project Hope is going after the source of 
drugs of abuse. In doing so, Project Hope committed to build on 
Meth Watch, a voluntary program that monitors the sale of 
various crystal meth precursors. This past November we took 
the first steps to restrict access to cold remedies that contain 
pseudoephedrine, a product that can be extracted to make 
crystal methamphetamine. These cold remedies contain no 
other medicines, making the pseudoephedrine more easily 
removed than other cold products and a preferred product by 
small crystal meth labs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we are building upon this commitment by 
taking another proactive step. Today we are introducing 
restrictions so that all cough and cold products containing 
pseudoephedrine or ephedrine will be sold in pharmacies only. 
Very shortly we will be sending out direction to non-pharmacy 
retailers, such as gas stations and convenience stores, with the 
expectation that they will no longer sell these multiple entity 
products. A transitional phase will be provided to allow 
managed change with these retailers and their suppliers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we remain very aware of the need to provide 
legitimate access to cold remedy products while weighing the 
concerns that they could be used for illegitimate purposes. Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing everything within our control to restrict 
access to those products that can be manufactured into crystal 
meth and today’s announcement demonstrates our ongoing 
commitment to do so. At the same time we will remain vigilant 
for any future action that may be required to protect the health 
of Saskatchewan residents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to start 
by thanking the minister for giving me an advance copy of his 
statement. I’m sure that everyone in this House knows that this 
issue is something that everyone in the Sask Party has talked 
about for many years. And any issues that we can do to deal 
with the manufacturing and use of meth is something that we’re 
very willing to listen to. 
 
The one thing that’s different between the government side of 
the House and our side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that we all represent many small communities. In my 
constituency, places like Invermay don’t have a pharmacy, and 
yet there’s many seniors who will require a package of cold 
medication at some time. And how are they going to get it? It’s 
going to mean a drive of 30 miles to go get the medication. 
 
This government not too long ago talked about the issue of 
cigarettes, and that time the problem was solved by putting it 
behind the counter. I’m wondering if the minister has thought 
about this issue. We are putting many seniors at a disadvantage 
when it comes to rural Saskatchewan, the needs there. Why 
couldn’t we put them in the same place that cigarettes were not 
too long ago? 
 
We have . . . I believe in many cases this issue is being . . . The 
minister started by saying that this is an issue in Saskatchewan 
that remains relatively low. And I really do appreciate the fact 
that the work that everyone is doing on meth is something that’s 
going to continue to make this issue not as huge as it could be. 
But I am very concerned that we’re going to be affecting a huge 
number of people. 
 
We’ve already had phone calls from places like . . . And I’m 
sure maybe the ministers, the members opposite haven’t been to 
places like Hazel Dell, Saskatchewan or Okla, Saskatchewan or 
Invermay, Saskatchewan or Lintlaw, Saskatchewan . . . are 
really the source of the opportunity for people to get the 
medication they need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think if the members opposite are saying 
it’s a national program, well Saskatchewan is unique. We have 
many, many small communities. What happens if you need cold 
medication at midnight? We don’t have the option that they 
have in larger centres to go to a store at midnight and pick up 
one package. 
 
The other thing that maybe the ministers, members opposite 
don’t realize, that in a town like Okla or Hazel Dell or 
Invermay, everybody that comes in there, people know. You 
don’t just drop in on the street in Invermay. People know that 
people are in there. And if they pick up more than one package, 
there’d be lots of alarm bells ringing. 
 
So my concern is that we have to balance, that Saskatchewan 
needs . . . We have to balance to ensure that if somebody is 
purchasing a lot of it. We have to be able to talk about this to 
the police. But how are we going to ensure that everybody has 
got the opportunity to get the medication that they need? 
 
We’ve talked about this many times. And in fact the retail 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

association, when we first talked about the Meth Watch poster, 
recognized that there are needs in rural Saskatchewan. So . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. I would like 
members to allow the member for Kelvington-Wadena to 
complete her statement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think one of the reasons that the 
minister makes his statement is to ensure that people on both 
sides of the House know what’s going on. What we’re trying to 
do is ensure that the minister realizes this is going to cause an 
issue in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m on record, we’re all on record as knowing that we’ll do 
whatever we can to eliminate or absolutely decrease any chance 
that there would be a manufacturing of crystal meth. But please 
don’t further hurt people in rural Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48, The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 48, The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Police and Peace Officers’ 
Memorial Day Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, The 
Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 49, The Police and 
Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 51, The Regional Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Labour 
and SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 52, The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative 
Development Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 53, The Economic and Co-operative 
Development Amendment Act be now introduced and read for a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 53, The Economic and Co-operative Development 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 54, The Cancer Agency Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54, The Cancer Agency Act be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
have tabled written responses to written questions no. 800 to 
833 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 800 to 833 have been 
submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to be able to stand in the House 
today to speak in favour of our government’s plan to make 
Saskatchewan an even better place to live, work, and raise a 
family. We’ve heard that before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into comments on the budget, I would 
like to say a couple of comments about my constituency of 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my 
constituents for giving me the honour of representing them in 
this legislature. It truly is a privilege to be able to sit as the 
representative from Moose Jaw Wakamow, and they are a 
wonderful constituency to represent. 
 
Wakamow is a constituency that is an urban-rural mix, and it 
contains part of the city of Moose Jaw, 15 Wing, which is home 
of the Snowbirds, and also about half of the RM [rural 
municipality] of Moose Jaw, a portion of the RM of Terrell, and 
all of the RM of Baildon. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to think that I have the best of both worlds — that I have a real 
good cross-section of Saskatchewan people to represent. I get a 
very good cross-section of issues from right across the 
constituency, and it truly is a nice constituency. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my family because, truly, it’s 
our family that gives us the support when we enter this 
occupation, role, job — whatever you want to call it. It ends up 
being a lifestyle that includes our family and takes over much of 
our time. So without their support, we would not be able to do 
this for sure, Mr. Speaker, and I will be forever grateful for that. 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

Mr. Speaker, before I make comments on the budget, I’d like to 
just make a few statements about how we get ready for a 
budget. It just doesn’t happen that the Minister of Finance all of 
a sudden shows up one day in the House and reads a wonderful 
speech that speaks to the future of the province of 
Saskatchewan and gets to go out and buy himself a new pair of 
boots and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Workboots. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes, workboots, and show up here in the 
House. There’s a great deal of work that goes into it, many long 
days, many long weeks, and can stretch over a couple of months 
at times, reviewing programs, reviewing projects, reviewing 
policy, going through department by department, line by line, 
reviewing our resources, reviewing our vision for the future of 
Saskatchewan, reviewing the plan that we have put forward for 
the province of Saskatchewan. But always keeping in mind 
where do the people of Saskatchewan feel that our province 
should go as, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s who we represent 
while we’re here. 
 
So you always have to keep in mind all of the special interests, 
all of the different interests that we will bring with us from all 
of our constituencies that vary right across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, many nights when I’d be driving 
home after doing work on sections of the budget or portions that 
we’d been reviewing that day, I used to ask myself one simple 
question. How does this budget that we’re putting together 
affect Saskatchewan people? How do people feel it? And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that was something that was important 
to me because that’s why we’re here. That’s why we do the 
work we do, and that’s why we’ve put in the hours that we do. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s a question that I keep in 
mind. It’s something that is important to all of us on this side of 
the House and, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe that we 
achieved success with this budget. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you look at the highlights of the 
budget just quickly . . . And this is a difficult portion too. We 
have such a short time to speak, and there is so much good 
news in this budget. It is just full of it. 
 
Thirteenth consecutive balanced budget, it allocates $101 
million to permanent debt reduction, bringing down our debt in 
this province. There’s been nearly $450 million paid down on 
the debt since the budget year of ’04-05, bringing this 
government and our province to its lowest level of debt in 15 
years, Madam Speaker — $7.2 billion. That’s our lowest level 
in 15 years. 
 
Health spending is up. It brings Health budget to a total of $3.2 
billion. Education spending, Madam Deputy Speaker, at 1.5 
billion. Madam Speaker, we have an economy that is growing. 
Not just the oil and gas — the resource sector, the minerals, the 
mining, retail sales are up. It just goes on and on, and it’s 
wonderful news for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the big things I’m sure that 
people will always talk about is the business tax reform that was 

put forward on budget day by our Minister of Finance. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, when you think back to the platform of the 
New Democrats during the last election in 2003, our Premier 
made the commitment that we would reduce taxes when we had 
the resources to maintain the sustainability of those reductions. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing. 
We’re reducing taxes when they’re sustainable and when it is a 
beneficial process for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the areas, Madam Speaker, that is important to many of 
us on this side of the House — and it’s something that our 
colleague here in Regina has worked on — was the tax credit 
for employed tradespeople. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
many people this might not be or sound like it is very important. 
But to recognize those people in the province of Saskatchewan 
that work in the trades, what they contribute, this is very 
worthwhile, and we were very pleased see that it was coming 
forward in this budget. 
 
And also the various areas . . . help for young people being able 
to build their futures right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan; education, improvements made to the training 
system, nearly $300 million for universities, and freezing 
tuition, Madam Deputy Speaker, for the year ’06-07, ’07-08. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the students were here 
during budget. They were very excited. They were very pleased. 
They invited us to come over to the university after the budget 
just to celebrate and have a bit of a discussion. Well I would 
suggest and recommend that whoever has the opportunity, go 
for a visit because these young people are the future of the 
province of Saskatchewan. A person just feels so energized. 
They’re wonderful to be around. They have good ideas. They 
are talented. They are intelligent. They are involved in their 
community, and they care about the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be able to put 
some supports forward so that they can achieve their education 
and begin to build their careers here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Increase in training seats was important because we’ve all heard 
about the skilled shortages, not only just in Saskatchewan but 
right across North America and beyond. But also this budget is 
providing almost $100 million in student assistance, 38 million 
in income support to over 9,500 students in basic education and 
apprenticeship opportunities, and also 60 million in student 
loans this year to support the goals and aspirations of young 
people. 
 
And one program, Madam Deputy Speaker, that may have been 
overlooked in some of the larger numbers, but I know at the 
SIAST Palliser Campus in my community of Moose Jaw it will 
be recognized and appreciated because this is one program that 
they utilize to its fullest extent and they have always lobbied for 
it to be expanded, and that’s the centennial merit scholarship 
program will receive a half-million-dollar injection, bringing 
the total for that program to $1.5 million in provincial 
contributions for a total of 934 scholarship opportunities for 
Saskatchewan students. That will be very well received. 
 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, support for communities and 
farm families — and I have to mention the $67 million in 
education property tax relief on agricultural property land. I 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

think we all recognize the difficulties that farm families in 
Saskatchewan are facing. And I know when I meet with the 
RMs in my constituency, there are many issues that are 
troubling whether it’s commodity prices, whether it’s inputs, 
whether it’s transportation. But the one that’s closest to home is 
the education portion of property tax. So, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I was very pleased when this budget allowed us to put 
the extra money to, to bring the average of property tax on 
agricultural land to the 60/40 split that we so often talk about. 
 
The increase in money and funding to immigration will also be 
felt, I know, in my home community. The Moose Jaw 
Multicultural Council has for many years done a wonderful job 
helping immigrants to Moose Jaw and surrounding community 
become adjusted to our community, whether it’s language 
classes, whether it’s help with finding houses, whether it’s help 
with finding jobs. The multicultural council welcomes the 
support for immigration that will come from the provincial 
department, and it can mean nothing but good things for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, one thing that we have to talk 
about, and I know our Premier has mentioned on a number of 
occasions when we talk about economic progress, there can’t be 
economic progress without social progress. And in this budget, 
we’ve seen some of the best changes that many of us have in a 
long time. We are increasing assistance for some of our most 
vulnerable citizens — 14.2 million for Saskatchewan assistance 
program and the transitional employment allowance 
enhancement. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that may not look like huge dollars, 
but to many people that is a wonderful increase, and I know that 
our caucus and this government is thankful that we have the 
resources and that we have the dedicated work, I think, from 
many people on this side of the House who have realized the 
need is there and that it was time to put this money in when we 
had some extra resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, $1 million to 
provide an additional $120 per year to the TEA [transitional 
employment allowance] recipients for the general living 
allowance . . . There is a number of provincial training 
allowance increases and, Madam Deputy Speaker, 17.1 million 
into the community-based organization wage increases. Now 
we can say that quickly and it doesn’t sound like much, but it 
means a great deal to the people that work in our communities 
and provide the services that are important on a day-to-day 
basis. These people were falling behind in their wage scale, and 
it was very difficult for some community-based organizations to 
recruit new employees and to retain them. So this has been a 
huge help. 
 
Also the extra investment into our health care — health care is 
important to the people of Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and we know that there will always be demands. There 
will always be difficult decisions as to where the money is 
focused, what are our priorities when it comes to health care? 
But we know that it’s important, and we’re very pleased to be 
able to put added income into the Department of Health. 
 

Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple things that 
weren’t touched on or really highlighted in the budget speech or 
on budget day, but I’d really like to talk about them a bit today. 
And one of those is the creation of the new Department of 
Learning. And it’s an exciting opportunity to increase learning 
activity early in life, ensuring better outcomes in school and to 
build a foundation for child care and pre-K to 12 education 
system. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this new Department of Learning will 
create support to give our children the best start in life by 
creating a unique blended approach to child care, and meet the 
educational development needs of children. And through this 
new department, we will continue to build on the success of the 
initiatives that we have already undertaken in our pre-K to 12 
schools to build a stronger education system that will prepare 
our young people for participation in Saskatchewan’s economy 
and in our province’s future. 
 
In this department, there’s been . . . I know for me, it’s been a 
real learning experience. I’ve had the opportunity over two 
months to be able to tour. We have toured libraries. I’ve met 
with many groups. I have had a number of meetings with the 
Literacy Commission. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s an exciting project. And 
we will see some announcements coming soon about funding to 
help communities expand and initiate literacy projects in their 
area. And all this is very important, not only to adult learners 
but to children in the schools, and to stress the importance of 
literacy and reading on a day-to-day basis. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one other area that I would really like 
to talk about is in May of last year, our government signed an 
agreement in principle with the federal Government of Canada 
to establish a national child care program. There was $146 
million over five years that was to be coming to the province of 
Saskatchewan to support our early learning child care 
programming in this province. And we all know that that deal 
has gone sideways and that the new federal government has 
withdrawn the funding for the five years. 
 
Now what they’ve put forward is two years of funding, which is 
fine, Madam Deputy Speaker. But what we need to do is make 
sure that when we put forward the federal dollars that we do 
have, that it is in sustainable programs that have a good effect 
on young people in the province of Saskatchewan. And despite 
the setback of having the federal money withdrawn, we believe 
that there is a real importance of positive social programs to 
ensure that no one is left behind is the early learning and child 
care. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Now after the federal dollars were pulled . . . Well first when 
there was rumours that this program was going to be 
discontinued, there was a real concern. But, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, one of the things that I have said to many people is 
that it has not been a waste, by no means, the two years of work 
that was put in, year and a half to two years of work that was 
put in by many advocacy groups around the province, by many 
people within the department to develop a child care plan, a 
comprehensive child care plan that really recognized the 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

difference in the province of Saskatchewan. That whether you 
live in rural Saskatchewan, whether you live in urbans, whether 
you live in the North, whether you prefer to have a home-based 
child care facility for your child to go to, whether you like a 
child care centre, there’s many different options. There’s many 
differences that we need to recognize. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we felt we did that with our plan. 
 
We were looking at improving, making many improvements for 
children in the province of Saskatchewan. So while it was a 
disappointment, Madam Deputy Speaker, it also was an 
opportunity to say, we have a good plan; we have a good plan 
in place. And while our resources aren’t as large as we’d hoped 
they’d be, we have a good plan to build from, and as resources 
become available we will move ahead. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, in this budget, we do see some 
of those improvements that have been put forward on our plan. 
This year’s budget, we’ll see some significant enhancements to 
support Saskatchewan families. Through the Department of 
Community Resources, we’ll be making the largest investment 
in the history of child care subsidy programs. $3.6 million in 
new dollars will significantly increase the subsidy rates and 
extend the reach of those subsidies to include modest-income 
families currently not able to access the program. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a 31 per cent budget increase 
and it’s huge. It’s a huge investment toward making services 
more affordable for families. We’ll also be expanding our 
targeted pre-kindergarten programs, 15 new locations across the 
province. And this expansion will benefit approximately 240 
participating children and their families. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as you may have heard from my 
colleague, the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment, for the purpose of calculating student loans and 
provincial training allowance payments, the provincial 
government will not — and I repeat will not — be considering 
the $100-per-month support to parents of children under six 
provided by the new federal government as income. We’ll be 
passing that support on to student loan recipients and to PTA 
[provincial training allowance] clients, and that’s very good 
news for these folks. 
 
Also we are committed to providing a range of supports for 
vulnerable children, beginning prenatally, and to their families. 
And we believe that children deserve the best possible start in 
life and that the investment in the early years is a sound 
investment in our future. 
 
Madam Speaker, here we are. I’m just about out of time 
already, and there’s still just a pile of information that we could 
go through. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, you know I go back to that, after 
all the work that goes into a budget and when we step back and 
think does this affect Saskatchewan people? Yes, it does. And 
on budget day, when I sat in the House and I listened to the 
budget speech being delivered — yes, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
it does reach Saskatchewan people. It affects our families. It 
affects working people. It affects seniors. It affects children. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it provides the ability for new tax 
measures to spur on economic activity. It’s a plan that builds on 

our economic prosperity and helps young people build their 
futures right here in Saskatchewan. And it ensures that no one is 
left behind on this path to opportunity. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, does this budget affect Saskatchewan 
people? Yes, it does loud and clear. And we know that by the 
response the budget has got from the general public right across 
Saskatchewan. Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
support the government motion and the budget put forward by 
the Minister of Finance, and I will not be supporting the 
amendment put forward by the opposition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Madam Speaker, I’m begging leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave of the 
Assembly to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. 
members opposite for allowing me to break into the budget 
debate. Madam Speaker, through you I’d like to introduce to 
you and to all members of the Assembly two guests in the west 
gallery. These are . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. We do have guests in 
the gallery, and the member has asked leave to introduce them 
so if the members would respect that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. MLAs, Madam 
Speaker, in the west gallery there are two good friends of mine I 
very much want to introduce. One is my constituency assistant, 
Gord Spelliscy. But seated with Gord is Bill Edwards, and Bill 
and I go back some considerable time. Bill is my very first 
supporter. When Bill joined my team, there was Bill that could 
vote for me. I’m very proud of my friendship with Bill, and I 
ask all members to welcome these two people to the Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is with 
great pleasure that I rise to speak about this year’s budget. 
 
Madam Speaker, we’re pleased to see that the Vicq commission 
was implemented. The Sask Party was the first to do a 
presentation to the Vicq commission, and the Sask Party was 
the only political organization to do a presentation to the Vicq 
commission. So we feel that it is sort of part of us more than it 
is of the government’s. 
 
Implementing the Vicq is a good start but just a good start. We 
still have the highest-taxed poor people in all of Canada, under 
29,000. No one left behind, Madam Speaker? How can that be 
if they’re the highest taxed in all of Canada? That sounds like 
they’re being left behind. The NDP has used that big tax boot 
on them again. 
 
A start on property tax has been accomplished, but it’s still got 
a long way to go. It was originally government 60 per cent and 
the property owners 40. And now we’ve seen 30 per cent for the 
government and 70 for the property owners. Way out of line, 
nobody left behind — we’ve got a long, long way to go. 
 
We see that minimum wage goes up. And we’re afraid that as 
minimum wage goes up, gas goes up, food goes up, clothing 
goes up, and the poor wage earner doesn’t get any farther 
ahead. The real answer of course is less tax for the poor. 
 
How about the PST [provincial sales tax]? You know that one 
that was promised wasn’t going to go up and then went up 
anyhow. And now all of a sudden we’ve got a $1 billion surplus 
and still that PST doesn’t go down. A $1 billion dollar surplus 
— that works out to $1,000 per man, woman, and child. In the 
budget, does a family of four gain $4,000? Do they see $4,000 
more for their family? Do they feel $4,000 better off after 
hearing that budget? No, they don’t, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, statistics reveal the other day that we’ve lost 
16,000 youth in five years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Sixteen thousand. It just . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Better than 16 in one year when your 
leader was in office. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Well here we go again. We’re hearing this: 
better than, better than. How about we start doing better than 
instead of sliding? 
 
And now to top it all off, they say they’re going to slap a $20 
fee on the waiting list for SIAST. How do they expect youth to 
stay in the province? They talk about a youth retention program, 
and then they slap $20 a year on for a waiting list. And we hear 
the waiting list is 15 years long. I mean how’s that going to stop 
somebody? They can go to Alberta, and they can get into the 
class right away and here they’ve got 15-year waiting lists. My 
goodness. We must support our youth. We must stop this 
out-migration. 
 

And then of course there’s the big question of the balanced 
budget, the balanced budget. The Provincial Auditor says 288 
million debt increase, and somehow they’re translating this into 
a balanced budget. Why is there a difference? Why does it not 
align with the auditor’s report? There should be a balance there, 
but somehow it isn’t. So we would like to see something done 
to correct these errors in the words of a balanced budget. 
 
Agriculture, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is worse than the dirty 
thirties. This is the ugliest time in all of Saskatchewan history 
for agriculture. In the ’30s they could barter for what they 
needed. If you had a chicken and a few eggs and you could sell 
the eggs; a cow and you made some butter and sold the butter. 
And you traded and you kept going. Today everything is on a 
cash basis. 
 
And so we’re seeing from the other side of the House a 
complete disregard for agriculture. This year in the agriculture 
budget, $166 million decrease from last year. And they say they 
care. How can you decrease the budget at a time like this, when 
agriculture is the worst it’s been in all of history? And they say 
it’s the feds’ fault. And then they say they won’t fund CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization]. Well maybe, 
might be . . . 154 million to fund CAIS. Not in November 
either, Madam Speaker. It should be now so that the farmers 
have a chance of getting that crop in the field. So we’re going to 
wait like last year until November, and maybe then, maybe . . . 
I’m afraid bankers don’t listen to that kind of talk. 
 
From that mountain of money, that slush fund, that Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, couldn’t they have squeezed out 154 million 
for agriculture? I mean we have 47 per cent of the crop land of 
Canada, 47 per cent of the crop land. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I think the members who are 
calling across and trying to enter into the debate know who they 
are, and I would ask that they would listen to the member who 
has the floor at present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The time 
has come to put politics aside. Do something. I mean, ask the 
Melville-Saltcoats MLA, and he’ll give you some ideas. I mean, 
there was that extension of crop insurance deadline which 
would’ve been no cost to the government. It wouldn’t have cost 
them 1 cent. They could’ve just set it, and it would’ve been 
done. But no. And it would have helped the farmer, once again, 
in the worst time in all of history. 
 
They could’ve reinstated the fuel tax rebate. And then of course, 
they did cut crop insurance by $12 million. How are we going 
to handle that one? But no, they care. But how? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to read a quote from the 
Throne Speech. It reads as follows: 
 

Agroforestry, including the growing of trees as crops, is 
underway. My government has a bold vision for the future 
of this industry. Over the next twenty years, the goal will 
be to transform ten per cent of the arable land of 
Saskatchewan to agroforestry, creating another sustainable 
industry in our province. 
 
Saskatchewan will continue to be a leader in forestry 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

management practices. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, what happened to the green part of the 
economy? What happened to agroforestry? Where was it in the 
budget? We didn’t hear a word about it in the budget. They 
have to plant the trees now in order to have them ready for 20 
years from now. But yet nothing was in the budget. What 
happened to that 10 per cent of all arable acres? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I have another quote, and it’s dated 
from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, March 22 of this year. And I 
quote: 
 

“We live in a world where . . . there are more housing 
starts in China this year than there are housing units in 
Canada. The growing market for finished wood product, 
worldwide, is going to be significant,” Calvert said. 
 
He said agroforestry will work by farming trees on land 
that has been cleared or used in other crop production. 

 
All the anticipation, all the words that were put out — this one 
was at the forestry convention in Saskatoon — and what do we 
get? Poof, like hot air in a paper bag. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
forestry and agroforestry deserve better. If you really want to 
talk the talk, you must walk the walk. You planted the seeds, 
and now you stamped it out with your big tax boot. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Another situation that I want to look at is hospitals which is 
very important to my Batoche constituency and that has been 
Humboldt hospital. It has been promised for three elections — 
three elections. And now all of a sudden they say the price has 
jumped from 19 million to 30 million, and the Humboldt area 
has 45 days to raise $8 million. And if they don’t, they threaten 
to downsize it if they can’t raise the money. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, Saskatoon and Regina pay nothing for a hospital 
building. Humboldt and area must pay 35 per cent of the cost. Is 
this a rural health tax? Is this once again two-tier, two-tier 
health care, and we’re playing with small communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when we address waiting lists, I want 
to use an example. I have a brother-in-law here in Regina, and 
he was suffering from a gall bladder condition. And the waiting 
list here in Regina was months long. He booked into Humboldt 
hospital, and within weeks he had his surgery, and everything 
was fine. We are viable in our smaller communities. 
 
For example if the SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome] 
situation strikes again — and the World Health Organization 
says that these things are going to strike again — what happens 
if it strikes in Saskatchewan? Where are people going to go? If 
we’ve got all our eggs in one basket, what can you reach for 
safety? If we have hospitals like Humboldt and Melfort that can 
back us up, we’d be much better off. 
 
We understand that the MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 
waiting list in Saskatoon is so huge, and yet we hear that in the 
evenings the vets are bringing animals over from the vet college 
for MRIs. Why can we not look at more staff instead of more 
MRIs? More staff . . . I mean if they told you that you had to be 
there at three o’clock in the morning for an MRI, I know you’d 

be there, because we just looked after my father’s situation 
similar to that. 
 
There’s nursing shortages, and there’s no mention of funding. 
Manitoba has a similar health budget and a similar population. 
Nursing enrolment in Manitoba is 3,000. Saskatchewan is less 
than half. Now it should be easy to line up with Manitoba with 
everything is similar. Something’s wrong, something’s not 
working in this formula. It has to be looked at. And all we’re 
getting is rhetoric. There has to be a reason why they can do it 
on the same amount and we can’t. And we have to look at those 
differences and address that. 
 
Yes, Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare. But what 
happened? We now have the record of being the longest waiting 
list in all of Canada. That’s unacceptable. Number one there is 
the wrong place to go. And we have to start looking at it, not 
just saying we are the birthplace. That’s not going to carry 
much anymore. 
 
Madam Speaker, when you look at our potential, when you look 
at our resources, we could be so much. We have oil, second 
only to Alberta. Natural gas, third to BC [British Columbia]. 
One-third of all the world’s potash. One-third of all the world’s 
uranium and the single largest deposit in the world. We have 
the largest kimberlite field in the entire world. And we have 47 
per cent of Canadian farm land. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I had to list that just to have it on the 
record. We have so much potential. We could do so much. We 
must welcome the people and these industries. We must say to 
them: what do you need that we can help you succeed? We 
mustn’t force them to leave and go other where . We must ask 
them: what do you need? 
 
We must have a sustainable tax climate that the companies can 
compete on a world level. We’re no longer playing on the 
market from here to Humboldt. I mean we’re playing on a 
world market now. And our system does not match other 
provinces, so they go to other provinces and build their 
industry, or other states. I’ve heard now that the big biodiesel 
canola crushing thing has signed a contract in North Dakota, is 
where they’re going to build, but they’re going to get the bulk 
of their canola from Saskatchewan. We must build for the 
future on a world scale. We must stop being the wee province. 
 
Also key to our future are our highways. Highway 368 in my 
constituency hauls $150 million worth of iron down it annually. 
They can truck halfway. Then they have to bring out a second 
truck and transfer half the load over. This is unacceptable. For 
an area that’s putting that much into the economy of 
Saskatchewan, we should be giving them support. 
 
We need Highway 368 repaired, rebuilt, redone. But what do 
we get? Nothing. They’ve had rollovers. They’ve had semis 
rolling over. They’ve had cars with the undercarriage torn out. 
And yet it’s not on their to-do list. Help them and they in turn 
will help build this province. 
 
Another road that concerns us is Highway 5 to Saskatoon — 
narrow, hilly, dangerous; it’s an accident waiting to happen. 
One morning we’re going to wake up to the morning news and 
we’re going to hear about semi-trailers smashing into cars. And 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

it’s just a situation that has to be looked at, but we hear nothing 
from the other side. And our side has been delivering petitions 
and petitions and petitions, and still nothing happens. 
 
Also in my constituency is of course No. 2 Highway, which is a 
corridor from Regina to Prince Albert, and in the future if 
Prince Albert is going to be the gateway to the North, it’s going 
to be used very heavily. But there’s one big flaw. Besides the 
highway needs a lot of work — besides that — there’s the 
bridge at St. Louis. And the people of St. Louis say they’ve 
been waiting for 16 years and they’ve had talk, talk, talk, but 
still no bridge. And I understand on a good day crossing the 
bridge, you can actually see through it in places. 
 
Highway 11 is another corridor again that connects our 
constituency and we’ve heard that it is again, again promised 
twinning of Highway 11. I don’t know if maybe we have to put 
a statute of limitations on the number of times you can promise 
something for an election, but it seems to be more empty 
promises. 
 
Madam Speaker, it has been said that if you’re not part of the 
solution, then you are part of the problem. Therefore I would 
ask the government to step aside and call a provincial election. 
And, Madam Speaker, I will not support the budget but I will be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I look forward to supporting this budget, Madam 
Speaker, and I do so with enthusiasm, because it marks the most 
important investment in social programs that I have witnessed 
in the Assembly in the past 24 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, health spending is up by more than 
$300 million and all the essential elements of publicly funded 
medicare are strengthened. Home care services are being 
enhanced, diagnostic and surgical waiting lists are being 
reduced, funding for the College of Medicine has been 
improved, and full accreditation has been achieved. A new 
academic health sciences building is being funded with an 
initial grant of $100 million. Health care workers in my 
constituency are benefiting from improved collective 
agreements. This is a good news health care budget, Mr. 
Speaker, which will positively impact on the people that I have 
the privilege to represent. 
 
Equally important to my riding, Mr. Speaker, is the benefit this 
budget will have on university students and the university 
community. Investment in the University of Saskatchewan 
capital projects is at record levels. University tuition will, as a 
result of this budget, be frozen for three years in a row. 
Meanwhile the universities in our province will receive a 7 per 
cent increase in operating funding this year. This cost of 
funding arrangement, Mr. Speaker, involves a $17.8 million 
commitment by our government so, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, 
very important investment in post-secondary education. 
 
In addition to the tuition freeze, our government has kept its 

promise to increase the graduate tax credit to $850 for every 
graduating student, effective this year. The tax credit will rise to 
$1,000 next year, fulfilling an important election promise. The 
number of centennial merit scholarships is being quadrupled, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is another extremely important 
investment. So overall, Mr. Speaker, this is an impressive 
commitment to make post-secondary education more affordable 
for the average student and I’m extremely pleased with this 
package. 
 
Most important of all, Mr. Speaker, this budget benefits the 
most vulnerable of all in our society: those with disabilities, 
those on social assistance, those who have special housing 
needs, and children in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I understand one of my colleagues would 
like to make an introduction of guests so I’m going to cede the 
floor to him for a moment. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Lakeview 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to introduce 
some guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to thank my colleague and I 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of our Pages here today, Kyla Will 
— and I think we all know Kyla — has her grandmother here, 
May Hobbs, who is from Regina. And I have known May for 
many years and so it’s a real pleasure to welcome her here. And 
she’s accompanied today by Nick Mosienko who’s a retired 
engineer from Regina Beach. And I ask all members to 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add 
my welcome to the guests in the gallery. 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the most important element of 
this budget is the benefits that it provides to the most vulnerable 
in our society. The adult basic allowance under the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan is being increased by $40 a 
month to $245. That will provide essential resources for the 
purchase of food, clothing, and personal items in a household. 
And this change will benefit 16,200 adults, the majority of 
whom have a disability. 
 
Those receiving the transitional employment allowance will 
receive the same increases as Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 
recipients. And that will benefit another 6,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker. And those recipients will also benefit from a rate 
adjustment in utility costs, which for those heating with natural 
gas and also needing to take responsibility for power costs will 
receive an extra $50 a month. 
 
Disabled persons will be eligible for extra help with housing 
costs. The disability housing supplement is going to be 
increased by 40 per cent to a maximum of $150 a month. There 
are improvements, Mr. Speaker, in the benefits for low-income 
families with children. They will receive a 33 per cent increase 
in the family housing supplement. And, Mr. Speaker, families 
with younger children will be eligible for increased assistance 
with child care costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, through the energy share 
program 1,500 grants per year are being made to low-income 
homeowners to help them upgrade the energy efficiency of their 
homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all the provincial government has boosted the 
budget of the Department of Community Resources by over $43 
million. An extra $22 million has gone into new investments in 
social housing. This is a very good budget, Mr. Speaker, for 
low-income residents in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that there are other important 
investments being made for those in need in our province. An 
extra $6 million is being invested in foster care to improve 
services to vulnerable children. And, Mr. Speaker, major road 
improvements are being extended to First Nations reserves and 
to northern Saskatchewan. And one of the measures in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very pleased about is the 
improvements in salaries for those who work in non-profit 
daycare and who work for community-based organizations that 
serve the disabled. These salaries, Mr. Speaker, take a big jump 
in this budget. And I’m honoured to be part of a government 
that’s making these kind of significant social investments. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget cuts the taxes paid by businesses in 
our province by a substantial amount. I’m pleased that the 
small-business threshold is being increased from $300,000 to 
$400,000 this year and to $500,000 in 2007. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about the 
impact of phasing out the corporate capital tax and reducing the 
corporate income tax from 17 per cent to 12 per cent. I worry 
that these tax cuts will leave our government short of revenue to 
fund essential social programs and may force government to 
draw down its savings fund, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. I 

would have preferred to preserve some of this tax revenue for 
poverty reduction, debt reduction, and meeting the needs of the 
elderly in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the energy policy 
referenced in the budget speech. The budget speaks to the 
exciting investment made in wind power. And this is a 
visionary investment, Mr. Speaker. We now have 172 
megawatts of zero emission electricity coming from our wind 
power facilities — one of the best public policy measures our 
government has taken during the past five years. 
 
The budget also contains one of the most exemplary residential 
energy conservation programs in Canada, delivered primarily 
through SaskEnergy. And the budget speaks to plans for clean 
coal and announces significant spending on a study into the 
design of a clean coal facility. While there is merit in 
demonstrating clean coal technology and while this is an 
improvement over conventional coal-fired generating stations, 
this is not my preferred investment, Mr. Speaker. So-called 
clean coal is a misnomer. A lot of greenhouse gas emissions 
result from mining the coal and a lot more energy is consumed 
forcing the carbon dioxide from the coal-fired generating 
stations underneath the earth. 
 
I would prefer to see our government take the $1.5 billion that a 
clean coal plant would cost and spend it exclusively on energy 
conservation and green electricity technologies including a 
tripling of wind power in Saskatchewan. Our Saskatchewan 
government should require that all new electricity generation in 
Saskatchewan be emission free and come from green, 
renewable sources such as wind power, solar technologies, 
micro-hydro, biogas digesters, heat recovery systems, energy 
efficiency measures, and energy conservation. 
 
SaskPower should remove the current barriers that discourage 
individuals, businesses, farmers, co-operatives, and 
municipalities from installing green power sources and selling 
surplus power to the electrical grid at a fair price. 
 
The natural gas industry should be required to reduce flare gas 
emissions and use that gas to generate electricity. Methane gas 
should be collected from feedlots and landfills and used to 
generate electricity. Financial incentives should be provided for 
homes, businesses, and municipalities to install high efficiency, 
compact fluorescent lamps, high efficiency motors, and high 
efficiency street lighting. A massive energy conservation 
program should be launched in every sector of the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The consequences of global warming are extremely worrying, 
Mr. Speaker. There is an urgent need to support the Kyoto 
Protocol and sharply reduce greenhouse gas emissions in 
Saskatchewan. And that requires a major shift in how we use 
energy in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our policies with regard to export of energy also 
need review. The budget envisages an expansion of the uranium 
industry in Saskatchewan, and highlights the fact that we supply 
one-third of the world’s uranium. But I have a different view. 
 
Concern over nuclear weapons proliferation and its threats to 
human survival should always trump revenue that can be made 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

from an industry, Mr. Speaker. The United Nations 
non-proliferation treaty clearly spells out the rules for uranium 
trade in the world. Article 6 of that treaty specifically says that 
the nuclear weapon states promise to implement nuclear 
disarmament and in exchange the countries that do not have 
nuclear weapons promise not to acquire them. It is very clear, 
Mr. Speaker, that a great many countries in the world are 
violating article 6 and violating the non-proliferation treaty, and 
many of them are our buyers of uranium. 
 
Uranium exports should not be made to any country in the 
world that violates the non-proliferation treaty, that tests nuclear 
weapons, that builds new nuclear weapons, or that stockpiles 
plutonium which can be drawn from at any time in the future 
for nuclear weapons production. With our big customers — 
including the United States and France — in violation of these 
important conditions and with a large potential customer, 
China, also in violation, it is clear that uranium exports in 
Saskatchewan should be steadily phased out until these 
important conditions are complied with. The promotion of a 
uranium refinery that would facilitate uranium exports should 
be dropped. Alternative employment should be assured to all 
those who lose jobs in the uranium industry as a result of this 
policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tar sands have been found in Saskatchewan, and 
once again their development requires careful thought. In a 
world that is already burning far too much fossil fuel, tar sands 
need to be developed with special care because for every barrel 
of oil the tar sands generate for energy use, they will consume 
half a barrel of oil to simply extract their product from the 
ground. Greenhouse gas emissions are thus much, much higher 
on tar sands projects than they are on conventional oil sites. 
 
Saskatchewan should therefore charge extra high royalties on 
oil sourced from tar sands and should use that revenue for only 
two purposes: first to build a green, safe, renewable energy 
economy in our province and second, to improve the living 
conditions of residents of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past I have commented on the damage video 
lottery terminals are doing in Saskatchewan. They are our worst 
source of gambling addiction and contribute to bankruptcies, 
social problems, and family breakup. I urge our government to 
phase out video lottery terminals across our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while there are clearly some areas where I would 
like to see policy changes, the overall effect of this budget is 
very positive for my constituency and for the people of 
Saskatoon. In addition to the measures I have already 
mentioned, it funds 2,700 new training spaces across our 
province. It allocates additional resources to the development of 
organic agriculture. It funds the development of a new, 
downtown park space in Saskatoon adjacent to the South 
Saskatchewan River and west of the Sid Buckwold bridge. It 
significantly improves support for municipal projects across 
Saskatchewan and in Saskatoon. It supports the research and 
development agenda that is centred in Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon. It advances highway twinning on Highway 16 
between North Battleford and Lloydminster, and on Highway 
11 between Warman and Rosthern. 
 
It reduces provincial government debt by $109.9 million in this 

fiscal year, for a three-year total of $446 million less debt. It 
balances the provincial budget for the 13th time in a row and 
leaves the Fiscal Stabilization Fund with a balance at the end of 
the fiscal year of almost $691 million. It helps ensure, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan remains a have province, and it 
guarantees that with our improved economic progress, we 
invest in social progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I reflect on the progress of the last 15 years of our NDP 
administration, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the progress that has 
been made. The NDP government, Mr. Speaker, under Premier 
Romanow and under our current Premier, Mr. Speaker, has 
taken our province from a state of near bankruptcy under Tory 
rule to a government now, Mr. Speaker, that has one of the best 
debt-to-gross-domestic-product ratios in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The work of this administration, Mr. Speaker, is in sharp 
contrast to the Tory record where we saw Crown assets being 
stripped down and sold off, Mr. Speaker. Those assets, Mr. 
Speaker, have now been built back up, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Crowns are an important part of Saskatchewan having become a 
have province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our social safety net, Mr. Speaker, that was so badly damaged 
during the Tory years is being rebuilt. And, Mr. Speaker, our 
Premier is providing national leadership on many, many files 
including, Mr. Speaker, resisting the privatization of health care 
in Canada, pressing, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that daycare 
services that were committed to this province and to other 
province in Canada are fulfilled by the national government. 
With a change in federal administration, Mr. Speaker, this has 
become a very pressing issue. 
 
Our Premier has again, Mr. Speaker, led the drive to ensure that 
we get a fair share of our non-renewable resources for the 
benefit of this province, Mr. Speaker, and a fair share under 
equalization. And, Mr. Speaker, this kind of national leadership 
is very, very important to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great budget. I’m very proud to support it. 
I will be opposing the amendment put forward by the official 
opposition, and with pride I will be supporting the government 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to 
rise and participate in the budget debate. Many of the MLAs 
use this as an opportunity to thank people that have been 
supportive in the last year or more. I would like to use this 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank my wife, Sandy, and my 
constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett, for their hard work 
and their ongoing support. The life of an MLA is not always an 
easy life. People are away; they’re on the road. And having 
supports at home and in the constituency office are absolutely 
essential, and I want to thank both of them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a budget coming in, and it’s a 
surprising time for us. We have a lot of issues with this budget. 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

It is the largest budget in dollars in the province’s history. It’s 
also the largest revenue in the province’s history, and we have 
$1 billion more revenue than what was budgeted for. Mr. 
Speaker, we should — with a budget excess that happened of 
that magnitude — we should be able to do some incredibly 
strong and powerful things with that resource. What we’ve done 
is we’ve seen it frittered away. 
 
I’m going to talk about some of the specific items, some of 
them in Justice. We’ve got ongoing issues and recurring issues 
with some of the commitments that were made by the NDP 
government as far back as 1999. And at the risk of sounding 
like a broken record, we had a commitment from the minister of 
Justice — the then minister of Justice — in 1999 to increase the 
number of police officers in this province by some 200. 
 
What we’ve done is we have seen the current Justice minister 
playing every kind of numbers game available to say I added 
this, I added that, added that, but never able to say this is the 
number we had in 1999 and this is the number we have now. 
Unfortunately this is a minister that does not know how many 
police officers we had in 1999. He does not know how many we 
have in 2006. He only knows small snatches in between. 
 
Well unfortunately an income statement or a balance sheet have 
two sides — there’s ingoing and there is outgoing. And this 
minister loses sight of the fact that officers retire, officers get 
sick, officers move on. And the reality of it is we know from the 
Stats Canada numbers that, as of the most recent numbers that 
they have, we have seen an increase of only 82 police officers. 
So we are short still 118 police officers. 
 
With a budget surplus of this magnitude, we could have made a 
real commitment to fulfill that promise and maybe once and for 
all actually fulfilled it. Well the reality of it is in this budget we 
saw $1.8 million to be set aside to work towards completing 
that commitment, in spite of the fact that this minister stood in 
this House only a few short days ago and said, I have fulfilled 
this commitment. I have done this; I have done that. 
 
The reality of it is the budget states that it’s not done, and 
they’ve now set $1.8 million aside. Well if you assume a police 
officer earns $50,000 a year — and in fact by the time you 
include the rest of the ancillary cost, it’s more — but we would 
have with this 1.8 million enough for another 36, if in fact all of 
that is applied which I doubt that it will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to be watching the numbers from 
Stats Canada, and we will be listening for the minister to make 
his ongoing representations. But we will wait for and we will 
learn the real numbers from Statistics Canada. And once again 
we will be back in this House holding the minister to account, 
asking him to fulfill the 1999 promise that he made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at some of the numbers that are in 
the budget document. We note that there is a $4.5 million 
increase in Justice accommodation. I’m hoping and expecting 
that that funds, those monies will go towards rebuilding the 
correctional facility in Regina. I’m not certain if it’s planned to 
go anywhere else, but it’s the largest single increase in this 
budget. So as they say, the devil is in the details. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be looking to this minister to see what is going 
to happen with regard to that additional accommodation money. 

And it’s my hope that it’s not just for luxurious offices maybe, 
perhaps, at the new hangar that was built to house NDP MLAs 
while they’re waiting for their flights. 
 
[15:30] 
 
If the NDP cabinet ministers would perhaps spend a little bit of 
time flying above the province and a little bit more time on the 
roads, they would have a better assessment of the condition of 
the highways and number of potholes. We know that the 
highways are now festooned with little red flags marking the 
highways. And the standing joke, Mr. Speaker, is somebody 
from out of province was travelling here and was travelling 
with one of the NDP cabinet ministers and asked what those 
little red flags were. And the NDP cabinet minister said, oh 
that’s how we mark potholes. What do you do in your state? 
And the answer was, Mr. Speaker, well we fix them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that would probably be a good approach for 
this government to take. We’d welcome them taking down 
some of the flags and going out and getting the potholes 
repaired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we notice that there is an increase in prosecution 
spending in the budget this year of $1.3 million. This is an 
increase of a little over 10 per cent. It is scarcely more than 
what the inflationary needs are and does little to address the 
rising crime in our province. 
 
The increase in spending for RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] has gone from $96 million to approximately $103 
million, an increase of approximately 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
for a Justice minister and a Premier that seem to indicate that 
they are committed to reduction in crime, this is certainly not 
the approach they’re taking when they’re barely meeting 
inflation. We look to them to do something far better and to do 
a lot better for dealing with crime. 
 
That’s only the portion of money that’s spent on RCMP 
officers. What about transfers to municipalities? What about 
other issues with regard to crime prevention issues, community 
policing, and things like early childhood intervention and 
programs in schools to try and keep children out of gangs? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about the budget deficit a little 
bit further and the surplus that the province is enjoying. And I’d 
like to read from page 572 of the Public Accounts Committee: 
 

The Chair: — And [it] would . . . also be a correct 
assumption that the way the government accounts for the 
fiscal stabilization, if they add monies or withdraw monies 
from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, that has no impact on 
the surplus or deficit when you do summary financial 
accounting? 
 
[The auditor says] That would be correct. 

 
The Chair: — So then it is true that in three of the last 
four years the government ran a deficit. 
 
[The auditor] For three years of the last five years, of 
course, yes. 
 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

The Chair: — Of the last four years, except for this year, 
the three previous years we saw deficits. 
 
[The auditor] That’s right. 
 
The Chair: — Okay. I just wanted to clarify that because 
that’s very important. I mean, there has been some 
misinformation in that regard and that had to be clarified. 

 
The reality of it is the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is a myth, 
continues to be a myth. When you add its numbers in or out, 
this government continues to run a deficit in all but one of its 
years in . . . [inaudible] . . . and the incredible thing is in spite of 
$1 billion of extra revenue, this government is still withdrawing 
funds from its fictitious stabilization fund to try and get in a 
balanced or surplus position — an unbelievable feat on their 
part to be able to actually do that. 
 
We have 1 billion extra dollars in revenue for which they are 
not entitled to any credit, and they have done absolutely nothing 
to show for it. And what the effect of it is, we are now deeper in 
debt at the end of the year than we will before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget would be a great opportunity to do 
something meaningful. And if in fact this NDP government is 
so totally uninspired as they can’t think of or understand what 
the province’s needs are, they should have applied it all to the 
debt. If they had chosen to do that, Mr. Speaker, this province 
would be debt-free in a little over five years. 
 
We pay an additional $551 million in interest this year — $551 
million. I hear the Finance minister over there beaking about it. 
He is the one that presented a budget that’s got $551 million in 
interest costs. Mr. Speaker, there would be no better legacy for 
our grandchildren than a reduced debt that that minister is doing 
nothing to deal with. And he should be the one that’s taking 
some element of responsibility for this. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. We will just wait 
for members to get it out of their system here. Thank you, 
members, and the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the Finance minister is done 
with his foolish antics and the chirping that’s coming from his 
side, I’d like to proceed, Mr. Speaker. We still continue on his 
part to play foolish and childish games with fiscal stabilization. 
The government this year will show a transfer from fiscal 
stabilization of $75 million out of that fund. In a year with 
record surplus, we are still really running a deficit when you use 
summary financial accounting — an unbelievable feat that you 
could have this kind of a surplus and still be running a deficit. 
Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget should be used . . . If nothing else, repay the debt. 
Get the debt repaid. If they wanted to do something imaginative 
without giving a lot of thought, they could use some of this 
money . . . Treat it as one-time income, Mr. Speaker. They 
could use it to rebuild infrastructure. They could use it as a 
one-time catch-up on things like the Regina Correctional 
Centre. 
 
They should not make the assumption that this money is going 
to last, but there is a host of things that they could do that would 

be meaningful and of some value. We have highways that need 
to be twinned in this province. We have some substantial 
problems with roadways and with infrastructure in this 
province. We have problems with some of the correctional 
centres, with the programs that are in those prisons, with the 
facilities themselves. 
 
We have municipalities, Mr. Speaker, that need bridges. We 
have school divisions that are waiting — and some have been 
waiting for a great many years — to build schools. We have the 
University of Saskatchewan. The University of Saskatchewan is 
one of the major economic engines in this province, and they 
could use money for the synchrotron and for a host of other 
programs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Health is not my portfolio, but unbelievably 
we did not see this government in this budget choose to fund 
Avastin. We have people in this province dying because that 
minister is not willing to fund drugs like Avastin and to fund 
health care properly. It is amazing that they will not choose to 
fund basic drugs that citizens of our province need so that they 
can continue their life and get another chance at it. They have 
the nerve to sit over there and say, we don’t think it’s a good 
business decision. A billion extra dollars and they’re not willing 
to save a life with it — unbelievable. 
 
What about parents that have autistic children? I’ve stood in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve presented petition after 
petition on behalf of parents of autistic children. Children that 
are autistic have incredible needs, expensive needs that need to 
be met. They need early childhood intervention and diagnosis. 
They need early childhood treatment. They need to participate 
in programs that go all year long, not just during the school 
session. They need to have respite for parents. They need to 
have all kinds of diagnosis and specially trained programs. 
 
It is more than just an educational burden. It is a health care 
issue, and this government has done little or nothing to deal 
with programming for parents with autistic children. And this 
would have been a good opportunity to implement programs for 
autistic children. I’m sure that their constituents have similar 
problems, similar concerns. And we’ve seen nothing on that at 
all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I’m willing to give that 
government some credit for — and there isn’t very many things 
I’m willing to give them credit for — is they’ve chosen to 
implement some significant portions of the Vicq report. I noted 
one of the newspaper columns that say, having this government 
implement portions of the Vicq report is a lot like an 
overweight person trying to put on a suit jacket “. . . that is two 
sizes too small.” Dealing appropriately or fairly with the 
business community is something that this government is not 
familiar with. Dealing with the business community is not 
something this government is even capable of doing. 
 
So in any event I am pleased to see that that is happening, and I 
expect to see more of that type of thing in the future. 
 
We have a province that desperately needs to grow, and it’s the 
type of thing like implementing the Vicq report that is going to 
go a long ways to bring this government in a position where it’s 
consistent with our competing provinces on either side. 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

Mr. Speaker, one of the troubling things about this budget was 
the typical citizen wanted to see some benefit from it. When 
you have a province that’s got as much wealth as we’ve got 
right now, the citizens should either see a reduction in debt or 
some tangible benefit for each and every citizen in this 
province. The working people in this province have not seen 
any benefit by way of lower taxes, better services, shorter 
waiting lists, or anything that this government provides. In fact 
they’ve seen longer waiting lists. 
 
And now bizarrely enough, we’re seeing letters coming out of 
SIAST for 15, 16 and 18 years for people that are going to be 
waiting for getting into a program. What kind of government 
can run this? What do you say to somebody? Well your child’s 
in kindergarten, you better get him on the waiting list. What if 
the child doesn’t want to be in that program? How do you pick 
it when the child is five, six, four years old? 
 
What kind of competence is that? What kind of an 
administration can actually sit idly by and say then, and by the 
way you’re going to pay to wait. Well maybe that’s a new 
fundraising initiative for them. I don’t know what it is, but you 
know the people of this province are not going to tolerate it. 
And come the next election, they’re going to turn those people 
out. 
 
We have an incredibly long record of waste and 
mismanagement on the part of this government. We have a host 
of situations, Mr. Speaker, where this government has refused 
to admit errors and has compounded the costs and ran up costs 
to an unrealistic level. With the revenues that we’ve got, if they 
can eliminate some of the waste and mismanagement and 
incompetence from that side of the House, we would have a 
wonderful province. 
 
And I’m going to give you a few examples, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a situation in the Klassen and Kvello trials in 
Saskatoon. This was a situation where that government would 
not admit that they had made a mistake on a prosecution, would 
not settle, would not apologize. The Minister of Justice who is 
now the Minister of Justice stood at a press conference and said, 
we’re going to appeal this. We’re going to fight this all the way. 
The opposition stood and raised this in the House. The Minister 
of Justice says independence, independence, independence and 
makes all this noise while the reality was we stuck up for those 
people. We went to bat for those people. And a few weeks later, 
we saw that minister over there apologize, and we saw that 
minister over there authorize a payment. And you know who 
made the payment? The citizens of this province because of the 
incompetence of that minister. Mr. Speaker, that is not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it happened again in the Martensville matter. We 
saw another prosecution that went awry, and what happened? 
Drag it out yet again, years and years, wearing down these 
people, destroying their lives. And once again at the end of the 
day, same thing from this minister — apologies and payments. 
Mr. Speaker, not acceptable. 
 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company], another situation. We run this business millions of 
dollars into the ditch. Any other private sector business would 
have said, oh this doesn’t work. We’re going to put it into 

bankruptcy and . . . No, they run it on, and they prop it up. It 
goes on and on. We waste more and more of the taxpayers’ 
money. Absolutely unacceptable on the part of this government 
to have that kind of decision making, and now we’re 30 or $40 
million in the red. Who’s going to pay? Not that government 
over there. The taxpayers of this province. 
 
What are we going to do with Navigata? Yet another one. Tens 
and tens of millions of dollars that we see this government run 
this foolhardy venture out of province. Everybody else is now 
passing this government on voice over Internet protocol. 
They’re playing this game with this one in BC [British 
Columbia]. They’ve now effectively given up and said, well 
we’re just going to absorb it into our books, so we don’t have to 
disclose how many more tens of millions of dollars we’re going 
to have for this program. And the service amazingly enough is 
still not available in Saskatchewan, and they won’t authorize 
other people to do it. 
 
Totally unacceptable . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They are 
taxpayers’ dollars because it’s a Crown corporation, and it’s 
money that would otherwise be available for citizens of this 
province for dividends out of the Crowns. And it’s not there 
because the government on that side of the House chose to 
waste that money foolishly with a business investment that they 
were not competent to handle. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go on with one final one before 
I take my place. Mr. Speaker, we saw the situation with the 
Legal Aid Commission and Jack Hillson. We saw Jack Hillson 
stand up and say last week he would have settled this matter for 
$95,000. This minister’s chosen to drag it out by not dealing 
with the department for which he is responsible, for the agency 
that he is accountable for. And now what we’ve got is an 
expense that’s going to be a quarter of a million dollars plus, 
and they’re talking about appealing of it. 
 
Outrageous and unacceptable, but then why should I be 
surprised? It’s continuing to go on like Martensville, like 
Klassen, Kvello. Today I’d like to invite the minister to do 
something competent for a change and make an apology to Mr. 
Hillson and undertake to pay it off promptly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the budget. I will be 
supporting the amendment. And I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just wanted to say thank you to the constituents of Saskatoon 
Sutherland for permitting me to be able to serve them. It’s a 
great privilege to be able to sit in this Assembly and serve the 
people of Saskatchewan. And there’s no people finer than the 
people of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
I’d also like to thank my family for permitting me to let my 
name stand and to actually seek a nomination and seek election. 
I first got elected in ’99, and my three boys were quite small, 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

and now probably this year they’ll be taller than me. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, Connie Lepard. 
She has served almost 20 years the constituents of Saskatoon 
Sutherland — two terms for me and three terms for the previous 
MLA, Mark Koenker. 
 
I’d also like to thank my parents for instilling in me the values 
of service to other individuals. When I was . . . Before I was 
born my father ran twice federally, didn’t get elected, but did 
very well and increased the popular vote for the NDP in that 
constituency. 
 
Saskatoon Sutherland is a very good constituency. It’s a 
microcosm of the entire province. The Royal University 
Hospital is within the constituency, University of 
Saskatchewan, the synchrotron, Innovation Place, Muskeg Lake 
First Nations. We have blue collar, white collar. We’ve got 
university, academic community. It’s a very good constituency, 
and I take my place in this House as MLA for Saskatoon 
Sutherland very seriously. And I appreciate the opportunity to 
serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first Saskatchewan government budget 
that has included the Department of Healthy Living Services 
portfolio. The focus on promoting good health in the province, 
preventing harm, and enabling recovery from addiction shows 
the Premier’s and this government’s willingness to follow 
through on its commitments. 
 
In my role as Healthy Living Services minister, I’m committed 
to supporting the research, the community connections, and the 
continued adoption of proven methods to achieve our goal of 
healthy people and healthy communities. Healthy Living 
Services funding has three main components: funding to 
regional health authorities, programs directly funded by the 
department, and as well senior services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authority delivered mental 
health addiction services, and many of the Saskatchewan mental 
health and addiction services are delivered locally, either 
through the health regions or through community-based partner 
organizations contracted by the health authorities. The overall 
RHA [regional health authority] base funding is increased by 
9.6 per cent in this budget, including 613,000 to support RHA 
community-based organizations, wage and operating increases, 
the bulk of this increase to fund competitive wages and benefits 
for the front line staff delivering program support. 
 
Most of the CBOs [community-based organization] contracted 
by health regions provide support in the mental health and 
addictions area. $95 million in funding is provided to regional 
health authorities for mental health programs. Throughout the 
health regions, there are equivalent to 420 full-time mental 
health workers and professionals. Not including new funding 
for the Premier’s Project Hope, $26 million is provided to allow 
addictions treatment and counselling to more than 13,000 
people annually. In health regions, there are equivalent of 250 
full-time addiction workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, grants to CBO organizations . . . the government 
recognizes the importance of these community and individual in 
maintaining healthy people in healthy communities. There’s 

money for services funded directly by Health to CBOs which 
are not contracted through RHAs. Five point two million or 
$222,000, a 3 per cent increase for CBOs was effective April 1. 
 
Some of the examples of CBOs within Healthy Living Services 
that we work with are the Alzheimer’s Society of 
Saskatchewan; Métis Addictions Council of Saskatchewan, 
MACSI; the Canadian Mental Health Association; the 
Saskatchewan Institute on the Prevention of Handicaps; the St. 
Louis Rehabilitation Centre; and the Schizophrenia Society of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we began to implement the new tobacco 
control legislation, and some one-time education and 
enforcement costs were incurred. This year we’re putting 
$345,000 to work to enforce the sales and display provisions of 
our tobacco legislation, providing training and support for 
enforcement officers, signage, and information for retailers. 
We’re also providing funding to the cancer society for the 
smokers’ helpline and innovation programs to help young 
people stay tobacco free. We’re very proud of the work done to 
denormalize tobacco. Our programs and policies are enjoying 
strong public support and will pay significant dividends to the 
health of Saskatchewan people in the long term. 
 
We’re continuing core funding to support population health 
promotion strategies as well as health promotion. We continue 
to develop and to support comprehensive and coordinated 
problem gambling strategies that mitigate the social 
consequences relating to gambling. Included is outreach 
services, a media campaign, treatment services, a problem 
gambling helpline, and specialized counsellor training. With a 
budget of $2.5 million annually, we have the second highest per 
capita expenditure of any Canadian jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are core funding increases for complex care 
for special needs children. Funding is increased by $100,000 for 
extraordinary costs in providing home care support for children. 
This new funding will allow more children to receive quality 
care in their own homes rather than in an institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cognitive disabilities is up $860,000 for 
assessment and diagnostic services, alcohol and risk assessment 
training in all health regions, public education, and an FASD 
[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] support network. Last year 
services were limited to Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and 
La Ronge. This year, Mr. Speaker, services are being expanded 
to reach across the entire province. Across all government, 
there’s $4.15 million budgeted to support the implementation of 
the cognitive disabilities strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the programs that I’m quite proud of is the 
Premier’s Project Hope. The total budget across all departments 
is $18.2 million, including federal funding. Saskatchewan 
Health funding for this initiative has increased by $11.5 million 
for a total of $13.2 million to allow full implementation of the 
plan including capital construction of new stabilization and 
treatment facilities. 
 
As well an additional $3.1 million will fund capital and 
operating costs of secure facilities including the cost of 
physicians, testing, training, evaluation, outpatient support 
workers, and outreach workers. We have an interim facility in 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

place, and we’ll be breaking ground soon on new facilities 
permanently in Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
partnership with Prince Albert Grand Council, the regional 
health authority, the Department of Health. And this program, 
Mr. Speaker, will provide 15 new beds for young people in a 
longer-term situation. 
 
As we know, most people can beat their addiction completely 
on an outpatient basis in the community, and research shows 
that that is the best way to treat most individuals. However 
there are cases where individuals do need an in-patient 
component. And we’re building that continuing care, that range 
of services for those individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m very proud of the partnership that we are developing 
with First Nations in Prince Albert to provide that longer-term 
service so that individuals can go in and detox and stabilize and 
get the in-patient treatment that they require, and then move out 
into the community and receive the care there on an outpatient 
basis, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s Project Hope 
reflects our government’s vision that no one will be left behind 
on the path of opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing here is we’re building that 
whole range of services on prevention and education. We have 
a new prevention and education directorate that is up and 
running and fully funded. And they’re working with the 
regional health authorities and partners to ensure that everyone 
is aware of the dangers of using illegal drugs or inappropriate 
use of alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have signed a contract with the University of 
Saskatchewan to provide research at the university. And they’re 
in the middle of recruiting a top-flight individual to come in and 
conduct research at the University of Saskatchewan and be a 
resource to the community and to addiction professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in January and early February we had an amazing 
conference that was put together by the education and 
prevention director in Saskatoon that attracted over 300 
individuals from all across Canada. And they heard 
evidence-based best practices. They were able to discuss new 
services with their peers and actually get the guidance that they 
require and a sense of morale boosting as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I was there the opening speaker, Mr. 
Skinner from Ontario, said that there are different components 
of treatment. But one of the important ones, the first steps — in 
fact he even quantified it as 15 per cent of any kind of treatment 
— is hope. Just the fact that an individual believes that they’re 
going to get well, that very belief if you provide nothing else, 
there’s a 15 per cent improvement in that person’s outlook, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what I find so troubling with the opposition, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ve said in the past, as has the Premier, that the 
opposition has had — and I use the word advisedly, had — 
some credibility on this issue. They did a good job last year 
raising the issue and I think that the government has done a 
good job in responding to that issue. But time and time again, 
we hear from members of the opposition providing incomplete 
information to the public which I think will actually destroy 
hope. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a direct attack on parents and 

families of people who are suffering with an addiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that very upsetting when I think of those 
families and they’re reading comments from members of the 
opposition that describe the Premier’s Project Hope as project 
hype or project hopeless, because what they’re trying to do is 
undercut the credibility of the government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has received an award from the Canadian Centre 
on Substance Abuse for leadership with addressing addictions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina north . . . sorry, 
Saskatoon Northwest recently was indicating that he was giving 
information to parents but what we found out that the 
information that he was providing was incomplete. It did not 
contain all of the options for these parents. So I know that he’s 
been going around the province giving updates and providing 
information to parents and families about the dangers and his 
experience with crystal meth, and I’ve encouraged that and I’ve 
supported that. But, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition or 
anybody provides incomplete information and is directly 
destroying hope for parents and families with kids with any 
kind of addiction, I have to question the credibility of those 
individuals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I find it very sad that some members of that 
opposition that have built up credibility over the years are now 
squandering that very credibility. And I think the public is 
going to be very concerned about members that continue to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another initiative within the government is the 
children’s rehabilitation services — $250,000 for new physical 
and occupational therapists and speech and language 
pathologists. We also have a children’s mental health strategy 
— $1 million increase to support a children’s mental health 
strategy for intervention, treatment, respite, and residential 
services for families with children who have mental health 
problems. This will take us forward in addressing some of the 
issues raised by the Children’s Advocate in 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to making announcements in the 
near future on details around these new programs. Step by step, 
we are building an agenda for healthy and happy children who 
can lead productive lives in this province because that benefits 
everybody. No one will argue that investing in children is one 
of the most strategic health measures possible. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the recent cabinet shuffle I was also given 
additional duties as Minister Responsible for Seniors and I’ve 
already begun meeting with different seniors’ groups and 
organizations and touring different seniors’ homes. And I’m 
really excited about the additional duties that I’ve been able to 
be provided by the Premier. This is an exciting area. We have 
probably the highest percentage of seniors in Saskatchewan in 
all across Canada. I believe one in seven of our population are 
seniors. 
 
And these are people that have, with their hard work and 
diligence, have built the wonderful province that we have here 
today. We’re very fortunate. We’re a have province largely to 
the work that many of the seniors have done over the years. 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

They’ve sacrificed during the 1980s and early ’90s as we’ve 
struggled to pay down the debt that members opposite 
supported — that government. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking 
forward to continuing to work with seniors’ organizations 
throughout Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say 
that we have $1.7 million budgeted in that area to address some 
of the needs. And I’m looking forward to some announcements 
as the days and weeks and months go by. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is starting to come to an end in 
this speech. And so, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to switch gears 
a little bit. Of course I’ll be supporting the budget and of course 
I’ll be voting against the members opposite, their motion. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues that I’ve heard 
in the last number of days from members opposite, I really feel 
the need to comment on. The Leader of the Opposition, the 
number of years that he spent working for the Grant Devine 
government, which a number of the MLAs went to jail and ran 
up a significantly huge debt and deficit . . . We still have 
recommendations from the Provincial Auditor in the area of 
liquor and gaming and up to $20,000 of misappropriated 
alcoholic beverages that were served in cabinet offices. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when that comes out and we point that out, 
somehow that’s unfair. That’s unfair to the opposition for us to 
point out that the potential person that they hope to see lead this 
province, when he was in his 20s, was working in a government 
that was doing this. And you know, somehow he’s not held 
accountable. Hasn’t apologized for some of the decisions that 
were done. 
 
And it’s somehow that they were only . . . he was only in his 
20s, Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, you know when I was 
that member’s age I was the father of three kids. I had been 
married for four or five years. No one was . . . I was responsible 
for a lot of things. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had attorney generals 
that were in their 20s, we’ve had ministers of Finance that were 
in their 20s. No one says, but they weren’t accountable; 
somehow they’re not responsible and it’s just childhood 
indiscretion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they may actually have a point if in that 
case, well this was just someone that was working there and, 
when he discovered all the things that were going on, decided to 
leave and go somewhere else and didn’t want to have anything 
to do with that. The Leader of the Opposition was so upset why 
the billions of dollars that went missing, the billions of dollars 
of debt that went up, all of the corruption that went on, you 
know what he decided to do in 1991? He decided to seek a 
nomination for the PC [Progressive Conservative] Party of 
Saskatchewan. That’s how upset he was. And Grant Devine was 
the leader. 
 
So when he says, when the Leader of the Opposition says 
somehow this province has been misrun for 60 years and all the 
things that have gone wrong and we don’t want to go back to 
the ’80s and make the mistakes there, Mr. Speaker, he was part 
of that government. And you might be able to make a case, he 
was just an employee and so he didn’t have any responsibility. 
But he was making the decision that he was going to seek the 
nomination. That’s how good he thought it was. 
 

And that was the year that, Mr. Speaker, everyone else in the 
province knew what kind of government that this was. Only the 
Leader of the Opposition seemed to think that they were okay. 
Because what happened at that election? The PC Party was 
wiped out. Wiped out. Premier Romanow was elected with a 
massive, massive, massive election victory. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, so I just . . . It’s passing strange that the 
opposition are trying to minimize that somehow a 25-year-old 
kid is somehow is not responsible for his actions and somehow 
he’s just trying to distance himself that. Now there were seven 
years he worked there. It’s not on his website, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand that he’s trying to forget that — similar to the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast who’s trying to forget some of 
his speeches 20 minutes later. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast, Mr. Speaker, he issued a pamphlet in Saskatoon 
saying there will be no new beds until 2008. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
is he going to send a correction to every one of those people 
now that there are new beds? There are new beds in Saskatoon; 
there will be new beds in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
secure care facility here in Regina. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is coming to an end. And I 
just wanted to say, I just wanted to say that I believe that this 
budget is a budget that will provide a good springboard — a 
fresh start, as the Minister of Finance has said — for building 
an economy where no one will be left behind on the path to 
prosperity and opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition is just not credible on this issue. 
The government has a very good plan that we’re implementing 
to ensure that young people have a place to live, raise, work, 
and have a career here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be supporting the budget put 
forward by the Minister of Finance, and of course I will be 
voting against the motion that the opposition has put forward. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
looking over my notes over the last hour or two, thinking about 
what I might want to finally say about the budget, which of 
course is what the subject that we are debating here today. 
 
As I sat in the House, in the Chamber here today, and listened 
to members give their speeches, I must say to you that I was 
impressed by a couple of things. I was impressed by the fact 
that the Minister of Learning stood in her place, gave a speech 
about the budget. I may not always agree with everything that 
she talked about — of course she does and that’s fair; she’s in a 
different political party than I am — but I was impressed with 
the fact that it was a well thought out . . . She talked about the 
budget and what she thought some of the good things that it 
could do for the people that she represents and of course the 
province. 
 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

I also listened to the member from Greystone as he gave his 
speech, Mr. Speaker, and I was impressed as well that he talked 
about the elements that were in the budget. He talked about the 
things that he liked about it and maybe some of the things that 
he wasn’t really even sure about. He talked about in his speech 
some things about, like cogeneration of electricity. He didn’t 
really mention the word cogeneration but he talked about being 
in support of anyone really in the province being able to supply, 
to generate clean, green electricity and put it back into the grids, 
which of course is something that I agree with as well. So I was 
impressed, really quite impressed with those two speeches and 
the fact that they stuck to the topic. 
 
Then the member for Saskatoon Sutherland then got up and was 
doing quite well. In fact I was thinking as I was just going to 
stand up, I was going to say, well you know, I’m going to 
compliment that member as well. Because even though I don’t 
necessarily always have to agree with what he said, it was 
related to the subject that we’re here to debate today. It was 
related to the budget. It was related to the area and the duties 
that he has as the minister. And I almost, I almost stood up and 
said good job until he got into the last five or ten minutes of his 
speech, Mr. Speaker, and then he kind of fell off the rails, to be 
real honest with you. 
 
And I find it incredibly, incredibly amazing that he could stand 
up with that holier-than-thou, pompous, arrogant, socialist 
attitude and talk about something that I can’t be responsible for. 
I wasn’t here, Mr. Speaker. He tries to tie everything back to 20 
or 25 or 30 years ago, Mr. Speaker. Two can play at that game 
of course, and I’m not going to really enter into that because I 
think that I don’t need to get into that kind of a debate. But he 
ought to be ashamed of himself. 
 
And I know that, I know that the reason he’s doing it is because 
he sees the polling results in his riding, in his constituency, and 
he knows that he’s in a desperate situation. And he’s trying to 
play desperate politics to get re-elected. Mr. Speaker, I can 
hardly wait for the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could play the same game that he did when he 
talked about our leader being in the old Grant Devine 
government. I could talk about SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. And I 
could talk about that particular socialist government covering 
up and lying about SPUDCO for years and years and years and 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — I could talk, Mr. Speaker, about the cases of 
fraud that are being investigated, in fact another one from 
SaskPower being covered up, Mr. Speaker. I could talk about 
those things, but I prefer not to. And I guess I’ll sit down now. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I know the member for 
Carrot River Valley has strong feelings about the SPUDCO 
issue but I think he may have . . . He may not realize this but he 
actually . . . I believe that you made reference to the 
government lying about SPUDCO. And I would just ask that 
you withdraw just that one word, the reference to the 
government lying, because that is out of order. So I just ask the 
member to withdraw that word. 
 

Mr. Kerpan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all let me say that I 
certainly have respect for the Chair and for the position. But, 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I cannot withdraw that remark. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I’d just like to ask the 
member for Carrot River Valley again, please you are clearly 
out of order with the remark about the government lying about 
SPUDCO and that’s an unparliamentary remark; it’s not for use 
in this Chamber. And I would just ask you please just to 
withdraw that word and use some other choice of words please. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I fully realize the words and the 
terminology that I used but I fear that I must stand behind them. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I would just ask the 
member again to unequivocally withdraw the remark please. 
Unequivocally withdraw that one word please. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, no I will not. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — This is the last time 
I’m warning the member. I’ll have no alternative otherwise 
other than to name him which I do not wish to do. I ask the 
member for Carrot River Valley to please withdraw the remark 
that he used and that he’s well aware of. Please withdraw that 
remark. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in politics, elected 
politics, for some 13 years or so at this point in time and I have 
never once stood in any Chamber and said exactly what I think. 
But, Mr. Speaker, on this issue I’m going to stick with my 
words. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Well, members of the 
Assembly and the member for Carrot River Valley, I’m afraid I 
have no alternative but to name you and I would ask the hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley to withdraw, to leave the 
Assembly please. So I regret very much having to do that. 
 
I recognize the hon. member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all let me say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am thrilled to 
rise in my place here today and speak in support of the 
government’s budget. 
 
I want to first of all compliment the Minister of Finance for his 
very thoughtful balance in the budget. And when I reference 
balance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about balance in a 
couple of perspectives. First of all it was a true financial 
balance. But in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I think more 
appropriately for myself and I think to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, there was also balance reflected in the social 
programming right across the budget. And I know in my 
post-budget meetings that I held in my community in Meadow 
Lake, it was extremely well received. And so I do want to 
compliment the Minister of Finance for that. 
 
I also want to say that generally speaking, across the piece, 
while I think living close . . . I want to say, truthfully, living 
close to the Alberta border, a provincial sales tax reduction 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

would have been appreciated. People also understand that we as 
governments have to make difficult choices sometimes. And 
right now I think given the environment in Saskatchewan, 
everyone understands that with the oil and gas development and 
clearly with some challenges in the forestry sector, this was 
indeed the right decision. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I also if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take the 
opportunity to thank the good people of the constituency of 
Meadow Lake. I am truly honoured and privileged to be able to 
represent them for this many years in the legislature in 
Saskatchewan. They’re a wonderful group of people there — 
the different communities that I represent — the different First 
Nations, the many, many, Métis people from the across the 
riding. Right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the constituency 
makeup is roughly as follows. There are roughly 50 per cent of 
the constituents — my constituents — are Aboriginal and 
roughly 50 per cent are obviously non-Aboriginal. And I take a 
great deal of pride in representing all of my constituents. 
 
I also, like several before me, want to take the opportunity to 
thank my family for their ongoing support. As all of us in this 
Chamber know that when you’ve been in politics for quite a 
number of years, you would not survive if it were not for the 
support of your family and friends. So I want to thank my 
family particularly and many of my friends. It’s truly 
appreciated. 
 
And finally I’d like to thank my colleagues as well, all of my 
colleagues, who I think were faced with some of the same 
difficult choices that I was faced with in trying to help assist in 
putting the budget together. They were very, very thoughtful in 
their approaches and I think thought for the betterment of the 
people of Saskatchewan before they put themselves ahead. And 
so to them as well I want to say thank you very much for their 
contributions to the budget. 
 
When I was first elected to the legislature in 1991, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the prospects of seeing the light of day with the 
mountain of debt left by the opposition party, Mr. Speaker, 
seemed like an impossible dream to overcome. And so when I 
stand here today and I realize how far we have come, it is 
incredibly gratifying for me to be a part of a budget like the one 
that’s just been delivered. It feels like the literally hundreds and 
hundreds of difficult decisions that were made in bringing us to 
this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it feels like finally many of 
those decisions have paid off. And I want to say this, that my 
biggest fear way back in 1991 was not about people leaving our 
province, Mr. Speaker. While that was a concern, it is being 
addressed in this budget. My biggest fear was that we quite 
literally — and I know the discussion happened — that we 
wouldn’t have, as is described today, a province left. 
 
So to have a circumstance that we have today now, as I said, is 
incredibly gratifying. When we came so close to bankruptcy as 
a provincial jurisdiction and when many of our bonds were 
quite literally traded as junk bonds on the markets, it is really, 
really gratifying and it feels wonderful, as I said, to be able to 
stand here and represent the good folks of Meadow Lake and to 
be part of a government that literally brought this province back 
from the brink of bankruptcy. 

So there are still many things that we have to deal with, that is 
for sure. And I understand that. But I do want to say that I am 
incredibly proud of the fact that we’ve had 13 consecutive 
balanced budgets — a record in Canada. We’ve had the 13th 
consecutive credit rating upgrade. The government has now 
retired an historic amount of debt and the government debt now 
is at record low levels. We have an economy that is diversified 
beyond what I think many of us could ever have imagined 10 
years ago. We have the most competitive jurisdiction in Canada 
as it relates to manufacturing and processing specifically. 
We’ve made significant improvements on the corporate capital 
side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it relates to reductions in the 
corporate capital tax. And of course the prospects for 
Saskatchewan’s future look very, very bright. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, if I could as well, take a few minutes to 
talk a little bit about some of the different portfolios that I 
represent. And I want to first of all speak a little about the 
Crown Investments Corporation. This is a budget that will 
clearly invest in our communities and will encourage economic 
growth and job creation. 
 
It’s also a budget which will provide opportunities for our 
young and for First Nations and Métis people, giving them 
more reasons to stay here in Saskatchewan and indeed have a 
future in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our young and 
First Nations and Métis people are among Saskatchewan’s 
greatest asset, and as I travel around the province that is so 
apparent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. By providing them with 
opportunities to realize a bright future right here at home in our 
province, we will make it an even better place to live, to work, 
and to raise our families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides the initiatives that have been announced in 
the budget, our government has been taking other steps to 
provide opportunities for our young and First Nations and Métis 
people. I would first like to if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
outline some of the programs that have been developed recently 
by Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan. Then if I 
could, I will talk a bit about the programs and the initiatives of 
the Department of First Nations and Métis Relations, as I 
indicated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have kept our government’s 
commitment to encourage the growth and the development of 
entrepreneurship and small businesses by establishing the 
Entrepreneurial Foundation of Saskatchewan and indeed the 
Saskatchewan Entrepreneurial Fund. The goal is to build 
Saskatchewan’s economy by developing an entrepreneurial 
base. 
 
The foundation and the fund are aimed at all existing and 
aspiring entrepreneurs. However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 
a special focus on young, on rural, on northern, and on First 
Nations and Métis people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The foundation 
will provide business advice; it will provide mentoring and 
support services, while the fund will provide financing of up to 
$1 million for each approved business proposal. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Crown Investments Corporation is leading 
this initiative in partnership with SaskCentral on behalf of 
Saskatchewan’s credit unions. And CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] will be providing $1.8 million in 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

operating capital for the foundation and up to 25 million for the 
fund over the next five years. 
 
And I say parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, many in the Chamber 
will know that before I was elected I worked in the credit union 
system, and so it is again gratifying for me to be able to see a 
fund like this put together between the credit unions of the 
province and between the corporation for which I currently 
have the privilege of being the minister. 
 
We are working on a similar fund that will be aimed at creating 
economic development opportunities and jobs for First Nations 
and Métis people. We hope to announce details in the coming 
months. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Crown Investments Corporation is leading 
another very important initiative to create job opportunities for 
our young and Aboriginal people. CIC is investing $20 million 
in programs aimed at hiring more young and First Nations and 
Métis people in our Crown corporations. 
 
The goals are to replace an aging Crown workforce, to have our 
Crowns better reflect the diversity of our population, and to 
provide attractive careers that will keep our educated, skilled 
young and Aboriginal people in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we estimate that by the year 2017 more 
than half of the current employees in our Crowns, about 5,000 
people, will have retired. We will need to replace them with 
skilled, educated people so that our Crowns will continue to 
grow and to prosper. 
 
Several programs have already been announced and are well 
under way. The CIC Aboriginal bursary program has been 
providing financial assistance to undergraduate students at the 
University of Regina and First Nations University of Canada 
since the fall of 2004 semester. Twenty-six bursaries were 
awarded that first semester. Since then another 49 bursaries 
have been awarded and CIC expects to assist up to 165 students 
over five years. That’s 165 students over five years. 
 
Gradworks is a program that provides internships in the Crowns 
for recent post-secondary graduates. The purpose is to provide 
work experience that will lead to permanent jobs in the Crowns 
or with other employers. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this program has already been very 
successful and it has been in operation for just over one year. 
CIC and its Crowns filled 15 internship positions in 2004 and 
another 88 in 2005. Thirty-five interns have already been hired 
permanently by one of our Crowns while another 11 have 
full-time jobs in other corporations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our goal is to provide 325 internships over 
five years and to eventually expand Gradworks to include other 
employers in the public and of course in the private sectors. 
 
CIC is working with our universities to develop other programs 
for young and Aboriginal people. CIC and the University of 
Saskatchewan have established the mathematics and science 
enrichment program to help First Nations and Métis students 
prepare for further study or careers in the maths and sciences. 
And as I spend my time travelling around the province and 

meeting with the private sector, clearly one of the significant 
impediments, whether it’s in the private sector or in the public 
sector, is a lack of enough maths and sciences in many young 
people’s background, Mr. Speaker. So we are obviously, as I’ve 
indicated, focusing on that and we hope that this will assist in 
bringing many, many more young people into our Crowns, into 
the public sector. And even if that training doesn’t bring them 
into public service it will clearly benefit our province. 
 
The program will assist up to 50 students each year. It got under 
way last fall with an initial enrolment of 33 students, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I had the privilege of attending an event 
at the First Nations University of Canada not so long ago where 
many of those students were present and recognized, and I want 
to very publicly commend them for the decisions that they’ve 
made. 
 
Last December CIC and the University of Saskatchewan 
entered into an agreement that will enhance the Aboriginal 
student achievement program. A new recruitment strategy will 
be developed, and mentorship programs and other services will 
be expanded. CIC and the Indian teacher education program at 
the University of Saskatchewan are also teaming up on a pilot 
project that will be aimed at Aboriginal youths who have 
dropped out of school. The goal is to get them back into the 
education system so that they will be able to pursue and fulfill 
career aspirations. 
 
CIC is working with the University of Regina right now and the 
First Nations University of Canada to develop an Aboriginal 
student recruitment and retention office as well as a leadership 
training program for Aboriginal and for non-Aboriginal 
students. Mr. Deputy Speaker, CIC will continue to work with 
its Crowns and our province’s educational institutions to 
determine where it might be able to provide further assistance. 
 
If I could now, I’d like to turn now to my other portfolio which 
has arguably even more of a focus on First Nations and Métis 
youth. The department has completed its first full fiscal year of 
operations, and it now has a performance plan available to the 
public which outlines its visions, its goals, and its objectives. 
 
The vision I think is far-reaching. It speaks to and it says that 
First Nations and Métis people, we see them as full partners in 
society, contributing to and sharing in the prosperity of our 
province. Mr. Speaker, one goal to achieve that vision is First 
Nations and Métis people participating fully in the social, 
cultural, and economic life of this province. Another, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is maintaining effective relations and 
communications between the province and First Nations and 
Métis peoples and governments. First Nations and Métis 
Relations uses several tools to work towards these goals. 
 
Our new tool is the First Nations and Métis economic 
development program. And it’s a program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I am particularly proud of. This innovative 
program officially began accepting applications in 
mid-February of this year. It provides grants to First Nations 
and Métis entrepreneurs on- and off-reserve to start or buy a 
new business or to expand an existing operation in key 
economic sectors of our province. The program is also designed 
to create more jobs for First Nations and Métis people. 
 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to say that the Saskatchewan 
Indian Equity Foundation and the Clarence Campeau 
Development Fund are helping the department deliver this 
program, and they are integral to its success; 1.5 million has 
been allocated to this initiative this year. 
 
The treaty land entitlement program continues to honour this 
government’s constitutional obligations to Canada by 
negotiating agreements to resolve long outstanding First 
Nations claims. As you may know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
treaty land entitlement process exists because not all First 
Nations received the land that was promised to them in the 
treaties. We will work in partnership with the Government of 
Canada and First Nations to resolve these claims. Fifteen 
million is dedicated to treaty land entitlement this year alone, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So far, 21 of the 29 treaty land entitlement First Nations have 
achieved their shortfalls and the rest continue to work on this 
very, very important initiative. We are currently at the table 
negotiating with Canada and four other First Nations, 
specifically Pasqua, Muskoday, Gordon’s, and Sturgeon Lake. 
And I’m hopeful that these negotiations will result in 
settlements later this year. 
 
In terms of gaming, we have 29 million in this area in our 
budget which flows through to either the First Nations Trust, a 
community development corporation, or the Clarence Campeau 
Development Fund. This is a legal obligation. And the money 
distributed is used to benefit First Nations people on reserves 
and First Nations and non-First Nations communities near the 
reserves where casinos are located for initiatives in areas such 
as education, justice, and obviously health as well. 
 
A portion of the gaming profits generated by the off-reserve 
casinos in Regina and Moose Jaw is also provided for Métis 
economic development. First Nations and Métis Relations also 
has 1.5 million to provide grants to Aboriginal organizations for 
employment and capacity building. The Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations receives funding through this 
program for policy development. The department’s Aboriginal 
employment development program is also receiving extra 
money to support employers who are implementing programs in 
their organizations through this funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased with the work that the 
Department of First Nations and Métis Relations has done in its 
first full fiscal year of operations. And I certainly look forward 
to the work that we’ll be doing again this coming year in 
continuing partnership with First Nations and Métis leaders and 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other initiatives of this 
government, housed in other departments and agencies, which 
have a huge impact on First Nations and Métis people. And I’d 
like to reference just a few because they are so very, very 
important. 
 
Our government is providing funding for 83 basic education 
seats at the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology. We 
are continuing planning on the diabetes centre on the Muskeg 

Lake Cree Nation. There will be work on the northern economic 
infrastructure strategy, including the start of construction on 
road access into Wollaston Lake. And money is also being 
earmarked for improvements to road access to reserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the programs and initiatives I have outlined, along 
with the initiatives in the provincial budget, will help us achieve 
our vision of a province in which clearly no one is left behind 
on the path to opportunity. It is vitally important to our future 
that we provide solid, meaningful opportunities to all our 
citizens, but especially to our young people and to our First 
Nations and Métis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close with just a little story. And it’s one 
that I relayed I think in this Chamber, probably not in my 
maiden speech but it would have been about 1993. And I 
realized with the creation . . . I was reminded of this story about 
a year ago when this department was first created. 
 
It was quite an experience for me. I was on the Churchill River 
system quite some number of years ago. And I thought back to 
a meeting I had had with a fairly young chief at that time. And 
he indicated to me what it was like for him to have been taken 
away from a little community that had roughly 50 people in it. 
His entire life that he knew existed within about a 5- or a 6-mile 
radius. And when he was six years of age, in the fall of the year 
he turned six he was taken away from that community and 
brought back in the springtime, and the huge impact that had on 
his life. 
 
Ironically he wasn’t actually very bitter about it. But roughly 
three months later on a canoe trip, I had the opportunity to 
actually, in the wilderness, pass right through that community 
and stand on the spot that this young chief was standing on and 
where he was raised when he was five and six years of age. And 
it was quite something to realize that this young boy would 
have been removed from an environment like that. 
 
And when I realize the injustices that our society has done to 
First Nations and to Métis people across our province and 
across our country, and to realize how far these good people 
have come, given the circumstances in which many of them 
were, I’m just thrilled to see some of the initiatives in this 
budget today that finally move past jurisdictional barriers and 
finally do things for First Nations people. And I think it’s 
something we should be incredibly proud of. So I am so proud 
to be able to stand in my spot and support this budget. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m certainly pleased to be able to enter into the debate on the 
2006 budget that the Minister of Finance tabled in this 
Assembly last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say that there were a few provisions within 
the budget that I certainly think I can support. But there were 
certainly a lot of omissions in this budget. There were certainly 
a number of half measures, Mr. Speaker, and there were 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

certainly a number of wrong directions that this budget will take 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And I would just like to comment 
on a number of these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, this NDP government has had a history of 
only getting things half right if we look at some of the things 
they’ve done in the past. They have perhaps some good 
intentions and they try to address them, but they just somehow 
can’t seem to get their act together and get the whole package 
together. And I think, Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget we see 
that once again. 
 
The action on the business tax front certainly is a step in the 
right direction. And that in itself, Mr. Speaker, in reducing 
business taxes for the sake of businesses isn’t the reason that we 
on this side of the House have been calling for that. The reason 
that we need to have a competitive environment for those 
people who create jobs in our economy is because frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, we need more taxpayers in this province to help carry 
the load, to pay for the things like health care and education and 
highways, and to provide some transition funding to our grain 
and oilseeds producers to move that industry to the next century 
. . . in the second century of this province. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that industry will be, at least part of it, heading off in a 
new direction, and I’ll have more to say about that a little later. 
 
But one of the things . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I should say a 
couple of things about this government’s lack of direction and 
lack of policy that has led to this, this seemingly unexplainable 
situation that we in this province find ourselves in. We are 
currently experiencing an economic boom in many sectors of 
the economy, yet we are seeing an out-migration of our young 
people and we are seeing a loss of jobs. And frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, many people including the members on that side of the 
House cannot explain what’s happening. 
 
And it’s really no mystery, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t have 
an environment that will foster that investment and that 
initiative that will create those additional jobs and provide the 
career . . . quality jobs that many of our young people are 
looking for. It’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, to say that there 
is a long list of jobs, that we don’t have people to fill those 
positions, because, Mr. Speaker, frankly if you look in the job 
or help wanted sections and if you look at some around in our 
retail sector, Mr. Speaker, many of these jobs are in the service 
industry and certainly are not conducive and certainly do not 
attract our young, well-educated people who are leaving this 
province, unfortunately, and taking their tax dollars with them. 
 
But one thing, Mr. Speaker, I must give this government credit 
for is the action they took with regards to the working men and 
women of this province, particularly those people who need to 
buy the tools of their trade so that they can earn a living — the 
tool tax credit, Mr. Speaker. I think this is something that 
should have been done some time ago, Mr. Speaker, and I 
certainly must give them credit. And when I listen very 
carefully to the Minister of Finance’s remarks, he didn’t take 
credit for it, Mr. Speaker. Who did he give credit to it? He gave 
credit to the member from northeast Regina. And I think that 
member certainly needs our support and our appreciation for his 
hard work in seeing this measure through. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I as a person who operates a business 

and any other self-employed person who requires tools of their 
trade, they can either . . . they can write them off as a tax 
deduction. But there are a number of working men and women 
in this province who are not self-employed but are still required 
to provide the tools of their trade and they incur all the 
expenses, Mr. Speaker, and they really don’t have any . . . they 
don’t receive any tax credit for it. They don’t receive any 
recognition. And so therefore as I said, the member from 
Regina Northeast certainly deserves full credit for the good 
work that he’s done. 
 
But when you stop and think about this for a moment, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And the Minister of Finance, as I said, in his 
address to the Assembly on budget day paid credit to that 
member. And so when I thought about that for a bit, it’s really 
ironic. We hear from those members on that side of the House 
how they are the defenders of the working men and women in 
this province, that they are looking after their best interests. 
 
So you would think, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance 
perhaps would have moved on this initiative or perhaps the 
former minister of Labour, the current member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow who talks about constantly in this House how 
she is the defender of and looks after the working men and 
women in this province. You would think perhaps that she 
would have moved on this initiative. Or perhaps even the 
Premier. 
 
But no, none of them moved on it. And those members are all 
members of cabinet. It took the member from Regina Northeast, 
a person who is not a member of cabinet, to bring this issue 
forward. And I suspect that he had to work quite some time to 
get this forward. I say that’s a real shame. It’s once again an 
example of talking the talk but not walking the walk. And there 
are many instances that we see with this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see a lot of talking the talk and very little 
walking the walk in the whole area of agriculture. What did we 
find on the very first day when we resumed? When we started 
the spring sitting the government came to us and said, we just 
realized we’ve got a crisis situation in agriculture and we need 
to have an emergency debate in agriculture. So we, certainly we 
agreed. I mean, we’ve been aware of this for many, many years. 
It seems to me we’ve almost had that emergency debate on 
agriculture almost every year since 1999. Now we’re moving to 
semi-annual debates on the crisis in agriculture. 
 
But this again, it’s nothing more than lip service to a problem so 
they can go out and say to the farmers of this province, well 
we’re doing something in agriculture. We had an emergency 
debate. And then they secretly hope that that problem goes 
away, that they don’t have to deal with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well that problem isn’t going away. And you know why we 
have that problem in this province, Mr. Speaker? And why we 
will continue to have that problem is because we don’t see any 
leadership. We don’t see any vision from those members and 
from that government. You would think with Saskatchewan 
having 47 per cent of the arable acres that at the very least, if 
they don’t want to put any money into agriculture, they could at 
least provide some leadership, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll have more 
to say about that in the days to come in this House, Mr. 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

Speaker. 
 
Another area that we really need to take this government to 
task, Mr. Speaker . . . They talk about putting more money into 
highways, yet they pit RM against RM, community against the 
community, with their partnerships agreements whereby they 
are expecting rural municipalities — small rural communities 
— to put money up to rebuild highways. And the member from 
Arm River-Watrous has a highway in his constituency that was 
redone under that plan and that section of highway is closed, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s another area that we will certainly have 
to discuss with these members and with this government. 
 
I have a couple of highways in my constituency — Highway 
310 and a section of Highway 22 — that are in dire, desperate 
condition. And what do we hear from these people? Well we 
won’t fix it unless you put some money up. And that certainly is 
not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see my time is moving on, Mr. Speaker, and so I’m afraid I 
must move on to some other areas, Mr. Speaker. And one of 
them that I would like to cover, Mr. Speaker, is the area of the 
environment. And, Mr. Speaker, you know we had the Speech 
from the Throne last fall and so I pulled out the Speech from the 
Throne to see what one of the themes in that speech was, Mr. 
Speaker. And one of the themes that we hear from these people 
is a green and prosperous economy. That Saskatchewan is 
going to be the leader in this country as far as green initiatives. 
And what do we see in the budget, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[16:45] 
 
If you look at the news release, Mr. Speaker, and the portion of 
the government news release that deals with the environment, 
it’s about a quarter of a page out of a three- or four-page 
document. I think that in itself speaks volumes as to the 
importance that this government places on the environment. 
They talk a good talk, Mr. Speaker, but I have to say they don’t 
walk a very good walk. 
 
But before I get into more specifics on what isn’t in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and what could have been, I think, I recently read 
a book by Ray Anderson who’s the founder and CEO of a 
company out of Atlanta, Georgia. It’s called Interface. And they 
are the largest manufacturer of commercial floor covering in the 
world. And that company has embarked on a program of 
sustainable development where they will minimize their 
environmental footprint. Their goal is to completely recycle 
everything they use, Mr. Speaker. They’re well down that road. 
 
There are a number of hurdles that they need to overcome, but I 
listened to their VP [vice-president] of sustainable development 
last November in Saskatoon. And what they have done is, 
through their efforts in minimizing their environmental 
footprint, is they’ve been able to add over $200 million to their 
bottom line. I think, Mr. Speaker, this is a company that we can 
look at, Mr. Speaker, and not only private industry, but 
governments and municipalities can look at what these people 
are doing and adopt some of their practices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what Mr. Anderson in his book does is he gives an example 
that David Brower, the executive director of the Sierra Club, 
did as far as putting time into perspective. It’s actually quite an 

interesting read, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll summarize just a few of 
the points. If from the beginning of time till now, approximately 
four and a half billion years, Mr. Speaker, if you compressed 
that into six days, mankind appeared on this earth on the sixth 
day at 11 minutes and 59 minutes and 54 seconds — just six 
minutes before midnight, Mr. Speaker. So we really haven’t 
been here that long if you look at the total life of the earth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think another comparison, another analogy that Mr. 
Brower talks about is that if the lifespan of the earth at four and 
a half billion years was compressed into one mile, Mr. Speaker, 
the industrial revolution would occupy the last three 
one-thousandths of an inch on that mile of measurement and 
that a human lifetime would only be one one-thousandth of an 
inch. So that puts that into perspective, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, so having set that frame, we realize that in comparison 
to the life of this earth, this planet we occupy, mankind’s time 
really has been pretty short. 
 
But we have done some things to the planet that can be very 
devastating. And, Mr. Speaker, climate change is one of those 
things that we’re seeing the result of, and we need to work at, 
Mr. Speaker. And what do we see in this budget? We see a few 
things, Mr. Speaker, but nothing of any real substance. They 
like to announce projects, Mr. Speaker, much like the hospitals. 
They announce the construction of new hospitals. They’re now 
six or seven times . . . six or seven years in a row before 
actually anything happens, and then we see the costs go up, and 
they’re unable to proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I came across an article in one of the papers out of 
Saskatoon, and it’s an article that was written by the member 
for Saskatoon Greystone where he outlines a number of things 
that this government has done to address the climate change and 
the environmental footprint in this province, but the list is fairly 
small. 
 
On the other side of the page, Mr. Speaker, that member lists all 
the things that Saskatchewan could do. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, there are many things that he listed that I certainly can 
agree with, Mr. Speaker. He mentions things like wind 
generation and cogeneration, Mr. Speaker. One of the things 
that I certainly do agree with, he mentions in one of the bullets 
that I’m quoting, “Remove the barriers that discourage 
individuals and businesses from installing green power 
sources.” 

 
And here’s the important part, Mr. Speaker: “In selling power 
to the electrical grid for a fair price . . .” And, Mr. Speaker, that 
is something that this government fails to do, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s something that needs to be done. It goes on to mention 
geothermal energy and that initiative, and that certainly is an 
initiative that we would support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The last bullet in the list of quite a number of things that the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone mentions, is he says, and 
I’m quoting again: “Involve SIAST in this vision and let’s train 
workers in the manufacture, design, and installation of energy 
conservation systems.” Mr. Speaker, I would add that we 
should probably involve the universities. 
 
And one of the things that comes to mind, I heard the Deputy 



April 11, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

Premier today in the media talking about ethanol. And you 
know, when that government talks about the ethanol industry, I 
always get a little worried because I’m not sure whether he’s 
going to find another school group and rent a big tent and have 
another groundbreaking ceremony. And the only thing that 
became of that is a little hole in the ground near Belle Plaine, 
and well that’s the only visible thing that we see. 
 
But there was immense damage to the ethanol industry, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m told by a number of groups who at that time were 
working with real companies that were involved in the ethanol 
industry, that had some expertise, that were willing to move 
forward, when that government announced their mega-intrusion 
into the ethanol industry, those people, those companies packed 
up and got out of this province as quickly as they could. And I 
would hope that they learned a lesson, Mr. Speaker, because the 
people of this province certainly learned a difficult lesson when 
this government starts to interfere in some of the initiatives in 
the ethanol industry. 
 
But getting back to what the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
said about involving SIAST, and as I said, I would include the 
universities in the vision to train and educate people. 
 
There’s a group in my constituency. They call themselves Blue 
Sky Biofuels, and they are currently working hard to put 
together a fund of money and develop a prospectus to get into 
the ethanol industry. And one of the things, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’ve identified — and I’m sure other people in the ethanol 
industry have also identified — is that if we do build some 
plants, who are we going to get to run these plants? There’s a 
certain amount of technical expertise that’s required, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I mean if these people are serious about the ethanol 
industry, I don’t see any evidence in them taking any initiative 
to address that one item. There are many items within the whole 
biofuels industry that this government has no desire or at least 
no willingness to address, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I was . . . I mentioned earlier 
that I was up last fall, up in Saskatoon last fall to listen to the 
VP of Interface talk about all the practices that their company 
has put into place to minimize their environmental footprint. I 
was sitting at a table of young professionals who are very 
keenly interested in minimizing mankind’s environmental 
footprint. And they have developed a term for those people who 
talk the talk but really don’t walk the walk, particularly when it 
comes to environmental issues, Mr. Speaker. And that term . . . 
it’s greenwashing, Mr. Speaker. And that term fits these people 
across the way absolutely. They greenwash on the environment, 
but they also greenwash on many other issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will not be able to support 
the motion, but I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the few 

moments, very few moments available to us today before we 
adjourn, I’ll just start out by saying . . . To demonstrate, Mr. 
Speaker, how misleading comments from the opposition can be, 
I want to pick up on something that that member just said. 
Anybody watching this will know that that member just said in 
his speech that because of actions of this government, the 
ethanol industry would not survive and thrive in Saskatchewan. 
That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. Yes, he says we chased it 
away. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, Husky Oil is building — and I would like to 
emphasize this — the world’s largest grain-based, the world’s 
largest wheat-based ethanol facility in the . . . the largest facility 
in the world at Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So here we have somebody that gets up in 
the legislature and says that there’s no ethanol industry being 
built, and yet the largest wheat-based facility in the world is 
being built right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now why, 
why would it be, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They like to complain, Mr. Speaker, but 
they don’t like the facts very much. But the fact is the ethanol 
industry is being built in Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan is 
the only province in Canada that has legislated the mandated 
use of ethanol. And yet, Mr. Speaker, that member will get up 
and talk about how nothing is happening in Saskatchewan 
ethanol. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a disservice to Husky 
Oil. It’s a disservice to the women and men that work for Husky 
Oil. It’s a disservice to the province of Saskatchewan and the 
wonderful things that actually happen here. 
 
Then I want to note what else the member said, Mr. Speaker, in 
his last few minutes. He said he went to Saskatoon and he was 
trying to demonstrate that somehow the Government of 
Saskatchewan wasn’t on the environmental file. And what did 
he say? He said he listened to a man that was with Armstrong 
flooring in the United States, and talked about what a wonderful 
job they were doing on the environment, Mr. Speaker. Why 
didn’t he mention, Mr. Speaker, that the uranium companies in 
Saskatchewan are regarded as world leaders when it comes to 
taking care of the environment? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think for a change it would be nice if the 
opposition, instead of their usual doom and gloom, would 
actually get up and talk about the good things that are in the 
budget, the good things that working people and business 
people are doing in Saskatchewan. But no, we just get more of 
the negativity and the false — as I’ve demonstrated, Mr. 
Speaker — gloom and doom that comes out of their mouths. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a much more 
positive message — a positive message from people who 
believe in Saskatchewan and who love Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And I hope to say a bit more about that tomorrow 
when I have the opportunity. 
 
And at this time therefore I’d like to move that the debate be 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2006 

adjourned until tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1108 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1121 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1124 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Mintos Win Western Regional Championship 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
 Reducing Poverty in Saskatchewan 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
 Celebratory Weekend in Moosomin 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
 Engineering Students Display Projects and Creativity 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 A Phenomenal Season for the Wilkie Midget Outlaws Hockey Team 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 Centennial Canoe Quest Wins Saskatchewan Tourism Awards 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 Conditions of Rural Roads 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Lists for Training 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
 Former Member’s Employment with the Legal Aid Commission 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
 SaskPower Investigation of Financial Irregularities 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1113 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1113 
 Funding Allocations for School Divisions 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1113 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1114 
 Allegations Regarding Wascana Rehabilitation Centre 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1114 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1114 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Restrictions on Sale of Crystal Meth Precursors 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 



 

 Bill No. 49 — The Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
 Bill No. 51 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
 Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
 Bill No. 54 — The Cancer Agency Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1118 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1124 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1126 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
  The Acting Speaker (Naming of Member)............................................................................................................................1133 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1133 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1136 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1139 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


