






















































Hansard: October 30, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 3B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 75 
 October 30, 2006 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Duncan.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Debate resumes on the motion 
for an address to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor in 
response to the Throne Speech as moved by the member for 
Regina Coronation Park, seconded by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains, and concurrently on the amendment to that 
motion as moved by the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy and 
seconded by the member for Cannington. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is with much enthusiasm that I enter into the Throne Speech 
debate. The Throne Speech traditionally, Mr. Speaker, is a time 
for all of us in this House to state the vision of the future and 
how we see ourselves getting there. And it’s very, very clear 
that when you look at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, as has 
been said before by previous speakers, this is a presentation 
which identifies four cornerstones for getting the job done as 
we build a future for Saskatchewan families and for 
Saskatchewan young people. 
 
Cornerstone number one, it’s the best place for young people to 
build their better futures and, Mr. Speaker, I’ll come back to 
that a little later. Number two, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
will continue to be a leader in public health care. I appreciated 
the comments of the Minister of Health in that regard to a very 
large extent. Saskatchewan as a leader in a green economy, 
we’ll be hearing more about that from other speakers later on. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, where I would like to go is to the fourth pillar 
— ensuring that Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong 
economy — and to direct the bulk of my attention there because 
that’s what my constituents I think are telling me, that they have 
appreciated what they’ve already heard and where they expect 
that we will go. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me paint a bit of the context for the 
speech and where we’re at here today as we listen to the debate 
here in the House. It’s kind of interesting. What we see is a 
government that is putting forth a positive plan for the future. 
What we see is an opposition interestingly enough, Mr. 
Speaker, an opposition that is more interested in running from 
its record. And, Mr. Speaker, if you listen very, very carefully 
— I’ll come back to the running from the record in just a 
moment — but if you listen very carefully to the positive ideas 
that you will have heard so far in this debate from the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, you would have one great big zero, a big 
void. 

Now it’s kind of interesting and I want to ask the members of 
the Saskatchewan Party and I want to ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to take note of the lack of concrete alternatives 
by the opposition. Interestingly enough they see the Throne 
Speech debate as having one purpose, and that’s to attack the 
government without any alternatives. Why is it that the 
opposition is afraid to tell us where they’re going to go? And, 
Mr. Speaker, could it be because, could it be because they 
intend to go where they have been? Let us be very aware, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a context here. There is a context that the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to be able to benefit from the 
state of the economy today because some things have happened, 
some very positive things have happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province we spent the ’90s paying for the 
debt of the ’80s. That’s what we did in this province. The debt 
of the ’80s, when the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, was a top advisor in the Devine government and left 
this province bankrupt for a New Democrat government to put 
back in order. And we spent the ’90s paying for the debt of the 
’80s. They won’t want to talk about their record there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And is it the fact as well, that they don’t want us to understand 
that if they ever got their hands on the treasury of Saskatchewan 
again, if they ever got their hands on the treasury of 
Saskatchewan again, we know, we know where they would take 
it. Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would reject 
it outright if the Saskatchewan Party dared to tell Saskatchewan 
people what they intend to do if they ever had the opportunity 
to do it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we spent the ’90s paying for the debt of the 
’80s. In the first half of this decade, Mr. Speaker, since the 
member for Riversdale has become Premier, we have been 
putting the economy of Saskatchewan in order and getting 
Saskatchewan in shape to move forward with a sense of 
confidence and with a sense of optimism. That’s what’s been 
happening. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we come today. We come to the time 
now, and we say in this Speech from the Throne that now is the 
time — now is the time — for Saskatchewan families to benefit 
from a state of a healthy Saskatchewan economy with the 
foundation being established by a New Democrat government 
pulling it up from the horrid, horrid Tory years, with the Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party there as their adviser. So, Mr. 
Speaker, there we are — there we are. 
 
So we talk about, Mr. Speaker, we talk about doing what will 
provide benefit for Saskatchewan families and enable young 
people to build a better future in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And we’ve had two concrete examples, two concrete examples. 
 
I don’t know what the Saskatchewan Party heard when they 
went home this weekend. I suspect that they didn’t spend a lot 
of time out and about, Mr. Speaker, because I think they were 
hearing, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan people took note 
of two concrete examples of Saskatchewan families benefiting 
from the state of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time, for the first time in 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

Saskatchewan, there will be a holiday between New Year’s Day 
and Easter Day. Now if there is, if there is, Mr. Speaker, 
anything that I have had a lobby on over the course of the last 
many years about something that Saskatchewan people would 
like to see, they have proposed that there should, ought to be a 
holiday in that long period between New Year’s Day and Good 
Friday. And, Mr. Speaker, because of the state of the 
Saskatchewan economy, because of the good work that 
Saskatchewan families, that Saskatchewan working people have 
done, Saskatchewan people will be the benefactors. There will 
be a Family Day to celebrate the contribution of Saskatchewan 
families, and it will begin on the third Monday, February 19 of 
next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — There it is. And what was the reaction of 
the Saskatchewan Party? Was it a sense of celebration for 
Saskatchewan people? Well then, Mr. Speaker, to make matters 
worse for the Saskatchewan Party, on Friday my hon. 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, stood in his place and 
reported that, because of the healthy state of the Saskatchewan 
economy, we are in a position where we can afford now to 
provide a sustainable benefit to Saskatchewan families and that 
they will be able to pay 2 per cent less sales tax on everything 
they purchase from this day forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now surely, surely, surely you would 
think, Mr. Speaker, that if you were truly interested in what is 
good for Saskatchewan families — what the Saskatchewan 
families want — you would say that’s good news for 
Saskatchewan families. Surely you would say that. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, what I am told — I didn’t hear it — but what I am 
told, interestingly enough, that one of the observers of 
Saskatchewan politics who conducts a daily radio talk show 
says that he found the reaction of the Saskatchewan party 
churlish. Churlish. Well, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of some of 
the members opposite, that means kind of glum, down in the 
mouth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why is it, why is it that when you announce 
that for Saskatchewan people there would be a day to celebrate, 
to celebrate Saskatchewan families and also, Mr. Speaker, as a 
statutory holiday, but also, Mr. Speaker, reduction of sales tax, 
why is one side churlish? Mr. Speaker, I think, simply put, it’s 
because there are two sides in the House today. There is one 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. There’s the New Democrat side 
of the House, the government side of the House, that is focused 
on doing what is good for Saskatchewan. There is another side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker. It’s the Saskatchewan Party side of 
the House, and they are focused on what is good for the 
Saskatchewan Party. There’s the difference. There’s the 
difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the fact of the matter is we have seen already — and I 
forecast that through this session we will see it over and over 
again — this is an opposition that cannot stand good news. 
Good news for Saskatchewan is bad news for the Saskatchewan 
Party. Mr. Speaker, I think they had better get used to it because 
Saskatchewan people are used to good news, and they are going 
to see more good news coming from this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is the hon. 
member from Wood River who just before supper was 
badmouthing his own constituents. I found it . . . It’s an 
interesting thing. It’s an interesting thing that he’ll come here, 
and off the record he’ll badmouth his own constituents. He 
wants an election, Mr. Speaker; he’s going to get an election. I 
say if he . . . if, if, if, if his constituents don’t come to know 
what he thinks about them, says about them when he’s in this 
House off the record, if they send him back, he should get used 
to sitting exactly where he is because that’s the closest he’s ever 
going to come to sitting on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there will be . . . In this 
session of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, we will see real benefits 
for Saskatchewan families, and we’re going to see them a whole 
host of ways. And I’d just like to turn my attention to some of 
those that are relative to my areas of responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is, in Saskatchewan there 
is a craving for something that we have come to value, and that 
is a celebration of quality of life — a celebration of the arts, Mr. 
Speaker, a celebration of the arts. 
 
There is also, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan, we have 
needs here that are felt across the nation. And the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, that in Canada about 40 years ago in 
preparation for the centennial celebration, along with the 
significant support of the federal government of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, there were a number of cultural and recreational 
facilities that were built across the nation. Mr. Speaker, they 
were built about 40 years ago to last 40 years. And here we are 
40 years later. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the 
ministers responsible for sport and physical activity have 
assessed that there is a deficit in the nation of about some $15 
billion. What we have proposed in concert with one another to 
the federal government, this is that the federal government 
become a partner, to join with the provinces and municipalities 
across the nation to engage in bringing the kinds of facilities 
that Canadian people, including Saskatchewan people, need in 
order to enjoy good health in the times in which we live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what was announced in the Speech from the 
Throne is the Building Communities Fund. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this will be an opportunity for some of the projects that are 
looking to be able to move forward in the best interests of the 
good health of Saskatchewan people in order to be addressed. 
And we will be looking, Mr. Speaker, we will be looking for the 
federal government to become a significant partner, to become a 
significant partner with Saskatchewan communities and 
communities across the nation as part of that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the portion of the Speech 
from the Throne that also identifies the status of the artist 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. The truth of the matter is we have a 
number of talented artists here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
a number of talented artists. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that artists — not only in Saskatchewan but across 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

Canada generally — do not make incomes that are anywhere 
near what would be typical of their levels of education. To put it 
in its bluntest and simplest terms, Mr. Speaker, on balance, 
artists, professional artists here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, would have about twice as many post-secondary 
degrees or diplomas as would the general population but 
unfortunately experience only about half of the income. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. 
 
And in this place in which we enjoy quality of life and which 
young people are increasingly looking to opportunities for 
quality of life — including the arts — as they choose where 
they’re going to build their future, we will be moving forward 
on the status of the artists’ agenda including introduction of 
legislation to assist in this regard. And we will be looking for 
the support and the co-operation of the opposition to do that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . okay. I’m 
much encouraged by the hon. member for Canora who has 
indicated his full support. And I welcome that because that 
would be the first thing, the first positive statement. And so let 
me say to the hon. member for Canora that I welcome his . . . 
although it’s off the record, I’m looking forward to his remarks 
in which I’m sure he’ll want to express his support on the 
record and that of his colleagues, I suspect. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn my attention to page 13 of the 
Speech from the Throne entitled, a year of music — 
Saskatchewan on centre stage. Mr. Speaker, on the 
Thanksgiving weekend here in Saskatchewan, something kind 
of special happened; the Rolling Stones came to town, Mr. 
Speaker. And they came to town, and some 90,000 people here 
in the province of Saskatchewan, including the number who 
came from outside of the province, to come to this province to 
take in, to take in this world-class tour of what many would call 
the world’s number one rock group, the Rolling Stones, the 
Bigger Bang Tour. 
 
And it’s kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, because they are 
coming . . . the Rolling Stones came to Saskatchewan because 
of what’s happening in this province next year. How did the 
Rolling Stones come to Regina? And in fact, Mr. Speaker, even 
more impressively how is it, how is it, Mr. Speaker, that here in 
Regina, Saskatchewan there was only one place, only one place 
outside their home town of London, England in the entire 
world, that the Rolling Stones performed two shows on the 
same weekend. Only one place in the world — right here in 
Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I predict that Regina and 
Saskatchewan are now increasingly on the map for top-notch 
entertainment. And you better believe that that’s an attractive 
thing to young people wanting to make their futures here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well it was because when the Rolling Stones decided they were 
doing the Bigger Bang Tour, they knew that they wanted to 
come to Canada. But where in Canada? And what they heard is 
that there is something happening. There is something good 
that’s happening out in Saskatchewan and fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Speaker, because, because four cities — the cities of 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw — joined in 
partnership with the province of Saskatchewan and decided that 

we were going to do something that was outstanding to 
recognize the arts and artists here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and would continue that sense of celebration and 
pride that was part of our centennial celebration, decided that 
we were going to go after a Canadian first. 
 
Truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, in 2007 for the first time, all 
of the major music awards in Canada are happening right here 
in Saskatchewan — right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the 
Rolling Stones here because they knew that there was 
something happening in the world of music. What they knew 
was that in April, the Juno Awards which will be televised to 
some 250 million households worldwide are going to be held in 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. They knew, Mr. Speaker, that in 
September the Canadian Country Music Awards were going to 
be held in Regina, Saskatchewan. And they knew, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Western Canadian Music Awards, for the first time in a 
city that is not one of our major cities — but I’ll tell you she’s 
going to be a bang-up effort — will be held, the Western 
Canadian Music Awards will be held in Moose Jaw, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, hang on to your hat because it ain’t done yet. 
I’ll guarantee that in 2007 this will be the place for music. This 
is where it’s happening. You talk to musicians in any province, 
in any territory, at any level, Mr. Speaker, and they will tell you 
that if you’re interested in music, if you like having a good 
time, if you enjoy a party, there’s one place to be in 2007 and 
that is in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — But it’s not all about fun, Mr. Speaker. 
Yes, we’re going to have fun. We’re going to have fun, and 
we’re going to welcome people from across the nation. They 
will come and they’ll visit. And they’ll spend their money here, 
and they’ll watch on their televisions, and they will appreciate 
that there is something happening in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But in addition to that my friend and colleague, the Legislative 
Secretary to the Premier, will be offering her advice as to how 
we build the music industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ll recognize it. Not that long ago, Mr. Speaker, the film and 
video industry in Saskatchewan was virtually null and void, but 
because of government policy it has become a thriving industry 
that has made a difference economically and has affected a 
number of communities in our province. And it is with that 
same intention to take advantage of the talent that we have in 
our province that we will be looking to move forward in the 
music industry to make it a part of the economic development 
story in the province of Saskatchewan as well, and that will be 
happening in the year 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And so, Mr. Speaker, as I prepare to take 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

my place, and I summarize why it is that I am so enthusiastic 
about this Speech from the Throne, this statement about the 
future, this statement about positive alternatives, this statement 
about plans for Saskatchewan families to continue to benefit 
from a sound and solid economy — this place, Mr. Speaker, 
where young people, young people can build a better future, 
where they can take advantage of the Saskatchewan advantage, 
the Saskatchewan advantage for young people where there are 
jobs aplenty; Mr. Speaker, where there is music aplenty; Mr. 
Speaker, where they can afford to insure their cars with the 
lowest rates in nation; Mr. Speaker, where they have the best 
access in the nation if not on the continent for Internet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the Saskatchewan advantage for young 
people. That is part of why I am confident and optimistic about 
the future of Saskatchewan and that this Speech from the 
Throne will be an important part of building our future. For all 
of those reasons and because, I will listen with interest as the 
Saskatchewan Party continue to run from their record. They 
continue to hide what they would say that they would do if they 
were ever given the right to turn over to . . . given the keys to 
the treasury of the province of Saskatchewan. They are scared 
to tell us. They are running from their record. 
 
We’re proud, Mr. Speaker. We’re working for Saskatchewan. 
They’re working for the Saskatchewan Party. There’s no doubt 
which side I’m on. I’ll be voting in favour of the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to reply to the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker. And after what we just listened to, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not sure whether I’ll be quite as energetic and 
quite as boisterous as the member opposite, but I know the 
member opposite always enjoys these debates and certainly 
livens this place up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think perhaps for a bit we’ll try and bring a bit of reason, 
Mr. Speaker, to this debate and perhaps put some real 
comments, legitimate comments, on the record rather than a lot 
of political rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, although we may have to 
indulge in a bit of that. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly like to congratulate 
our youngest, our newest colleague, our youngest and newest 
colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy for the great 
speech that he gave this afternoon in the Assembly. It was 
certainly a . . . he set the bar high for future members, Mr. 
Speaker. And if that’s an indication of what’s to come from this 
young member, I think we are in for a lot of good things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the text of the Throne Speech, I 
thought I would like to make a few comments on the Minister 
of Finance’s announcement on Friday of the cut to the sales tax, 
Mr. Speaker. I looked at some of the headlines and articles in 
the papers from the weekend, and there’s a couple that caught 
my eye, Mr. Speaker. 

One, the editorial page of The StarPhoenix headline is, “Sales 
tax cut cynical ploy.” And they go on to talk about how 
desperate this government must be to come up with a 2 per cent 
sales tax at this time when as late as last spring’s budget they 
said they couldn’t afford it and they weren’t going there. And 
the Finance minister talked about and was questioned during the 
summer months about a cut to the PST [provincial sales tax], 
and he at that time had indicated he had no intention of doing 
that. In fact I understand that the Premier two weeks ago didn’t 
even know that his government was going to be doing this, and 
here at the 11th hour they try to pull a rabbit out of the hat, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But the other article that caught my attention is again in The 
StarPhoenix. It’s a column by Randy Burton, and the headline 
is “Tax cut signals NDP panic.” And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s exactly what this tax cut is. 
 
In the last six months, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a couple of 
polls taken that are public. One is a regional poll, Mr. Speaker. 
It occurred near the end of June, and it occurred in the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, Mr. Speaker, when this 
government, this NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
opposite, finished third in the polls, Mr. Speaker. I think my 
colleague made reference to it earlier this afternoon. I think we 
could aptly call this 2 per cent tax cut as the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy tax cut. And so if that in fact is the case, Mr. Speaker, I 
think the people of this province should look forward to another 
cut in the PST or perhaps some other tax cut, and we’re going 
to call that the Martensville tax cut, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as columnist Randy Burton has pointed out, this is 
nothing more than a government that’s in desperation mode. He 
asks some very legitimate questions in his column. He says, did 
the Minister of Finance and this government look at other 
options that perhaps would be more beneficial to the overall 
economy? Did they do any analysis on spending a similar 
amount of money in cutting property taxes? And I would guess, 
Mr. Speaker, that the answer is no. I think they looked at the 
simple political fact that more people pay PST than pay 
property taxes, and so that’s what they were going with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When I look at this year’s Throne Speech, I thought a Throne 
Speech is a government’s vision for the next year. So in order to 
judge this year’s Throne Speech, I thought I should go back and 
look at last year’s and particularly in the environment area 
because we hear many times about . . . these people across the 
way are the defenders of our environment. They’re the green 
party in Saskatchewan. Well there is a real Green Party that 
actually does have a real grasp on environmental issues and is 
putting forward some credible environmental policies, Mr. 
Speaker, but these people prop themselves up and pretend that 
they’re the protectors of the environment. 
 
So what did they say, Mr. Speaker, in last year’s Throne 
Speech, comments pertaining to the environment? Well he 
talked about a green strategy. They’re going to be bringing 
forward their green strategy. Well they underwent a year and a 
half or two years of work which culminated in a series of public 
meetings around the provinces on various issues dealing with 
the environment. In last year’s Throne Speech, they said they 
were going to be rolling this green strategy out. Well has 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

anybody seen it yet? No. The answer is no. When I asked the 
Minister of the Environment this spring, in the spring sitting, 
where they are with their green strategy, well he said he hoped 
it’s going to be coming forward. Was it even mentioned in this 
year’s Throne Speech? No, not a word, Mr. Speaker, not a 
word. 
 
Last year’s Throne Speech, they talked about a climate change 
package. So they’re going to develop this climate change 
package to deal with a number of issues, and the biggest one of 
course is greenhouse gas emissions. Was there mention of it this 
year? Not a word, Mr. Speaker. Again they prop themselves up 
as the protector of the environment, and yet when it comes to 
bringing some concrete plans forward, we see nothing. 
 
So what are some other organizations that are knowledgeable in 
this area have to say about this government, Mr. Speaker? Well 
just recently the David Suzuki Foundation issued their 2006 
report, and it’s the 2006 Status Report of Provincial Climate 
Change Plans. So what does that report say about 
Saskatchewan? Well I’ll read you what it says, Mr. Speaker. It 
says Saskatchewan remains the Canadian jurisdiction with the 
fastest growing greenhouse gas emissions and the highest per 
capita emissions in Canada of some 62 per cent above 1990 
levels — 62 per cent above 1990 levels. We’re the highest per 
capita jurisdiction in Canada. And is there a plan? In bold print, 
Mr. Speaker, “No climate change plan . . .” These people have 
no climate change plan. Yet they’re the protectors of the 
environment, and they’re going to make all these good things 
happen in the environmental field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what have they got? Well the Suzuki people say 
Saskatchewan doesn’t have a plan, but they merely have a 
perspective. Well what does that mean, a perspective? Well 
they have some sort of an idea that maybe climate change is 
something that should be addressed, and maybe someday we 
may do something about it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
that’s good enough. I don’t think the people of this province 
think it’s good enough. 
 
But in order to compare what’s happening in Saskatchewan, see 
how we measure up . . . I mean the people have already told us, 
but what do they say about other provinces? Well let’s have a 
look. Let’s have a look, Mr. Speaker, what the same report says 
about Manitoba. It says Manitoba, our neighbouring province 
— governed by an NDP party — what are they saying? What 
are they doing? They have “A reasonably strong climate change 
plan . . .” Manitoba has “A reasonably strong climate change 
plan . . .” 
 
What has Saskatchewan got? Nothing. They go on to say that 
Manitoba’s plan is possibly the most ambitious or their 2002 
plan was probably one of the most ambitious in Canada. I 
believe in this year’s report Quebec came out with a new plan, 
and I believe they’re rated as probably the strongest plan. 
 
Well what about that neighbour to the west of us? You know 
the ones that the people across the way don’t really like that 
much and perhaps they’re fairly envious of? What do they say 
about Alberta, Mr. Speaker? Well they say that at least Alberta 
has a plan. These people aren’t entirely happy with the plan, but 
they do have a plan. And they say, interestingly enough, one of 
the strengths is that it’s “A promise to buy 90 % of government 

power from renewable resources.” The Alberta government has 
made that promise. What do we hear? Have we heard anything 
similar from these people? Not a word, Mr. Speaker. Not a 
word. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at how Saskatchewan stacks up 
to our neighbours out to the East and the West, I’m afraid we 
don’t stack up very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we heard last year that they’re going to work on this climate 
change plan and address this whole area of climate change. 
They don’t even mention it this year because they haven’t got 
any idea of how to really go about it I would think, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One other thing — so last year what else did they say? They 
talked about the forestry sector, and they’re going to work with 
the industry to capture new opportunities. Well I wonder how’s 
that going for them, Mr. Speaker. How’s that going for them? 
Ask the people of Hudson Bay and Carrot River how it’s going 
for them. I think the people there are saying don’t help us; 
please stop helping us because, if you help us, we’re going to 
lose more mills. I think that’s what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year though, they said, well we’re determined to continue 
to help. So the forestry operation that we do have, that’s still 
operating in this province, I’m guessing . . . I hope I’m wrong, 
but I’m guessing by the end of this year or at the very earliest, 
longest, the middle of next year, we may not have a forestry 
industry left if these people continue to work the way they are, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:30] 
 
So then what was the . . . What else did they say in last year’s 
Throne Speech in the environment area? They talked about 
agroforestry. And you know what they said they’re going to do, 
Mr. Speaker? They’re going to convert, over 20 years, they’re 
going to convert 10 per cent of all of Saskatchewan’s arable 
land to agroforestry. And this year they said, well we’re going 
to enhance our plan. 
 
Well let’s see how they’re doing. Ten per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s arable land is somewhere over 3 million acres. 
So how are they doing, Mr. Speaker, with this agroforestry plan 
of theirs? Well I haven’t got the latest numbers, but I’m 
guessing if they’ve got 2,000 acres in agroforestry we’re doing 
real well. 
 
So how long is that going to take? If we’re going to convert 
about 3 million acres, and if we’ve only got 2,000 acres over 
the last couple of years, we’re somewhere about five 
ten-thousandths of a per cent along our way. So we’re really 
moving down the road here. I mean we’re, you know, I think 
perhaps we’ll see the next ice age before we see their plan in 
effect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one other thing. The Throne Speech talked a 
little bit about agriculture and talked a bit about highways. And 
highways, Mr. Speaker, is one thing in my constituency that is a 
very controversial issue. And I should tell you what this 
government has done to some of the highways in my 
constituency, particularly Highway 22 between the junctions of 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

No. 6 and No. 20. This is a chunk of highway . . . We’ve got a 
grain terminal there. It’s used by many producers to deliver 
their grain. There’s heavy traffic on that chunk of highway, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s been in a state of disrepair for the last six or seven 
or eight years. 
 
And what’s the answer? What is their answer, Mr. Speaker? 
The people of the area have been asking that this government 
does something about this highway. And so for six years they 
haven’t done anything, you know. But finally this summer they 
did something. You know what they did, Mr. Speaker? They 
turned it back to gravel. That’s their answer. A busy highway 
where you have 40 semis a day, perhaps, crossing that highway. 
And I’m not exaggerating because the majority of grain 
deliveries to the terminal situated along that highway come in 
from over that . . . from the west, over that stretch of highway. 
 
On hot summer days I’ve been over that highway in the middle 
of the day. There’s so much dust there that you’d think you’re 
in a snowstorm. It’s an unsafe highway. School buses travel that 
highway. People of Earl Grey are fearful that we don’t have a 
tragic accident because of the unsafe driving conditions. 
 
Within the last three weeks, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a couple 
of very serious accidents. Luckily no one was killed. One of the 
accidents an individual, because of the dust and the heavy 
traffic, lost control, spun off into the ditch, hit a power pole, and 
the communities in the areas were without power for several 
hours, Mr. Speaker. That’s the answer that these people have 
for highways. 
 
Another highway in my constituency, 310, between Balcarres 
and Ituna, the people of that area have been asking of this 
government to do something about it for many years. That 
highway extends on up to Foam Lake so we . . . I think that 
highway’s been in the news enough that I don’t need to describe 
the condition of it. 
 
What is the answer of this government? Well we’re not going to 
fix it unless local governments pony up and put some money 
into helping fix the highway. It seems to me, isn’t that a 
provincial government’s responsibility, to provide the 
infrastructure so that people can travel safely, children can 
come to school, that business can do what they need to do, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
But no. What do they do? They say no, we’re not going to do 
anything unless you folks put some money into it. And so what 
they’ve effectively done is they’ve pitted council members one 
against another within councils. They’ve pitted one RM [rural 
municipality] council against another, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
created hard feelings within the area, and then even if the area 
begrudgingly says, well I guess this is the only way we’re going 
to get our highway fixed . . . And one RM led the way. They 
didn’t agree with it but they felt this was the only option they 
had. They’re levying an extra mill a year for five years to help 
fix this highway. 
 
Even after all of that, what are they told? Well okay, we may 
look at the highway. We may fix a couple of kilometres a year. 
It’ll take another 14 years to do 30 kilometres or some such 
thing, Mr. Speaker. By the time they get one end of it done, the 
other end will be wore out, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s the direction of this government, Mr. Speaker. But to 
top it all off, Mr. Speaker — as I mentioned we’ve got an RM 
that’s levying one mill per year for five years to help fix the 
highway — what do these people who are digging deeper into 
their pockets to not only look after their municipal needs but 
now help fix a highway, what do they see in their newspapers in 
their mailboxes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Look, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine? Can you imagine, Mr. 
Speaker? Can you imagine $300,000 spent on an ad campaign? 
That $300,000 could have been put into fixing highways, Mr. 
Speaker, but no, they launched off on an imaginary ad 
campaign that, at the end of the day, is it going to help? I don’t 
think so, Mr. Speaker. In their document they say, they explain 
that the way equalization works and that the . . . there’s a 
formula that works on the basis of a province’s ability to raise 
its own revenues. And then what do we do because of political 
desperation? They weaken that position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for all those reasons that I’ve outlined, Mr. 
Speaker, I certainly cannot support the main motion and I 
certainly will be voting for the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased this evening to join with my 
colleagues of the legislature in the Throne Speech debate. I 
want to first recognize and thank the member from Coronation 
Park for the delivery of the Throne Speech late yesterday, and 
to the member from Wascana Plains for seconding the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to extend my appreciation and congratulations to the 
member from Weyburn in the delivery of his maiden speech in 
the legislature, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not an easy task when 
you are first elected to this Assembly, and to get up and give a 
speech in the Assembly and so, Mr. Speaker, I extend my 
congratulations to him as well. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, to say first and foremost that I am very 
proud on two fronts. I’m very proud, Mr. Speaker, to be the 
member from Yorkton, and secondly to be a member of the 
Legislative Assembly on this side of the House in government. I 
say, Mr. Speaker, to be proud to be a member of the Yorkton 
constituency because we have in our part of the country, or east 
side of the province, a city that’s alive, that’s growing and 
thriving and inclusive, modern and progressive. 
 
Outstanding services in a regional area, Mr. Speaker, which is 
not unlike what happens around the province in many of our 
regional centres where we now have dialysis machines, we have 
CT [computerized tomography] scans, we have state of the art 
long-term care facility in our community, a bank of pathologists 
today that are working out of our health care centre, a full team 
of surgeons, Mr. Speaker, and many, many family physicians 
that are now coming and working within our environment in the 
city area. 
 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

New schools in education, Mr. Speaker, over the last 15 years, 
brand new schools. The first joint-use school facility in the 
province is in our community. The SIIT, the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Indian Technology, in our community, Mr. Speaker, 
providing educational services to Aboriginal people. A program 
called Dream Builders that brings young people — Aboriginal 
and non — working together to enhance and expand their 
knowledge base; and a very, very extensive community college, 
Mr. Speaker, that provides post-secondary education to people 
in the region. 
 
And certainly a very vibrant retail centre, Mr. Speaker, with all 
the box stores and the tremendous amount of activity that 
happens on the retail side, a vibrant downtown, an active 
downtown, Mr. Speaker, with new buildings and a library and a 
new look that the city has just provided in the last little while. 
 
A state of the art recreational facility that is probably the finest 
recreational centre in Western Canada in our city that was built 
over the last couple of years, the Gallagher Centre. A casino, 
Mr. Speaker, and some extensive industry and that of Grain 
Millers which is an international company doing business out of 
our community, Morris and Leon’s which are outstanding 
community industrial leaders, Premium Brands which is an 
international meat packing plant, and of course just recently 
Louis Dreyfus and also . . . [inaudible] . . . have now come to 
our community, Mr. Speaker, bringing 100 jobs, $200 million 
of investment into our community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that says to me, Mr. Speaker, that in our community in east 
central Saskatchewan we are alive and vibrant and busy, which 
is exactly the same picture that is painted across the province on 
many, many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I’m so proud 
to be a part of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because 15 years ago in this province, Mr. Speaker, you 
couldn’t cash a cheque — you couldn’t cash a provincial 
cheque, Mr. Speaker, because the opposition party or the 
government of the day, the Conservative government of the 
day, had bankrupt the province, Mr. Speaker. And many of 
those members, Mr. Speaker, who were responsible for the state 
of condition of this province still exist in the opposition party of 
the opposite, Mr. Speaker. They’re still here. 
 
And there are many members, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly 
today who sit in the opposition who were strong participants 
and involved in that administration to a large degree. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that there are 50 per cent of the 
members who sit opposite today were very much involved in 
the activities of the Conservative Party of 1980s. They’re still 
there, Mr. Speaker, and they’re involved in a variety of different 
ways, Mr. Speaker, and participating in that. And I can provide 
that for you, Mr. Speaker, as they can. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people have 
made a huge sacrifice. Saskatchewan people made a huge 
sacrifice and so today this is why we, in fact, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes well, Mr. Speaker, that is 
exactly right. The member from Weyburn says he was only five 
years old or seven years old. He was only one year old. He was 
only one year old, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s exactly what the Leader of the Opposition said. He 

was far too young, Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party 
or the Conservative Party was in government. He was far too 
young to have any influence. He was 27 years old, Mr. Speaker, 
exactly the same age as the member from Weyburn today who 
arrives in the legislature who’s making decisions on behalf of 
the province, who’s involved, Mr. Speaker, in engaging in 
public policy, who’s involved today in providing leadership in a 
constituency who people trust. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition says, you can’t blame me for 
being involved in the 1980s because, you know what, I was too 
young. I was too young to be involved in that process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say that the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, was 
groomed in Conservative politics. He was groomed in 
Conservative politics. And today he brings them into this 
legislature and he espouses the virtues of the ’80s every day 
with the team of men and women who are conservatives as 
well, Mr. Speaker, conservative members who hold the same 
ideologies and practices of the 1980s. And we see it every place 
today when we look at the kinds of policies of which they 
espouse. And I will provide some of that information for the 
member from Canora-Pelly in the next couple of minutes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to say that this Premier and this government, Mr. 
Speaker, through the course of the, over the last five years, have 
provided opportunities for this province, Mr. Speaker, that are 
outstanding. It didn’t happen by accident, Mr. Speaker, as the 
member from Canora-Pelly speaks on many occasions, that we 
have a new tax regime in Saskatchewan. 
 
It didn’t happen by accident. It’s because the Finance minister, 
this Premier, and the member from Massey Place, they’re the 
ones who conducted the personal income tax reduction in this 
province. They’re the people who helped, Mr. Speaker, in 
changing the royalty structures in this province . . . the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton. That’s how it happened, Mr. 
Speaker, not by accident. It was by design is how it happened, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the new tax policies that we have today as they relate to the 
taxes, the tax cuts that we have today in the sales tax, they 
didn’t happen by accident, Mr. Speaker. They happened 
because there has been a process in this province, a process of 
rebuilding the structural design of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so today we have a tax cut. Why? Because we can afford a 
tax cut, because we’ve rebalanced the taxation piece in the 
province of which this Premier has provided that kind of 
leadership over that period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all along the way . . . And the member from Canora-Pelly 
and others over on the other side of the House will say, well it 
happened by accident. Didn’t happen by accident, Mr. Speaker. 
It happened through design. And through that very same period, 
Mr. Speaker, we have unprecedented expenditures in health 
care, unprecedented expenditures in health care, unprecedented 
expenditures in education, unprecedented expenditures, Mr. 
Speaker, in transportation. Why? Because we’ve built a 
province today, Mr. Speaker, that we brought from the ruins of 
the 1980s of which we had a Conservative government in 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

Saskatchewan of which many of the members still today reside 
in the party opposite, Mr. Speaker, I would say. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that our economy has never been stronger. 
Our economy has never been stronger in this province, and it’s 
time for us to give things back to Saskatchewan people as 
we’ve been giving back to Saskatchewan people. 
 
[19:45] 
 
I hear on a regular basis that there are people who are leaving 
our province. Mr. Speaker, I was in Mossbank a couple of days 
ago. In Mossbank, Saskatchewan, 10 brand new people living 
in Mossbank, Saskatchewan, who’ve come here from other 
parts of Canada. I was in Assiniboia, and in Assiniboia, 
Saskatchewan, 20 brand new people have moved to Assiniboia 
from all over Saskatchewan, or from all over Western Canada, 
have moved to the little community of Assiniboia. I was the 
other day, Mr. Speaker, in North Battleford. You can’t buy 
commercial property in Battleford today, Mr. Speaker. Why? 
Because it’s been purchased by people who are coming to do 
business in Battleford, Saskatchewan. 
 
I was in Swift Current 10 days ago, Mr. Speaker, and you can’t 
find a piece of real estate for sale in Swift Current. Why? 
Because there isn’t any available. Because there is a huge boom 
happening in Saskatchewan. When you come to the 
constituency of which I come from, and the member from 
Canora-Pelly and the member from Kelvington, there are 100 
new families who’ve moved to our area within the last five 
years — 100 brand new families who have taken up business in 
our area, who are today farming in our communities and are 
making a difference. 
 
And all we hear from the members opposite is that there is no 
activity going on in Saskatchewan — absolutely wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. We have all kinds of growth happening in every 
community in the province. It is demonstrated by those 
communities who are making a statement today about it 
happening. 
 
I hear the members opposite on a regular basis saying, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is no investment happening in 
Saskatchewan. We have in the city that I’m from today, Mr. 
Speaker, two brand new companies that have arrived in our 
community, who said to us that we are going to build 
state-of-the-art crushing plants in our city. And we have $200 
million of investment in our city today, Mr. Speaker, because 
they say that Saskatchewan is the best place to do business. 
 
And I have a quote, Mr. Speaker, from that of Mr. Brant 
Randles, who is the president of Louis Dreyfus. And what does 
he say to the members of the Saskatchewan Party and the 
people of the province? He said that “establishing the plant in 
Saskatchewan was also prudent, said Randles, suggesting that 
the tax situation for processing in this province is ‘the best in 
Western Canada’”, Mr. Speaker. It’s the best place in Western 
Canada to do business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talked to the members of James Richardson 
International, Mr. Speaker, who put the province to the test in 
the canola crushing plants, what did they say to us? They said, 
when we compared you against North Dakota and we compared 

you against Brandon, Manitoba, and when we compared you 
against the plant that we have today in Alberta about where 
we’re going to do business, where did we come? We come to 
Saskatchewan to do business because it is the best place, the 
best climate in Canada to do work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats says that it’s about having 
canola. Yes, it is about having canola for sure. But when you 
speak to them, they say it’s more than about having canola. It’s 
about having the best tax policy incentives in Canada, and that’s 
why they’re there, and you should have a conversation with 
them. And that’s exactly what they’ll say to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hear on a regular basis from the members opposite about the 
fact that we have in this legislature . . . old and tired. Well you 
know what? When you add, when you add, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Take the average of the members who sit opposite on the other 
side of the House and compare them to the members that sit on 
this side of the House, and you’ll find that the average age of 
the members on the other side are the ones that are old and tired 
because it’s a greater number, Mr. Speaker. That’s a greater 
number. So just add it up, Mr. Speaker, and you’ll see where 
the old and tired is. It’s right over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you take a look at where those members have 
travelled over the last 20 years, you’ll find that they travelled in 
the Reform Party. You’ll find that they travelled, Mr. Speaker, 
in the Alliance Party. You’ll find, Mr. Speaker, that they are 
long-time conservative supporters of the previous 
administration. You’ll find that they make contributions today 
to the federal government members. You’ll see them at their 
annual meetings, Mr. Speaker. You’ll see the federal members 
in their annual meetings. You’ll see them doing things 
collectively together. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we got 
conservatives across the way today that are exactly the same ilk 
as the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we will be sure on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, as 
long as we are here and as long as we continue to have voice in 
this province, that we will expose them for who they are. We’ll 
expose them for who they are. They’re members of the 
Conservative Party of the past and hold exactly the same 
philosophies, and they’re evident, Mr. Speaker, in the brochure 
that was circulated, in the brochure that was circulated just a 
couple of days ago in the member from Silver Springs. 
 
The member from Silver Springs has circulated around his . . . a 
couple of weeks ago had circulated in his riding, Saskatchewan 
Party: Building from Strength. Darn right, building from 
strength, Mr. Speaker, building from strength because in 
Saskatchewan today we have the strongest economy. And we 
built it here. And finally, the Leader of the Opposition says, we 
finally built a province from strength, and it’s time for us to 
take it over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what will we do when we’re the government . . . if we ever 
become the government? Well this is what we’re going to do, 
Mr. Speaker. This is what the Leader of the Opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, the old conservative guy who was 
groomed in conservative politics, where he says, I’ve learned a 
lot having served under Grant Devine. Well this is what he’s 
learned, Mr. Speaker. He’s learned exactly the language of 
Grant Devine. And you can pull the history. You just look at 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

their history record, and you’ll see exactly the same language. 
 
And this is what he says. He said we’re going to have smaller, 
less intrusive, more efficient government. Remember Grant 
Devine when he was going to have smaller, less efficient 
government where he’s going to reduce the Regina services and 
put them out in small parts of Saskatchewan, exactly the same 
language — smaller, less intrusive, effective government. 
 
I want to know from the Leader of the Opposition which 
government departments is he going to be cutting. Who is that 
he’s going to be cutting? The member from Saltcoats tells me 
that it’s going to be Rural Development offices. Is that what I 
hear you say? Which government departments are we going to 
be cutting, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And then he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, then he goes on in his 
third bullet to say, we’re going to reduce government spending. 
Well that’s exactly what Mr. Grant Devine said. He said, you 
pick me and you know what we’re going to do? We’re going to 
reduce the spending in government 15 years ago in a way in 
which you won’t even recognize it. And we’ve heard, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, the past leader of the 
opposition from Rosetown, where he says, you know what? We 
know where the skunks and the deadwood are. That was his 
comment. We know where the skunks and the deadwood are. 
 
And you know what? The thing about this leader, Mr. Speaker, 
is he’s a little bit more articulate. He doesn’t talk about the 
skunks and the deadwood in the way in which the leader from 
Rosetown did. He’s a little smoother about that. But what he 
does say, Mr. Speaker? He says exactly what Grant Devine 
says: we’re going to reduce the government spending and we’re 
going to cut government. And I want to know from the 
opposition members opposite, which government departments 
do you have on the block that you’re going to be cutting? Let us 
know. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The member from Yorkton has 
a couple of times . . . And I bring it to his attention at this 
moment that ought to direct all of his remarks through the Chair 
and not directly across the floor. The member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s you that 
I wanted to look at mostly and speak, Mr. Speaker. You’re 
right. I will be speaking directly to you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say on the third bullet or the fifth bullet of this 
document that was prepared for the Saskatchewan Party — 
which has the same stench of the Conservatives of the ’80s, Mr. 
Speaker — and it says this: a strong, social safety net which 
will protect those who truly need support; those who truly need 
support, Mr. Speaker. It was exactly the very same 
Conservative government in the ’80s that slashed the 
non-government agencies in the province, and I know it 
because I worked in it, Mr. Speaker, and we were one of the 
agencies that received the wrath of the ’80s. Because you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? You know what, Mr. Speaker? Because we 
truly weren’t . . . we truly need the support. 
 
I want the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the new 
conservative party, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan, to tell us 
who it is in Saskatchewan today who is receiving public 
services that don’t need it. Who are those people that don’t need 

it, Mr. Speaker? Tell us who they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this further, Mr. 
Speaker. We have, Mr. Speaker, today, we have today, Mr. 
Speaker, a group of men and women who are the most 
significant apologists for the federal government that we’ve 
seen in a long time, a long time, Mr. Speaker. We have now 
apologists across the way. 
 
And you pick the subject area, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Saltcoats, the member from Saltcoats Melville is chirping again 
out of his chair. But he’s the guy, Mr. Speaker, who on a 
regular basis called for us to be going to Ottawa to fix the 
60/40. He’s on record saying it should be 80/20, as are a 
number of the other members saying they’re on record for 
80/20. And you know what he’s going to say when we get to 
the agricultural policy? He’s going to say it should be 60/40. 
Why? Because that’s his brethren of which he’s supported out 
of Ottawa today, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re going to hear 
from him. 
 
And what about, Mr. Speaker, the piece that’s happening on the 
infrastructure work where we have said that we need to get the 
equalization piece fixed? What’s happened across the way, Mr. 
Speaker? How many letters has the member from Swift Current 
written to the opposition leader or the government leader in 
Ottawa? How many letters has he written? How many times has 
he travelled to Ottawa, like he called on when the Liberals were 
in power, to fix the equalization piece? I’d like for him to 
produce that. And I bet you, Mr. Speaker, we won’t find any. 
Why? Because this is an apologist party — a conservative 
apologist party — for the Conservatives in Ottawa. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, you 
need to stand up for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You need to 
stand up for Saskatchewan and help us build an economy like 
we’re building in the province today. If they say, Mr. Speaker, 
on the other side of the House that in fact they want to see a 
difference, they should be voting for this Throne Speech. They 
should be voting, Mr. Speaker, for the fact that we’re going to 
add more spaces in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They should be applauding the people of the province for 
getting a 2 per cent tax cut because they deserve it, because 
they’ve experienced the wrath of the ’80s of which their party 
in fact created the kinds of decimation on Saskatchewan people. 
They should be applauding it. 
 
And they should be voting, Mr. Speaker, for a public holiday in 
Saskatchewan, additional public holiday, of where you can 
recognize men and women who roll the economy or keep the 
economy rolling in this province. They should be supporting 
that, Mr. Speaker. And they should be supporting a green 
economy where you have ethanol plants and biodiesel plants 
that are springing up in all of their constituencies across the 
province. 
 
And what do we hear them say? There shouldn’t be any public 
money putting into those affair, in any of those, when in fact 
it’s their constituencies, Mr. Speaker, who are asking for it to 
happen. How can you in fact be that disconnected? 
 
And the member from Saltcoats says, is that right? Well he just 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

needs to attend the meeting in Neudorf like I did the other night 
where members opposite in their own constituencies were 
asking, where are they? And they would have heard clearly and 
loudly that what those people in that constituency want is they 
want some support, as they want support in Tisdale, as they 
want support in Shaunavon, as they want support in Unity. 
 
People in their own constituencies are saying, wake up and 
smell the coffee, boys and girls, because the reality is, is that in 
order for us to build the green economy we need to have some 
public support. But they’re not there, Mr. Speaker. Why? 
Because this is a conservative party. This is a conservative 
party, Mr. Speaker, that addresses and speaks to the issues of 
Ottawa. And I say this, Mr. Speaker. As long as we’re in 
government on this side of the House and we have enough 
energy to make a statement in Saskatchewan, we’re never going 
to trust the treasury in the midst of those conservatives, Mr. 
Speaker, because we know what happened the last time they 
had a go at it where they decimated the province. And that’s 
why we have today, Mr. Speaker, 27-year-olds in this province 
who are carrying debt. My children and the member opposite 
from Weyburn’s going to carry debt for the next 15 or 18 years 
because of what his party contributed to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I’m not going to be voting, Mr. Speaker, for the 
amendment and will be supporting a Throne Speech as it’s 
progressive, creative, expansive, and is going to build a new 
economy in Saskatchewan in a new era because that’s where we 
are today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to stand in this, my place in this Assembly 
today to address the issue of the Throne Speech as it was 
presented by His Honour a couple of days ago in this Assembly. 
 
But first of all, I’d just like to comment a little bit about the 
constituency of Moosomin and a number of the activities that I 
had the privilege of being a part of and a number of issues that 
people have been dealing with, some that they’re beginning to 
see some work being taken place on. 
 
And first of all, I’d like to talk about the community of 
Moosomin and the new hospital that that community has been 
working for for years and the number of announcements that 
this government made in regards to the construction of the new 
facility, the facts that the community and surrounding area have 
worked very diligently to raise the funds. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when the government finally got 
around to getting the tender let, we ended up with a 30 per cent 
cost of the project which meant the community had to go and 
find more funds to put in their facility. So while the people of 
Moosomin and surrounding area are more than pleased — in 
fact on a daily basis, they drive by the site just to see how work 
is progressing — it’s somewhat irritating that in rural 
Saskatchewan, rural residents have to contribute such a high 
capital expenditure in order to achieve the health care that they 

are so looking for. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as well, the community of Windthorst 
this year celebrated its 100th year — its centennial anniversary 
year. And I would have to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that as 
rural communities go, the community of Windthorst certainly 
was second to none when it came to celebrating their 
anniversary. They celebrated with pride. They committed 
extensive hours to planning for this weekend. 
 
And I know that each and every individual who came back from 
all parts of Canada and certainly other parts of North America 
found this to be a wonderful time of getting together, renewing 
acquaintances with family and friends. And so a special thank 
you to Mayor Tim Dew, the council of Windthorst, and the 
many volunteers who made this such a successful centennial 
weekend. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And as you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t know if 
there is very many people in this community or in this 
Assembly who are not aware of the red paper clip and the 
exposure the town of Kipling has received as a result of the red 
paper clip and how that event . . . Actually two major events 
this summer drew people from all across Canada and the United 
States, in fact, Europe. We had a film crew that had come 
through from the world soccer finals cup in Germany, stopped 
off in Kipling for the red paper clip day, and then were on their 
way for the blast-off of the space shuttle in Florida. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, here again was a community with 
an economic development officer that had done some major 
work in enticing the young gentleman who had begun the trade 
of red paper clips and presented him with a house in the 
community of Kipling. And as a result of that, we are beginning 
to see a lot of interest from groups and individuals, small 
businesses who are looking at Kipling as maybe a place to 
invest in because of the services that community provides, and 
as well because of the type of spirit that the community has and 
certainly the work that council and all the volunteer groups 
have done. 
 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, we can talk about the Wolseley 
arts guild and their most recent arts and crafts show. 
 
And I would also like to acknowledge the fact that twinning of 
No. 1 Highway is now complete to east of Whitewood, and 
certainly people in that area on the east side of the province are 
beginning to reap the rewards of their labour, their hard-earned 
work. And that twinning project, while there has been a number 
of difficult issues we’ve had to deal with over the years and the 
planning as the highways had to move and in some cases move 
individuals and make arrangements for those individuals to 
have their homes moved or their yards changed, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the twinning of No. 1 Highway is something that will 
be an economic boom for not only eastern, the eastern part of 
the Moosomin constituency, but all of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to say however, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
despite all the warnings that were given to the Department of 
Highways and all the questions that were raised about the 
intersection of No. 9 and the No. 1 Junction, while the 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

department had indicated that the new twinning project would 
make it a much safer junction at Whitewood, we have found, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that this is anything but the case. In 
fact there have been four major accidents at that intersection in 
the short time period that the twinned section of No. 1 has been 
open. And I would suggest, Madam Deputy Speaker, that had 
the Department of Highways and some of their officials spent a 
little more time really assessing the junction there of No. 9 and 
No. 1, we may have alleviated a number of the problems that 
have continued to crop up as a result of how that junction was 
designed. 
 
I would also like to make a mention of and congratulate the 
many mayors and reeves and councillors, many incumbents and 
many new members who were elected to councils across the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I think as we have seen in the 
Moosomin constituency, a number of communities this year 
actually had active races and actually had elections where 
people had to get out and cast their ballot to elect members to 
council or elect reeves or new reeves or mayors. It speaks well 
of democracy in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
However, as we get into the Speech from the Throne and I 
listened with interest to the member from Moose Jaw North and 
the member from Yorkton and, Madam Deputy Speaker, it 
seems to me that they have selective memory. It certainly 
appears that part of their memory, there’s certainly blanks in 
that memory capacity of the two members or many of the 
members that have spoken in regards to what they like to 
remember and what they like to forget about. The fact that when 
I talk of selective memory and I really . . . Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it just seems to me that this government has certainly 
been fond of playing with the truth when it comes to, especially 
when it comes to the economy of the province of Saskatchewan, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we talk about finances. We talk 
about . . . I believe it was the member from Moose Jaw North 
and the member of Yorkton I believe may also may have 
mentioned . . . I think when I talked about selective memory, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I talk about the fact they like to go 
back to the ’80s. However maybe I should remind them as well 
that prior to the ’80s, there was also a period of time where 
governments were not running surplus budgets. It depended on 
how you reported the funds. 
 
And the members are very well aware of the fact that one of 
their own members, Madam Deputy Speaker, in this Assembly 
stood up and acknowledged the fact that the provincial 
government in 1982 went to the polls and by manipulating, by 
drawing funds from the Crowns and putting into the general 
fund, they left the view that there was a surplus available, while 
at the same time they put the Crowns into a major deficit 
position. 
 
And a former member of this Assembly acknowledged that was 
actually the truth, Madam Deputy Speaker. So that’s why I say 
it’s interesting to listen to the members and their selective 
hearing. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague talked about the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan. And I think my 
colleague from Cannington raised the issue of debt. And when I 

talk about this, I go back to the Speech from the Throne, and I 
also go back to the announcement the other day from the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
And I believe the Speech from the Throne they talk about 13, 
13 consecutive or surplus budgets in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And yet the Provincial Auditor is pointing out 
the fact that since 1991 there have been actually seven deficit 
budgets that have been presented. That doesn’t look like 13 
surplus budgets unless their ability to . . . their math isn’t the 
same as the Provincial Auditor’s or the member’s or mine, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
It would seem to me that at least you could be somewhat more 
honest with the people of Saskatchewan. And I think as the 
Provincial Auditor has tried to point out time and time again, 
it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan understand the 
total picture of government. 
 
Now one of the areas that I think needs to be raised very 
significantly when you look at the provincial budget and when 
you look at the total liabilities of government, back in 1991 the 
total liabilities of government was 17.6. Today they’re over 21 
billion. And what’s very significant and should be of major 
concern to many people in the public sector, in fact many 
individuals who will be retiring in the near future, is that this 
NDP government has allowed the unfunded pension liability to 
grow from $2.7 billion of deficit to 4.3 over the last 15 years. 
 
I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is significant because at 
the end of the day, while it may not be something you have to 
deal with today, someone is going to have to deal with that 
issue, and it’s important that the individuals involved or the 
individuals who may be impacted are aware of that fact. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and the member from Moose Jaw 
North talked about no new ideas, but he forgot to talk about 
population loss. He talked about how . . . And the member from 
Yorkton talked about their achievements and the population 
growth. And yes, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some 
families that have moved into the province. There are a number 
of families that have moved into my area. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, the bottom line is more families 
have moved out than have moved in. In fact the unfortunate part 
about all of this, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I hear it every 
day, is parents are watching as their young, their young people, 
the young and bright individuals in the province with their 
university education that we have helped them achieve, are 
leaving the province because of the lack of real opportunity in 
this province. And as a result, I must admit that maybe the 
public holiday that the government recently announced is one 
that many people are going to welcome because it gives them 
an opportunity again, Madam Deputy Speaker, to actually go 
and visit those young people that have left the province, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, this government in the Throne 
Speech talked about hard work and sacrifice in the following 
decade to restore the provincial fiscal foundation. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t this government. It was the people of 
Saskatchewan. And yes, Saskatchewan residents are hard 
workers, and they’re dedicated to building their communities. 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

They’re dedicating to pouring the funds into the services they 
need to provide the economic well-being for their community. 
And yes, they played an important part in helping, and will 
continue to play an important part in building this province, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the other day we had the Finance 
minister lower the provincial sales tax. And no one’s opposed to 
a sales tax reduction. In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, the one 
thing I guess we could add is we wonder why it took them so 
long to actually adopt another part of the Saskatchewan Party’s 
plan of reducing the taxes. In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan need to know that in 2003, following 
the 2003 election, which government actually increased the tax. 
Which government actually put their hand in the back pocket of 
the taxpayers and increased the tax? This government. So while 
they’re taking credit for reducing the tax by two percentage 
points, from seven to five, they actually increased it from six to 
seven. So however, Madam Deputy Speaker, a reduction is a 
reduction, and all Saskatchewan people at the end of the day 
will be more than, more than happy for it. At the end of the day 
however, it doesn’t mean that much to them. 
 
But let me say this. I think when it comes to it, it’s . . . A 
well-known columnist I believe has put it very accurately when 
he says, “It may sound a bit cynical, but maybe we owe former 
cabinet minister Kevin Yates a big ‘thank you’ for yesterday’s 
massive provincial sales tax cut to five per cent.” And thank 
you, Mr. Yates. Thank you, Mr. Yates. 
 
“And maybe [Madam Deputy Speaker] a few congratulations 
should also go to new Saskatchewan Party MLA Dustin Duncan 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy.” And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
may remember that by-election that was held last June, a 
by-election where the NDP kept telling their supporters, we’re 
on the way up, and we’re going to win this by-election. In fact 
you just watch us. Well everybody watched them, and where 
did they go? They went to a position they’ve never had. The 
home of Tommy Douglas, and they came in a poor or distant 
third. And I would think, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 2 per 
cent sales tax has more to do with how poorly they did in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy than it has to do with actually doing what 
was right for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the columnist goes on to say: 
 

The NDP government’s spin doctors can argue all they 
want that this is all about sharing Saskatchewan’s 
newfound prosperity with the families of the province — 
the theme of Thursday’s throne speech — but when a 
government cuts the sales tax a year before the election, 
it’s really about getting re-elected. 

 
He also goes on to say: 
 

But when you provide Saskatchewan people with what 
was likely the biggest single-day tax cut they’ve ever 
enjoyed and when you do it as a ministerial statement in 
the middle of the fiscal year and outside the confines of a 
budget, you are making a statement about something else. 
 
As much as Friday’s tax cut was about the NDP getting 
re-elected, it was also about Premier Lorne Calvert 

holding on to his leadership in the face of criticism that he 
has been too timid, too indecisive and too myopic. 

 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, “The first challenge for both 
Calvert and the NDP was to stop the bleeding.” That’s what this 
columnist said, the first challenge was to stop the bleeding. And 
that’s what the holiday was all about, and that’s what the tax 
reduction at this time was all about — to stop the bleeding. 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ll see whether or not Premier 
Calvert and this government’s been able to stop the bleeding. 
 
One other comment I’d like to make that was made by this 
columnist: “After all, what makes great politics often makes . . . 
pretty bad government policy.” And it says: 
 

There are obviously reasons for the public to be 
legitimately concerned about how sustainable these tax 
cuts are — especially given that the first thing the Calvert 
government did after getting re-elected in 2003 was to 
hike the PST in the 2004 budget to seven per cent from six 
per cent. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s one of the issues or one of the 
concerns that I actually heard on the street when I was on my 
way home the other day. So it goes to show you that I believe 
the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to look a little more 
carefully at government policy, what they say, and what they 
do. 
 
As we come back to the Throne Speech, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and we look at the commitments . . . And I believe the 
member from Moose Jaw North talked about no new ideas from 
the opposition. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, who’s 
government? Who’s responsible today to lay out a vision for the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleagues and our leader, we’ve 
been laying out a vision. We’ve been laying out a very 
systematic vision. Now we may not have put all the pieces in it 
yet, but they are being laid out. But this government had 15 
years, and how well have they done? How well have they done 
at laying out a vision that people can really believe in and catch 
a hold of? 
 
I’d like to just quote another quote from one of the columnists. 
In fact he says from the Speech of the Throne: 
 

In fact, short of the commitment . . . to spend all the gas 
tax collected (about $370 million this year) on highway 
operational and capital spending . . . there really wasn’t 
much of anything new in terms of government policy. 
 
Most of the supposed highlights — expanded literacy 
programs, a continued freeze on . . . tuition, more training 
opportunities . . . 
 

Fully funding the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] agricultural income stabilization program long 
ago had been announced. I find that very interesting. The 
minister of Moose Jaw North asked for what our ideas were. 
The columnist, the well-known columnist says there really was 
nothing new. So I can understand why the member from Moose 
Jaw North is looking for new ideas, because it would seem to 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

me if there were any new ideas, and the few there were, they 
really came out of the 100-point policy book the Saskatchewan 
Party has had out for the last three years, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Premier, through the Lieutenant 
Governor, announced that there were four foundations, four 
cornerstones for their government’s agenda. “Make 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures.” Well that sounds like a policy that 
Saskatchewan Party has had for a number of years now. 
“Strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in [improving] public 
health care while reducing wait times and improving access to 
services.” That sound’s like a policy the Saskatchewan Party 
has had for a number of years. “Advance Saskatchewan as a 
leader in environmental protection and the green economy.” 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, ensuring that today’s 
“Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong . . . economy.” 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these four cornerstones that the 
government lays out as something new really in reality are 
nothing new, and unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan are 
still looking to see exactly what this government means when it 
talks about new cornerstones, new ideas, or new vision for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s one thing though I would like to just make a comment 
on. The Premier and this government talk about investing in 
training. They talk about expanding training opportunities to 
meet market demands. They talk about: 
 

[unveiling] a new partnership between business, labour 
and our training institutions to provide counsel to 
government to meet Saskatchewan’s evolving labour 
market needs; and [to] strengthen and expand our regional 
training model to bring education closer to students and 
better link training to learners, job-seekers and employers. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we can agree with those points 
because, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
brought out a number of ideas in that regard and my colleagues 
have already laid out a number of points that could be followed. 
And it’s interesting to note that what the government’s talking 
about, as I mention again, certainly isn’t much different than 
what the Saskatchewan Party has already laid out. 
 
But I would like to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, when this 
government talks about strengthen and expanding our regional 
training programs, Madam Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it’s unfortunate that it’s taken this government 15 
years, 15 years to finally realize that many of our regional 
colleges actually have been doing this for the past 15 years. 
 
Let me talk about the Southeast Regional College. One of the 
programs, the home care aide program that has been involved in 
Whitewood for, been hosted in Whitewood for the past number 
of years has been full every year. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
every time, every time, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I have 
been at one of their graduations, everyone of the individuals 
that took that program graduated from the program with a job 
that they were already prepared to go to. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, there are so many other issues that 
could be raised in regards to this Throne Speech. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, what I have found that regardless of what this 
government has done, the people of Saskatchewan have moved 
beyond the NDP government and their policies. And I would 
like to thank the people of Saskatchewan for their resolve to 
move forward despite the inability of this government and the 
NDP Premier to actually bring a real vision to help grow the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will not be . . . unable to 
support the Speech from the Throne. We will be voting in 
favour of the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First 
Nations and Métis Relations, the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would like to, I would like to begin my remarks as 
many others have, Madam Deputy Speaker, by first of all 
congratulating the member from Regina Coronation Park, and 
of course I also want to also congratulate the seconder, yourself, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the member from Regina Wascana 
Plains who moved and seconded the Throne Speech and did a 
very, very good job. Both speeches were very good and as I say 
I want to congratulate you. 
 
I also want to say just from the on-set that I’ll be speaking in 
favour of the main motion and of course speaking against the 
amendment as put forward by the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. But when I say that, in saying that as well, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, along with others I want to take the 
opportunity to congratulate the new member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy for a victory there, well-deserved, and congratulations 
to him and his family. I know it will be a new and an interesting 
experience for him. 
 
As well I’d like to say — talking about family — many others 
have said in this Assembly and it’s very true that these jobs are 
difficult at times, and we really do need the support of our 
family. So I want to take this opportunity to thank my family as 
well — my wife Virginia and my two children, Mayson and 
Meika who . . . By the way, I don’t know if they’re watching or 
not, but my son is celebrating his seventh birthday tonight. And 
the irony of that is that some members in this legislature, on 
both sides of the House, will remember exactly seven years ago 
tonight when we were in Ottawa making a frantic trip back to 
Regina so that I could take part in my son’s birth here in 
Regina, and we made it on time. So anyway, that was a great 
experience. 
 
I’d like to as well just very briefly thank my constituency 
assistant, Elaine Yaychuk back in Meadow Lake who has 
served me extremely and exceedingly well. She does a huge 
amount of work for me, and I am deeply appreciative of that. 
 
I want to get into the sort of the, a bit of the meat of the Throne 
Speech. I, being one of the members who was first elected back 
in 1991, I can remember some of the incredibly difficult 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

decisions that were made on behalf . . . I should say as a 
government that we made in trying to reduce expenditures when 
we felt that there was literally no capacity anymore to squeeze 
departments or community-based organizations any tighter, but 
being told really by our bankers that we had to reduce 
expenditures further. We had a province that was literally on the 
verge of bankruptcy that we had to go through so many difficult 
decisions. And when I look back and realize that we’ve now 
brought the province’s finances together and in a good standing 
after 10 years, it is in my view quite a feat that we have 
accomplished. 
 
And I find it a bit ironic, you know, I listen to sometimes the 
public, but most often members opposite, who say that you 
know that’s the past and we shouldn’t talk about that anymore. 
And you know my background is financial, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and I’m often reminded of the circumstance where you 
would see somebody who would have a $200,000 mortgage 
they might have borrowed a number of years ago. And coming 
in, if you could imagine, coming into their banker and saying 
you know I know I owe you $200,000 and I know there’s a lot 
of accumulated interest, but that’s in the past. I don’t want to 
talk about it anymore; therefore let’s get over it. I’m not going 
to pay it. 
 
I mean it’s the most ridiculous argument that you could ever put 
forward that we shouldn’t remember what we’ve gone through. 
And the fact that we still owe a huge amount of money . . . We 
pay something — I don’t know — it’s in excess of $500 million 
I think a year just in interest on that debt that was accumulated 
during the 1980s. It is nothing short of amazing that most of 
these people across the way would want to say that we should 
forget about it, Madam Speaker. It isn’t any wonder that you 
hear members like the member from Wood River saying just 
get over it; let it go. 
 
And after we put our fiscal house in order, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, under — I hasten to say — the Premier’s very good 
leadership, we put our economy in order. And that really, over 
the last five years, has brought us to where we are today. 
 
And there were major changes in those five years. We reformed 
the income tax structure in Saskatchewan I think in a way that 
Saskatchewan has never seen before. We made major changes 
in royalties and improvements that were put in place for the oil, 
gas, and mining sector. 
 
We’ve made major changes to the business tax structure to the 
point where when new businesses are starting here in the 
province there’s no corporate capital tax, and the corporate 
capital tax on existing businesses are reducing. And those who 
are expanding there are far less corporate capital tax. And that’s 
a huge step forward, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the oil and gas revenues clearly, clearly have helped us, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. But I want to say that even though 
they’ve helped us, I would argue many of the changes that I’ve 
just talked about here that in fact have allowed the oil and gas 
sector to expand in Saskatchewan and have really been the root 
cause of why we’ve had the revenues that we now do. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it goes almost without exception to say that all 
of these changes that I’ve talked about from 1991 those 
members opposite voted against them every single time. Every 

positive change that we enacted they voted against it. 
 
I think of one exception, and that’s the former member from 
Kindersley who actually voted in favour of one of our budgets 
one time, and I give him credit. And maybe when he comes 
back here not too long from now in the next three or four years 
when the next election’s called, when he comes back in 
opposition again he might be able to vote in favour of one of 
our budgets in the next five or ten years again. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, I think now that our province is really 
well positioned for growth . . . and you know I saw testimony of 
that actually this past week and in my own local newspaper on 
the front page. We have an initiative by the chamber of 
commerce that is seizing upon some of the opportunities that 
we think our community has. 
 
And in fact we have affordable housing here in Saskatchewan. 
We have — as many have talked about — some of the most 
competitive tax regimes in all of Canada right now. And, 
Madam Speaker, I noted in our paper just this past week there 
were two families actually who have moved from Fort 
McMurray into my community of Meadow Lake and are now 
commuting back and forth. And I will argue that you will see 
more and more of that. Housing sales in my community of 
Meadow Lake last year exceeded the year before by quite a 
significant amount, and in fact these people have often 
upgraded to another house I’m told by the real estate agencies. 
There isn’t a sell-off of housing. In fact the housing prices have 
stayed exactly where they have been, so it shows a lot of 
confidence in our community even given some of the tensions 
that are currently existing in the forestry sector. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I want to, if I could, just quote a couple 
of independent observers if you will who have talked about 
what’s going on in Saskatchewan right now. And this is from 
David Pryce, the vice-president of the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers, who said that: 
 

Pryce said [and I quote] the Saskatchewan government 
also deserves some credit [as I’ve just indicated] for the 
increased oil and gas activity in the province. 
 
“Look at what Saskatchewan has done over the past four 
or five years. They started with the royalty (reduction) 
initiatives, they moved to enhance oil recovery initiatives, 
[and] . . . then just recently the (business) tax changes. 
 
“All of those are important signals to the investment 
community that here’s a province that’s trying to maintain 
its competitive edge.” 
 

That’s in the Regina Leader-Post, of June 16 of this past year. 
 
From Roger Thomas, senior vice-president of Nexen Canada, 
on CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.], he said: 
 

We have a long association with the province of 
Saskatchewan. And as far as I’m concerned, it’s a great 
place to do business. They’re very entrepreneurial, very 
. . . [responsible]. And they understand the oil and gas 
business very well. 

 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

The Fraser Institute, I don’t quote them very often, but they say 
that: 
 

Western Canadian governments . . . all have dramatically 
reduced personal income taxes and business taxes . . . with 
improved investment climates, lower taxes, and generally 
more vibrant economies. The fortunes of Western Canada 
will continue to rise . . . Saskatchewan [note 
Saskatchewan] . . . has now joined Alberta and British 
Columbia by pursing the strong pro-growth, incentive 
based relief. 

 
That’s from the Fraser Institute. In 2006, Nesbitt Burns stated 
that “Saskatchewan was also one of only two provinces to 
exceed the national growth for five years in a row; the other, of 
course, being [our neighbour to the West] Alberta.” 
 
Statistics Canada reports that 17 of 18 major economic sectors 
contributed to Saskatchewan’s growth last year. And this is not 
just an oil-driven boom, which further reinforces the remarks 
that I made earlier, Madam Deputy Speaker, about the changes 
that this government has put in place to ensure that we have a 
strong, vibrant and diversified economy. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, that brings me then to what I think really 
is the basis for this year’s Throne Speech, the four cornerstones 
or the four pillars, if you will, of the Throne Speech that will I 
think allow young people the opportunity to at least choose and 
stay here in our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our first cornerstone is to “Make 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures.” And I see more and more and more of that 
happening across the province. And as I travel through the 
different communities, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m convinced 
that this will happen in greater and greater numbers into the 
future. 
 
And we are going to “Strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in 
improving public health care while reducing wait times and 
improving access to services.” We want to “Advance 
Saskatchewan as a leader in environmental protection in the 
green economy.” And we’re going to “Ensure that today’s 
Saskatchewan families benefit from our strong economy.” 
 
[20:30] 
 
All of that, Madam Deputy Speaker, particularly the last point 
when we talk about our Saskatchewan families being able to 
share in this strong future, led us to the announcement by the 
Minister of Finance just the other day — the 2 per cent sales tax 
reduction. And I do want to say that this applies to all the items 
that it did before, but there was no expansion. 
 
I’ll point out for our Finance critic in the opposition 
Saskatchewan Party again who, unbelievably, as the critic of 
Finance last year apparently was of the view that we charged 
sales tax on groceries — we’re not charging sales tax on 
groceries. Never have. We don’t charge . . . there’s no sales tax 
on gasoline fuel or gasoline car gas, which I think he thought as 
well. That’s never . . . We’re not charging on that either. 
There’s been no expansion, and it’s all been reduced down to 5 
per cent. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, another issue that was raised here . . . I 
think it was by the current member from Kindersley who was 
talking about the Canadian Wheat Board with apparently some 
authority, and I think he probably does know a little bit about it. 
But I’m not sure he understands the process of democracy very 
well. He was arguing that even though 51 per cent plus have 
voted in favour of a Canadian Wheat Board, that the other 49 
per cent — I suspect it’s somewhat higher than that but — 
shouldn’t be restricted to a single marketing desk. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you know, it defies logic as far as I’m 
concerned if you just very . . . if you think about the process 
that brought that very member to this Chamber — a democratic 
process, a democratic election that elected that member. Now I 
suspect he got something over 50 per cent in Kindersley. I 
know I did in Meadow Lake as well, but I know he did quite 
well in Kindersley. That would suggest that that member should 
not have any right to represent his constituents in this Chamber. 
He should not have a right to vote on legislation that comes 
forward because there’s some number — not the majority but 
some number — who disagree with him being in this Chamber. 
It’s the same logic that he uses for arguing that the Canadian 
Wheat Board, that farmers, through an election and a 
democratic process, have said that they want a single-desk 
marketing board, the Canadian Wheat Board, that they should 
. . . for those who weren’t in favour of that, they should have a 
second option. 
 
Madam Speaker, I couldn’t disagree more categorically than I 
am now. I think that argument just completely, completely 
defies logic. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to, as well if I could, get a 
little bit into the area that I’m responsible for — one of the 
portfolios — that’s the Department of First Nations and Métis 
Relations. 
 
When I travel around the province — and I think I have visited 
almost every single First Nation in the province and probably 
most of the Métis communities in our province — I listen to the 
members opposite, and I hear them talk in circles, and smoke 
and mirrors about how they support, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the Kelowna accord. And then in the same breath, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, they talk about how wonderful last spring’s 
budget by the federal Conservative Party of Canada was, what a 
wonderful budget it was. 
 
If anybody paid much attention to what that budget actually did, 
it literally ripped the heart out of the Kelowna accord. And you 
only have to travel across this province and talk to First Nations 
and Métis leaders to understand what that last federal budget 
did to the Kelowna accord. Now they can say all kinds of 
wonderful things about what they’re going to do to replace the 
Kelowna accord, but I can tell you that virtually nothing has 
been done to replace the many, many gains that our first 
ministers and Aboriginal leaders came together — many, many 
accomplishments that they brought to the table and brought 
together under the Kelowna accord. It literally rips the heart out 
of that Kelowna accord. So how that Saskatchewan Party can 
say they support the Kelowna accord and at the same time 
support a federal party that pulls all of the funding and pulls all 
of the programs out of that accord is literally unbelievable, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, they criticize our government for 
not doing enough as it relates to First Nations and Métis people 
across our province, and you know I will be the first to 
acknowledge that there is so much more that we have to do. But 
let me run through for you just a short list of some of the things 
that this government has done in a very short period of time. 
 
I think of last year when the Minister of Finance stood up in his 
place, just for one off-the-top, and talked about how we were 
going to break some of the jurisdictional barriers. We are going 
to now provide some paving into, access into First Nations 
where we’ve never gone before, and that is starting to happen, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Last spring we provided I think it was about $900,000 for the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, no legal 
responsibility, but I would argue as a province we have a 
responsibility to train and education all of our young people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the treaty land entitlement framework 
agreement is seeing literally unprecedented successes. I travel 
across the province, my colleagues — and my counterparts, I 
should say, from other parts of Canada — often look to 
Saskatchewan to see what we’ve done as it relates to treaty land 
entitlement. Now I know not every province obviously has 
treaties or treaty land entitlement, but they look very, very 
favourably on what Saskatchewan has done. 
 
We’ve put in place the economic development program, the 
First Nations and Métis economic development grant program 
through our department. That’s $20 million that has been really 
over-subscribed, it’s been so popular. 
 
In Crown Investments Corporation, we have the First Nations 
and Métis equity fund. We have the Entrepreneurial Fund. We 
have the Aboriginal employment development program that has 
now over 70 different partnerships, and they have been hugely 
successful in employing young Aboriginal people across our 
province. 
 
And I would argue in addition to the Aboriginal employment 
development program, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the 
achievements in that program are a bit hard to measure because 
what we have done through that program . . . I shouldn’t say 
what we have done, but what those who have signed into this, 
the partners who’ve signed into this, it really has provided 
cultural awareness which is I think probably the most important 
part of that program, provided cultural awareness for employees 
and employers and even for many of the young Aboriginal 
employees, whether they be First Nations or Métis, because 
many of those young employees say to me, we don’t really 
understand our roots and we want to know more as well. So I 
think it has achieved success that goes far beyond measuring 
just numbers, and I think that’s a very important component that 
we need to pay attention to. 
 
And of course in the Department of Health, we continue to 
work with many of the First Nations on their individual 
initiatives. In the Department of Environment, we’ve 
announced the First Nations resource management system 
program. In Highways, in addition to what I’ve already talked 
about, the Premier last year announced the Roads to Prosperity, 
the government’s northern economic development 

infrastructure strategy. 
 
I was talking to one of the members earlier and some in here 
might be aware, this past fall, in September, I actually took the 
opportunity to drive all the way from my community, from my 
community in Meadow Lake, all the way up to Stony Rapids. 
And it really is quite an experience to drive there and realize 
what some of the people have had to endure. So when people 
here complain about roads, they have no understanding of what 
it’s really like. 
 
And I’ll wrap up my remarks shortly here. What I wanted to say 
is that in that northern strategy, Mr. Speaker, it’s a seven-year 
initiative. I actually had the opportunity to see some of the work 
that was being done. And believe me; the people up there really, 
really appreciate it. 
 
So I realize my time has drawn to a close, and I will wrap it up 
simply by saying that I will of course again support the main 
motion and vote against the amendment. And I’m thrilled to be 
a part of this government that is advancing such a positive 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
stand in my place this evening and speak to the Throne Speech. 
 
First I’d like to thank a few people. I’d like to thank my family, 
my wife and my three children for putting up with me as a 
politician. As we all know, members have a considerable time 
away from home as we carry out our duty for our constituents. 
My youngest daughter is still at home, and my eldest daughter 
is going to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology] in PA [Prince Albert]. And my son who just 
graduated from high school this past spring, like so many other 
young people, is working in Alberta. He’s working for a 
plumber who is a Saskatchewan-based plumbing business who 
basically doesn’t have any work to do in Saskatchewan, and 
he’s got projects in Grand Prairie, Alberta where my son is 
working. And after that project is done, they likely will be 
moving on to British Columbia to work on projects there. 
 
So I’d like to thank my family, and I’d also like to take the 
opportunity to congratulate the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who made an outstanding speech in his maiden speech, 
and certainly this member of the legislature will have a real 
great future in the future Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
I’d like to speak a bit about my constituency. My constituency 
boundaries run very close to Saskatoon, so I have communities 
like Vanscoy and Delisle and Langham who basically are 
bedroom communities. Many people live there and work in 
Saskatoon. They’ve had various challenges concerning their 
infrastructure, their sewage and water, and they’re slowly 
working their way through. But that has been a real, real 
challenge. 
 
I would like to congratulate the new mayor of Langham who is 
a supporter and who is certainly looking forward to his duties as 
mayor of Langham in the future. 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

Other communities in my constituency are the community of 
Borden. And they have . . . They are progressive. They have 
developed a number of lots in the community and attracting 
new people to live in the community. And many of those people 
are working in Saskatoon. They have the fortune of still having 
a school, which is not the case with the community of Radisson. 
Radisson, which is 12 kilometres down the road from Borden, 
lost their school and like other communities are trying to attract 
more people to the community. But once you’ve lost your 
school and lost your hospital, it’s very difficult to attract people 
to the community. But they are working together to do that, and 
they have also opened up many serviced lots and are beginning 
to attract people to their community. 
 
Further down Highway 16 you come to a community of 
Maymont which has a very lovely school, was built five, six 
years ago. But unfortunately the population in there is dropping, 
and we don’t know how long that school will remain viable 
without a number of new students to come into the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a community called Cando which I 
represent. But in this last year, it has basically been, basically 
been shut down, has become part of the RM of Rosemont so is 
no longer a town, and that’s very unfortunate. Cando’s been a 
thriving community for many, many years. 
 
At the other end of the Biggar constituency is the community of 
Wilkie. The community of Wilkie, like so many other 
communities, has been having problems keeping young people 
in the community. The community’s got behind a number of 
ventures and a pelleting plant which has been very successful 
and other ventures that they’ve been working on. But they are 
struggling, and it’s a real challenge for that community to stay 
viable into the future. 
 
I’m from the town of Biggar. Biggar is the largest community 
in the constituency, and it has been doing very good in recent 
years. We’ve had a couple of scares with the CNR [Canadian 
National Railway] announcing they’re going to close the 
bunkhouse and the division point in the community, but the 
CNR backed down in their decision and hopefully they remain 
in the community. We have Prairie Malt which is a large 
employer and a very important part of the community, and we 
have a greenhouse which is under new ownership and 
management which is doing well, and also a manufacturing 
business which builds environmental tanks. Of course we also 
have a number of retired people in the community. And in all 
the constituency, the agricultural side is a very important part of 
the economy of the Biggar constituency. 
 
Now when we talk about agriculture, it’s a great problem 
There’s many people, many farmers are going out of business in 
the constituency of Biggar. Grains and oilseeds side has been 
hurting for a number of years, and this year did have a better 
than average crop, better than average quality, and prices seem 
to be getting a little higher. But it’s certainly going to take a 
number of years of excellent crops and excellent prices to offset 
the financial hardship that’s taken place in the agriculture 
sector. 
 
[20:45] 
 
The same thing in the livestock industry, as we’ve seen, there’s 

still the after-effects of the BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] crisis. The cow-calf people have been doing 
better than the feedlot industry. But certainly there’s a number 
of challenges in the livestock sector as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concern is that the governments — the past 
Liberal federal government and the current NDP government of 
Saskatchewan — has not been doing enough to help the 
agriculture industry in Saskatchewan and in the constituency of 
Biggar. Farmers need an improved crop insurance plan that 
works. As we see, so many people have been dropping out of 
the Saskatchewan crop insurance because of the high premiums. 
And it just hasn’t been an adequate program. It hasn’t been a 
sustainable program for many farm operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course the farm support programs such as CAIS 
has been, well, less than adequate. Certainly the farming and 
agriculture industry has been looking towards this plan to help 
them, but it’s unfortunately been very inadequate in a number 
of areas. First of all, a number of farmers who are retiring or 
sell down their inventories seem to be able to trigger a payout. 
Young farmers who are growing their business both in grains 
and oilseeds and livestock do not get a payment because they’re 
increasing their inventories and they’re growing their farms. 
And that certainly is not fair because both sectors of the 
agriculture economy has had many losses. And the CAIS 
program has not been adequate in that. 
 
Now as we’ve seen, the NDP government has not announced 
fully funding CAIS until the very last minute. And this certainly 
has been a problem to the agriculture sector trying to go to a 
bank to obtain loans to carry on for another year when it’s 
always in doubt whether there’s going to be an adequate 
funding to the CAIS program. 
 
Now under the new Conservative federal government, there’s 
been a number of changes which have improved the program 
certainly, but talking to my MP [Member of Parliament] and the 
MPs on the Conservative government, they have said when the 
NDP government goes to the table to negotiate, they try to 
negotiate less money for the Saskatchewan farmer. They’re not 
concerned about the Saskatchewan farmer in any way. They’re 
only worried about their own pocketbooks. As far as the 
government and their . . . Really it’s on the backs of the 
agriculture community, and it’s hurting the agriculture 
community. 
 
Instead of going to the federal government and negotiating for 
more money for the Saskatchewan farmer, this NDP 
government and this Agriculture minister goes there and leads 
the charge to pay less into CAIS, to make changes to CAIS so it 
pays out less, not more. And that certainly is a very unfortunate 
thing to have seen this NDP government do in the past number 
of years. 
 
And of course, all we see from this government is, in the 
Throne Speech, is the discussion about the Canadian Wheat 
Board. Well, Mr. Speaker, trust me. Farmers at night don’t lay 
awake at night worrying about whether the Canadian Wheat 
Board exists or is going to survive. They worry about their 
survival economically, and it’s not whether the Canadian Wheat 
Board’s going to survive or not. That’s the last thing on their 
minds. 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2006 

And the agriculture industry is in a terrible shape under . . . 
while we’ve had the Canadian Wheat Board in place. So this 
whole debate that the NDP government are going to bring to the 
legislature in the future, it’s certainly a red herring and really 
deflects what’s really out there in the agriculture community, 
the problems that exist. And the debate over the Canadian 
Wheat Board is really unfortunate rather than discussing the 
real issues that exist in the agriculture community. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, the real problem that we have in this 
problem is the under-subsidization of agriculture for the 
Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers. The Saskatchewan farmer 
is fighting the world subsidy war against the European and 
American treasury. And that’s something that this government 
does not understand, is not willing to stand up and fight for the 
Saskatchewan family farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s quite clear that in this Throne Speech 
what we have here is a document which quite frankly is just an 
act of desperation. And I’ll give you an example from The 
StarPhoenix written by Randy Burton. The heading is “Tax cut 
signals NDP panic.” I’d like to read some lines from this article 
which really outlines what’s going on with this NDP party. 
 

Everybody likes lower taxes, but the real tough tax 
problem we have in Saskatchewan is property taxes. All of 
us can reduce our sales tax expenditures simply by 
adjusting our discretionary spending. We have no choice 
about paying property tax. 
 
However, getting the education portion of the property tax 
down is a much more complicated issue, since it also 
involves the actions of public school boards across the 
province. 
 
So if you’re a government in need of some help at the 
polls, a sales tax is the quick way to buy some support. 
 
The question is, how much trouble does it take to 
[promote] . . . a tax cut in the middle of the year? 
 
Quite a lot, actually. [It goes on to say] Recent soundings 
of public opinion show that the NDP government is on the 
ropes. 
 
Environics Research Group periodically surveys the public 
across the country to see what’s going on between 
elections. The company’s latest poll conducted in June has 
the Saskatchewan Party attracting 53 per cent of decided 
. . . [vote], compared to 24 per cent for the NDP and 19 per 
cent for the Liberals. 
 
If a 29-point spread is even close to accurate, it’s just not 
trouble for the NDP, it’s [a] disaster. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order please, 
members. Order, order. 
 
A member, while speaking in the Assembly, should not have to 
yell to be heard if the member has the floor. And I would ask all 
members to respect the member’s right to use the tone of voice 

that he feels comfortable with, and that’s got to be said in a way 
that the Speaker and anybody that might be listening can hear. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Bigger. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I was speaking 
about how desperate the NDP is because of the poll results and 
the reason why they brought in this 2 per cent reduction in the 
PST and announced a holiday in February. 
 
Well certainly nobody can complain with a holiday. I think 
families in Saskatchewan deserve that. Unfortunately so many 
of these families will be driving to Alberta on that holiday to 
visit their children working in Alberta. 
 
The timing of the PST reduction also . . . I have to be cynical. I 
mean there’s no way around it. Why would the government 
announce it now? Why didn’t they announce it in last year’s 
budget? There was record oil prices last spring. Why not 
announce it then? Well I think the answer is fairly clear that this 
Premier is trying to save his political neck coming up to the 
NDP convention. So he has to have something good to 
announce at the conventions, or else they’re going to dump him. 
And so they brought out this plan now instead of waiting for 
what you would normally call a pre-election budget next spring. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, also the problem with these announcements 
is there’s no long-term planning in place for the government, 
but also no opportunity for businesses in this province to 
prepare themselves for the PST reduction. It cost businesses up 
to $350 to readjust their tills to take the two per cent reduction 
in place. Mr. Speaker, these announcements that we’ve seen in 
the Throne Speech and the PST certainly leaves the 
Saskatchewan people with a cynical feeling, and I think the 
NDP just only does things for their own political good, and they 
don’t bring in good public policy to the good of the province at 
the proper time. 
 
Under this Premier and under this NDP government, the 
province have lost 18,000 people — this year 4,500 people 
alone, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a very interesting statistics 
concerning that issue. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, this government goes around saying that 
they’ve had 13 balanced budgets, and that’s just not true, Mr. 
Speaker. In the last 15 budgets, there have been seven deficit 
budgets. 
 
I’d like to say a few things about my critic responsibilities, 
Highways for one. It certainly is interesting now that the 
government wants to enshrine in legislation spending gas tax on 
maintenance and construction. Well it’s interesting. Why 
doesn’t the government just do it? They haven’t done it in the 
past. Why bring in legislation? Just do it. That’s what 
governments are empowered to do, is the right thing. Why 
didn’t they do it years ago? Well now they’re talking about 
enshrining in legislation. Well I think everyone is pretty cynical 
about those types of moves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my other critic responsibility is Immigration, and 
I’ve spoken to the minister back and forth while this debate has 
been going on, and it’s interesting to hear that there is a 
consultant firm that has submitted 85 applications for new 
immigrants to this province through the nominee program, and 



October 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

the people are coming from Germany. This same consulting 
firm brings in hundreds of people into Manitoba every year 
from Germany. They have applied to bring 85 into this 
province. The same people, the same skills, the same education 
and this government and this minister has turned down all 85 
applications. One wonders why. It boggles the mind why this 
government and this minister would do such a thing when we 
need to attract people to this province. But unfortunately this, 
for some reason — and who knows what the reason is? — they 
are turning down these immigrants to this province while 
businesses in this province desperately need truck drivers and 
welders and other people with various skills in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting also when you talk about the 
NDP, they have a history of raising taxes following an election 
and cutting taxes before an election to buy votes. The Romanow 
government did exactly the same thing after an election. When 
they are heading into an election and then right after the 2003 
election, this NDP government under the present Premier raised 
the taxes in 2004. Now we see them cutting taxes again leading 
up to the next election. So this is certainly a history of this 
government just playing with the taxpayers’ money. This is a 
sign of very cynical government who is tired and worn out, and 
certainly it’s time for this government to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this Throne Speech has no plans to retain 
youth and no plans to fix the labour shortage. And it’s very 
unfortunate that this government is not doing anything for the 
safety of young people in this province who are at risk. We’ve 
asked questions again in the legislature, and they don’t seem to 
care or understand or worry about the people that are at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our amendment to the motion is quite clear. It 
speaks to the loss of confidence that the Assembly has and the 
lack of vision and initiative in finding solutions to the growing 
labour shortage, out-migration of youth and families, and 
certainly is doing nothing for health care. It’s unbelievable the 
waiting lists the people are on to get health care, and again we 
spoke of that in question period, and the government doesn’t 
seem to have any handle on how to deal with this other than to 
bring out more plans and more numbers and more ideas, but 
they never have any results from what they talk about. 
 
As I spoke about also . . . [inaudible] . . . members failed to deal 
with the agriculture crisis. Certainly this government has a 
dismal record on agriculture crisis. Rural Saskatchewan is 
certainly hurting and continues to hurt, and the moves by the 
NDP government now is doing little or nothing to address those 
problems. 
 
And I spoke about failing to protect the children who are at risk 
and all . . . They’re failing to deal with very important subjects 
like health care, like youth, like agriculture. And unfortunately 
they’re so wound up in the internal partisan political problems 
that they’re unable to govern. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I will 
be not supporting the motion for the Throne Speech, and I will 
be supporting the amendment to the Throne Speech debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[21:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon-Nutana, the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter 
into this debate on the Throne Speech. And after having spent 
some time — about 25 minutes I think — listening to the 
member from Biggar who took some time explaining how we 
were a tired, worn out old government, after that speech I 
wasn’t quite sure who he was talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of reflections that I want to 
partake in over the next 20 minutes and I realize that we’re 
about adjourn. But I will indicate to the members opposite that 
I’ve spent some time looking at their Throne Speech responses 
prior to the last election. And I think I’m going to have a little 
bit of fun reminiscing about what they had to say about the 
government in their Throne Speech responses prior to the 2003 
election. 
 
And one of the things I would like to say to the members 
tonight, before you get too gleeful about taking your place on 
this side of the House, we’ve got a long way to go before the 
next provincial election, and they may very well be sitting in 
those chairs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m looking forward to tomorrow. 
I’m looking forward to responding to the Throne Speech. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that this House do now 
adjourn. Oh pardon me, I would now ask that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon-Nutana that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:03.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................80 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................84 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................87 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................90 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................93 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


