






















































Hansard: November 20, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 15A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 455 
 November 20, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
present another petition to the Assembly today. And I will read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
regarding reimbursement of necessary costs related to the 
Bonderud trip to the Mayo Clinic. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and to improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is also signed by citizens 
from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of Doug Bonderud and the issue 
around medical costs. The prayer reads as follows without any 
other preamble. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Martensville 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatoon. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and to improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I present on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens also concerned with the need for out-of-country 
treatment cost coverage for the Bonderud family. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family of 
out-of-country treatment costs and to improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to reimburse the out-of-country medical costs of Doug 
Bonderud. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bonderud’s surgery at the Mayo 
Clinic was deemed emergent and therefore should be covered 
under the Saskatchewan Health policies. The prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Saskatoon, Warman, and Beechy. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family of 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures are all from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the onerous and punitive health care 
cost borne by the Bonderud family. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cutknife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition to reimburse the out-of-country medical costs 
of Doug Bonderud. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signators are all from the city of Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with my colleagues in reading a petition with citizens that 
are concerned when the Saskatchewan Health officials do not 
give all the information to critical patients. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon and 
Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition on behalf of people concerned about the 
emergency medical costs of Doug Bonderud. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. Thank you 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 
present a petition from citizens of Biggar who are concerned 
about possible loss of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Landis and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today on behalf of Crystal Bonderud, the Bonderud family, 
and residents across Saskatchewan. Doug and Crystal Bonderud 
were residents of the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures today, Mr. Speaker, are from the constituencies 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

of Saskatoon Silver Springs, Saskatoon Eastview, and 
Saskatoon Centre. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from people who are very upset with the NDP’s [New 
Democratic Party] two tiered health system. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are concerned with the government’s 
two-tier health system. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are all from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to rise in the 
Assembly today to present a petition to reimburse the 
out-of-country medical costs of Doug Bonderud. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 

 
And as is duty bounds, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, amongst other communities, this one is signed by 
the good citizens of Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to offer 
a petition on the premature death of Doug Bonderud who died 
of a treatable form of cancer. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatments costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
patients. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present yet another petition to cause the 
government the reimburse the out-of-country medical costs 
incurred by the family of Doug Bonderud. I’ll read the prayer 
for relief, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise with my 
colleagues today to present a petition to reimburse the 
out-of-country medical costs of Doug Bonderud: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people of Saskatoon and 
Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 
 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: does the 
government have any plans to close the Valley View 
Centre in Moose Jaw? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: does the Government of 
Saskatchewan have a formal investment strategy for the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund? If so, what are the terms under 
which the fund will be invested? And what instruments 
will the fund invest in? 

 
[13:45] 
 
A further question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall on day no. 
20 ask the government the following question: 
 

Will the Fiscal Stabilization Fund be managed through 
in-house or external managers? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: will the Government of 
Saskatchewan place any restrictions on investments made 
by or on behalf of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: will the Government of 
Saskatchewan restrict investments made by, on, or on 
behalf of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to Canadian 
investment interests, assets, investments, and equities? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker. 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what is the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s expected annual rate of return on the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this week marks the Red Ribbon campaign, and 
today’s the launch of that campaign. And in order to facilitate 
doing that, we are joined, Mr. Speaker, by a large number of 
guests who are seated in your gallery. I’d like to introduce them 
to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The guests in your gallery are all involved with one of two 
organizations, the large bulk of them with the Students Against 
Drinking and Driving and then also by the SaskTel Pioneers 
who are a large and important support group for the Students 
Against Drinking and Driving. 
 
I’d like to introduce the Students Against Drinking and Driving 
who are with us here. And I would ask that they would just 
simply give a wave so that they can be recognized. And we’ll 
acknowledge them all when they’ve been introduced. 
 
We have students here today from Luther College. And joining 
us are Meaghan Kimmie, Nikki Powers, Katelyn Perry, 
Courtney Gluck, Roxanne Lenton-Young, Kaleah Baker, 
Madison Dufault, Lindsay Harpauer, Haley Cattell, Jules 
Herney, Shelby Becker, Taryn Larson, Tasha Nidzielski. 
 
And also they are joined with students from Sheldon-Williams 
who are here as well: Eve Reed, Katherine McCudden, and Sam 
Shannon. 
 
Also we have two officials: the president of SADD [Students 
Against Drinking and Driving] Saskatchewan, Brooke 
Gloeckler — thanks, Brooke — and also the provincial director 
of SADD, Tim Spelliscy. 
 
Joining them today, and having presented a cheque just a few 
moments ago to SADD on behalf of the SaskTel Pioneers, is 
Wayne Rutten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all hon. members recognize the great value 
to safety on the roads that Saskatchewan Students Against 
Drinking and Driving have played for the past 25 years now. 
They’ve made a difference. And these are young people who 
are committed to continuing to make a difference in their 
province, and I ask all hon. members to join in welcoming them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister opposite in welcoming all the students from 
the Students Against Drinking and Driving program in Luther 
and Sheldon. We know there are many more students around 
the province that do great work in the SADD program. 
 
I can tell you that in my previous life, when I used to work for 
the Saskatchewan Safety Council, I really got to understand and 
follow SADD quite closely as it worked out of our office under 
the direction of the first executive director for SADD, Mike 
Fedyk, who did just amazing work for that program to get it 
launched and have it really spread to become a provincial 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

organization which we know SADD is. 
 
I also would like to, on behalf of the official opposition, 
compliment them on the work that they do because, when 
you’re preventing collisions — and especially when you’re 
preventing drinking and driving collisions — you don’t really 
know how many you have prevented. It’s a number that we just 
. . . We assume we’ve prevented however many, hundreds of 
collisions, but we don’t know for sure. So even though you 
can’t see the numbers tangibly, we know the work that you’re 
doing is extremely valuable for our province. And we thank not 
only the group here in this gallery but members of SADD 
throughout the province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my honour to introduce to you and through you in the 
Assembly the recipients of Foster Family Long Service Awards 
in fostering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery joining the Assembly today are a 
great, fantastic bunch of Saskatchewan people. I’d like to 
introduce them and give us a quick wave as I introduce them: 
Olaf and Hope Pedersen and two of their fine sons; Vera and 
Raymond Boisson; Rose Polsom; Anita and Richard Klochko; 
Gladys and Oliver Engel. 
 
And with them, with the Saskatchewan Foster Family 
Association is Larry Evans and Shirley Laroque. As well from 
DCR [Department of Community Resources], our department, 
is Eva Carpenter and Dianne Shannon. And I’m sure I’ve got 
everybody on the list. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that both Larry and 
Shirley are from the Saskatchewan Foster Family Association 
and these are some of their members. And the SFFA 
[Saskatchewan Foster Family Association] are important 
members and partners who provide support services to foster 
families across the province. And I want to welcome all the 
recipients today and apologize to those . . . I may have missed a 
few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deb Davies, who is the executive director of the 
SFFA, called my office on Friday to convey her apologies at 
not being able to join us today. She asked that I extend her 
personal appreciation to the foster families for their endless 
commitment to the children, to the youth in need of their care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the extreme pleasure of being part of the 
Foster Families Week kickoff event in Moose Jaw last month 
where I met some of the foster parents who are here today. I am 
very pleased and very humbled to have this opportunity to 
congratulate them again and those who are unable to join us 
today for their dedicated service to Saskatchewan. Thank you 
all for being here on National Child Day so that we can 
acknowledge your dedication, your love and compassion for 
Saskatchewan children and their families. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. I had the 
opportunity to speak at your convention just held a little while 
ago. I enjoyed the day. I’ve met with many of you in your 
homes, heard your concerns and listened to you. 
 
I just want to say that for people who are so unique to open 
their homes to children, children who need special care, not 
only do you open your homes. You open your families. You 
show these young children what a family environment can truly 
be like. But most importantly you open your hearts. You show 
them love, caring, and nurturing, and through that we know the 
benefits are done. 
 
And when I was in school, they taught us three R’s. And I want 
to tell you from this side of the House, we know the three R’s 
— recognition for the work you’ve done, respect for the work 
you’ve done, and remuneration for the work you’ve done — are 
part of our hallmark and our care to you. On behalf of all people 
on this side of the House, bless you for what you do. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to have all members of the Assembly welcome some of my 
family and a few friends to the Assembly. Seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, on the right-hand side — and I’ll ask them 
to give a little wave — first of all is my brother, Patrick 
Sonntag, and his wife, Rita, and their children Heather, Tamara, 
Peter, and Maria. And I’ll just say a bit about the other two in a 
minute. They, along with their friends, were down taking part in 
the 2A provincial senior girls’ volleyball in Quill Lake this past 
weekend. We’ve not got the final results, so they didn’t quite 
finish in first place, but they do know they finished in the top 
six in the province, from the community of Goodsoil. So 
congratulations to them for that. 
 
With them as well, Mr. Speaker, as part of the global partners 
exchange program is Kurumi Momotsu from Tanba, Japan. 
She’ll be with my brother’s family until the end of June of this 
year. She had time this morning or all of them had time this 
morning to visit a fair bit of the building, had a picture with the 
Premier, and got to see a number of the interesting sights in the 
building. And I know they enjoyed that. 
 
Also along with them is Andrea Rogers who is down here as 
part of the volleyball as well but took a tour of the University of 
Regina this morning. She’s very interested in attending 
university here in Regina next year and tells me that she 
enjoyed that very much as well. So please all members join me 
in welcoming my family and some of their friends to the 
Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the hon. members of this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce two guests from Weyburn. We have today Debra 
Button and accompanying her is her father Roy. Debra lives in 
Weyburn with her husband, Greg, and their son, Ryley. She’s 
very active in the community of Weyburn. Her and Greg are 
foster parents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only is Debra a constituent of mine, but I 
am now a constituent of hers as she was recently elected mayor 
of Weyburn. So I’d ask all members to welcome Debra and Roy 
to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly a 
gentleman that’s seated in your gallery. His name is Gerald 
Aalbers, and the Highways’ minister may have seen his story on 
CTV’s [Canadian Television Network Ltd.]national news 
program, W-FIVE, this past weekend because of the Highways 
minister’s lack of due diligence cost Mr. Aalbers $50,000 which 
the NDP government refused to reimburse him for. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Mr. Aalbers to his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to 
introduce someone special with the Luther College group in 
case every one didn’t catch the name, I’m sure. And I know this 
is going to cost me supper when I say that my baby is in the 
gallery . So I know that’s going to cost me supper, but my 
daughter Lindsay is with the group with SADD. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Huskies Capture the Mitchell Bowl 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They say that defence 
wins championships, and that was pretty evident this weekend 
for all of us who got to tune in and watch the Huskies play in 
Ottawa against the Ottawa U Gee-Gees and win the Mitchell 
Bowl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Huskies’ defence came up very, very big, time 
and time again. And we would be remiss if we didn’t recognize 
people like Brian Guebert who is a defensive end not much 
taller than me — obviously stronger and more talented — but 
he played an excellent game. Gabe Mackesey, number 20; the 
safety, Dylan Barker, played an excellent game as well. 
 
This is the third straight time that Brian Towriss and his 

coaching staff have led the Huskies to the Vanier Cup. However 
there is a difference this time, Mr. Speaker. This time they’re 
going to be playing in front of a home crowd at Griffiths 
Stadium. 
 
Paul Woldu provided the spark the Dogs needed in the 
comeback victory. He returned an interception for 78 yards, I 
think, in the third quarter. Mr. Speaker, Mitchell Bowl MVP 
[most valuable player] Tyler O’Gorman also showed why he 
deserved to be selected at the game’s MVP, especially towards 
the end of the game. He ran for two touchdowns in the final 
quarter to ensure that the Griffiths Stadium will be bursting at 
the seams next weekend. 
 
I heard the Premier talking about the Huskies on the radio today 
and congratulating them. We’d ask that he doesn’t talk about 
them too much because of the NDP’s impact on football teams 
in our province, but we know he’ll be at the game as well. And 
we’re looking forward to being there to support the Huskies. 
 
Laval hasn’t lost very many games in the last number of years, 
but they lost last year in the Mitchell Bowl at Griffiths Stadium. 
And together with minus 18 degree temperatures and a great 
coaching staff and a great team, we think history is going to 
repeat itself. Go Dogs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Recognition of Foster Families on National Child Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today is National Child Day, and I 
want to take this opportunity to recognize the significant 
contributions foster parents make to Saskatchewan. Foster 
families cannot be thanked enough for the compassion and 
commitment they give to children and their families during 
times of need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for more foster families is ongoing, and 
in some cases increasing. As a result, there are some homes 
where there are more children than we would prefer. But the 
special people who accept additional children do so because of 
an emergency or to keep sisters and brothers together. And even 
though these homes are provided with additional supports to get 
them through a time of increased demand, they are being asked 
to go above and beyond what is expected of them. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need more foster homes. Community 
Resources and Saskatchewan Foster Families Association 
initiated public awareness campaigns and recruitment strategies 
this year that are making a difference. I thank the foster families 
we are recognizing today. They have been foster parents for 20 
years or more, or they have received the Montgomery Award 
for excellence in fostering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these exceptional people serve as important role 
models for people who are considering becoming foster parents, 
and they serve as examples to all of us through the positive 
contributions they make to the children and families in their 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

communities who need help. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Canadian Western Agribition 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Western Agribition has opened its gates for the 36th 
edition of Agribition. Saskatchewan is a known leader in 
agriculture industry in areas that reign from agriculture 
innovation to livestock and crop production to the 
manufacturing and sales of agriculture equipment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we know, Saskatchewan’s economy is 
strongly attached to agriculture. So there is no doubt as to why 
Canadian Western Agribition has become a mainstay in 
Saskatchewan. With over 4,000 head of livestock and 450 
tradeshow exhibits, Agribition has proven that it’s one of the 
largest and best known agriculture marketplaces in the world. 
 
The Canadian Western Agribition shows the true diversity in 
Western Canada’s agriculture marketplace with livestock such 
as cattle, bison, horses, and goats — something my colleague 
from Cannington is very familiar with as he’ll be taking part in 
a goat milking contest later this week — and also the tradeshow 
exhibits ranging from agribusiness and technology products and 
services to home and lifestyle products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canadian Western Agribition annually attracts 
about 145,000 visitors to Regina, which includes visitors from 
outside of Canada. International attendance in 2006 is expected 
to resemble the 2005 turnout where nearly 400 international 
guests were registered, representing 46 countries and 17 
American states. Congratulations to all those that volunteer 
their time to make Agribition such a true success it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Red Ribbon Campaign 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today, 
as we’ve heard, is the first day of a week dedicated to making 
people aware of the devastating consequences of drinking and 
driving. The Students Against Drinking and Driving, SADD, 
has officially designated the week of November 20 to 26 for 
their annual Red Ribbon campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year SADD chapters from across 
Saskatchewan distribute red ribbons throughout our 
communities as a visible reminder of the need to be safe while 
driving. Although SADD has made significant progress over the 
past number of years educating young people, there are those 
who still choose to put their lives and the lives of others at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SADD has played an important role in informing 
and educating people about the dangers of drinking and driving. 
These young people and their peers are among leaders in their 

community. They share a deep passion for an issue that touches 
the lives of everyone, and we’re very proud of you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize the contributions as well of 
the SaskTel Pioneers who since 1999 have generously donated 
24,000 toward the purchase of red ribbons. I know all the 
members here will be receiving a red ribbon, and we thoroughly 
expect to see a sea of red out in the parking lot. 
 
And on behalf of all the members, I want to thank SADD for 
providing each of us with the ribbons and for your commitment 
and your dedication to addressing the issue. Having lost an 
extended family member on graduation night through a 
drinking and driving incident and with a granddaughter who’s 
14, I appreciate everything you’re doing. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Corrections to Premier’s Statement 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
can tell there’s an election coming and the NDP is getting 
desperate when you listen to some of the personal attacks and 
complete garbage coming from the members opposite, 
especially the Premier. 
 
Last Thursday the Premier was talking about the Leader of the 
Opposition’s meeting with the federal Minister of Finance. 
Here’s what he said, and I quote: 
 

I’m told there . . . [was] a meeting. I’m told the Leader of 
the Opposition went off to the Conservative Party 
fundraiser, and they got together over the cocktail hour . . . 
Over some Harvey Wallbangers or something and had a 
meeting. 

 
I understand the Premier repeated that story at the NDP 
convention this last weekend, suggesting that the Leader of the 
Opposition and the federal Minister of Finance were drinking 
when they were supposed to be discussing equalization. Mr. 
Speaker, everything the Premier said is absolute nonsense. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition did meet with the federal Finance 
minister to advance the province’s call for a fair equalization 
deal, but there was no drinking during that meeting as the 
Premier is falsely suggesting in his cheap shots against not only 
the Leader of the Opposition, but also the federal Minister of 
Finance from whom he wants a better equalization deal. 
 
And one more thing. The Leader of the Opposition did not 
attend the Conservative fundraiser. And you know why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because immediately after his meeting with the 
Finance minister, the Leader of the Opposition drove home to 
Swift Current to be with his daughter to celebrate her birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

Canadian Western Agribition 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
week Saskatchewan is hosting one of the premier agricultural 
shows in the world and one of the largest events held in 
Saskatchewan every year, the Canadian Western Agribition. 
With more than 145,000 visitors from around the world 
expected to visit the show over the next six days, the economic 
impacts on the city of Regina, on this region, and on the 
province as a whole are quite significant. In fact a recent study 
indicates that the show supports more than 1,000 jobs in the 
province and generates over $16 million annually in provincial 
GDP [gross domestic product]. Agribition has also played a 
large role in raising Saskatchewan’s profile within the 
international agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Agribition is about making connections and 
forging relationships that will help grow and diversify 
agricultural industry in the future. Last year 47 nations and 17 
US [United States] states registered at Agribition’s international 
business centre. As the theme for this year’s show indicates, 
Agribition really is A World of Opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make special note of the fact that, for the 
first time in three years, producers and animals from the United 
States are at the show. 
 
My congratulations and thanks go to the board, management, 
and staff of Canadian Western Agribition, and to the many 
volunteers who have once again made this world-class event a 
great reality. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

New Democratic Party Convention 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. It’s great 
news this weekend for the Saskatchewan Party. The Premier is 
still leader of his party, and the NDP has stuck with its old 
name. Those two decisions have probably done more to boost 
the fortunes of the Saskatchewan Party since the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy by-election. 
 
The Premier spent much of his convention speech trying to 
convince delegates he’s not old and tired, but bold and inspired. 
That kind of Dr. Seuss-Muhammad Ali speech may work on the 
converted, but it won’t fool anyone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier also talked about all the work that he 
has left to do. Well the question is this. If you had hired a 
contractor to build a house 15 years ago and the work still 
hadn’t been done, you’d probably get a new contractor, Mr. 
Speaker. What have these people been doing for the past 15 
years? 
 
The Premier also told his audience that he had been stranded in 
broken-down vans in more places than the Leader of the 
Opposition has ever visited. Well we have some advice for the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. He should buy a new car. He tells his 
party that he knows a lot about the care and maintenance of old 

things, and by looking across the way, I think he’s right. 
 
Let’s review some of the very important resolutions considered 
by the NDP at their convention: a call for free spaying and 
neutering for family pets, a resolution to control the maximum 
amount of sugar in food, a call to work for a non-punitive 
approach to cannabis law including elimination of all penalties 
for personal cultivation. Mr. Speaker, maybe the Minister of 
Industry and Resources should try a little non-punitive therapy 
before he goes back on a radio talk show. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Screening and Treatment for Cancer 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Colorectal cancer 
is the second leading cause of cancer death in Canada. It’s 
second only to lung cancer. We have public policy on smoking 
to reduce deaths caused because of lung cancer. An inexpensive 
screening program for colorectal cancer would reduce deaths by 
about 30 per cent. Will the minister commit today to funding a 
screening program for colorectal cancer to prevent deaths from 
this disease? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
agree with the content of the words that the member opposite is 
speaking. There’s no doubt that screening programs can be very 
effective, Mr. Speaker. We currently in Saskatchewan handle 
our screening through physicians. We have been working with 
physicians and others with regards to further developing the 
screening program, Mr. Speaker. And certainly as we move 
forward into our budget process for next year, this is one of 
those issues that we will continue to be looking at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, regardless of what the 
minister said, the reality is that people in this province are 
getting left behind. Here’s what people are saying about this 
NDP government. In a recent news release by Barry Stein, the 
president of the Colorectal Cancer Association of Canada, 
here’s what he has to say: “. . . Saskatchewan must now rethink 
its approach to colorectal cancer which in our opinion is neither 
compassionate nor responsible.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he consider rethinking their 
position and put the resources in place — and not a lot of 
resources — to a dedicated screening program that could reduce 
fatalities by 30 per cent for the second most common type of 
cancer in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Will he provide the 
resources to give the people of Saskatchewan the health care 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

they desire and deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
show our commitment in this regard, Mr. Speaker, we currently 
fund the screening programs operated through physicians’ 
offices, Mr. Speaker. We also have two population-based, 
organized screening programs, both operated by the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the screening program for breast cancer was 
established in 1990 and has one of the highest participation 
rates in the country. The prevention program for cervical cancer 
was established in 2003 to promote participation in cervical 
screening. Mr. Speaker, screening programs can take a variety 
of forms. No province in Canada currently has an organized 
screening program for colorectal cancer. We are continuing to 
work, Mr. Speaker, with physicians and others in this field to 
develop the proper approach in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — This government’s track record is a 
shortage of specialists which result in delayed diagnosis. Once 
people get into the system they have to wait three times the 
national average for a first visit to oncologist. Then once they 
start treatment they are forced to pay for their own drugs. 
 
Avastin is a standard of care for colorectal cancer and this 
government is not funding it. This government is sitting on a 
mountain of money waiting to spend it on the next general 
election just for its own re-election purposes, when people are 
having to pay for Avastin out of their pocket. The government 
should be ashamed of itself. 
 
In Newfoundland they can fund the drug. Why won’t they get 
off the mountain of cash that it’s got put away for its election 
purposes and start funding Avastin for people that need it in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite has used the phrase, standard of care, in the 
past. Of course, Mr. Speaker, no province in Canada has 
Avastin as a universal coverage in their drug plan, Mr. Speaker. 
It is not correct to say it is standard of care. It is not available in 
any province in Canada on a universal basis. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is very well-known as 
having one of the most comprehensive cancer care drug 
programs in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Cancer 
Advocacy Coalition in its report last year indicated that, of the 
20 new drugs, Saskatchewan is one of the provinces with the 
most of the new drugs covered under our program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue to work with the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency and others across Canada to ensure that cancer patients 
receive the drug care that we can afford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you would think that all the 
demonstrators outside the NDP convention this weekend would 
have made an impact on this government. But obviously not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the Premier speak after the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy by-election how they’ve quit . . . they’d obviously lost 
touch and weren’t listening to the people wanting to talk to 
them. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only happening in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, it happened this weekend in Saskatoon at 
their own convention. Stories like Terry Rak and Doug 
Bonderud are becoming all too common. 
 
Can the minister take a few million dollars out of a $1 billion 
dollar slush fund this government has set up for its own political 
purposes? Can it take a few million dollars out of that slush 
fund and start doing the things that people are asking of them 
— funding the cancer drugs that they need in this province and 
covering for out-of-country care when they were misdiagnosed 
in this province, Mr. Speaker? Will this government commit to 
that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite must be aware — because I know he reads 
newspapers — that in fact, Mr. Speaker, all ministers of Health 
from across Canada are working on a national pharmaceutical 
strategy, one component of which, Mr. Speaker, is high-cost 
cancer drugs. Mr. Speaker, we all recognize, every provincial 
Health minister in Canada recognizes, Mr. Speaker, that new 
cancer drugs are coming on the market at increasingly increased 
costs and, Mr. Speaker, are becoming . . . it’s becoming more 
and more important that we have a national drug program that 
addresses those programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working together as provinces. Mr. 
Speaker, we are working together as provinces to address this 
issue. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is working 
very closely with the four Western provinces, the three other 
Western provinces, and the province of Ontario, Mr. Speaker, to 
address this very specific issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Friends and 
family of Doug Bonderud went to the NDP convention this 
weekend. They didn’t get any answers. Marj and Terry Rak 
went to the convention as well. They didn’t get any answers. 
 
Some of the members opposite had the courtesy to at least stop 
and listen, and I applaud them for that. But all too many of 
these members across the way blew past them like the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow, like the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin, like the member from Cumberland. The member 
from Saskatoon Nutana didn’t even break stride but at least she 
had the nerve to go in the front door and at least go by these 
protesters. Whereas the other members couldn’t, didn’t have 
that common courtesy. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order please. Order please. Order please. Order. 
Order please. Order please. Members, on a point of order, the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has made a remark which 
was unparliamentary and which was heard by all in the House, 
and I would ask her at this time to rise and withdraw it 
unequivocally and apologize to the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw my remarks and 
apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When will this 
government get its priorities straight? It’s not about the 
re-election of the NDP government. It’s about health care in 
Saskatchewan. When will they take the priorities straight and 
start funding the cancer care that we need in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite may be providing an introduction to some 
Sask Party video with regards to the NDP convention, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’ll tell you this; I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. The 
commitment that this government has made to cancer care is 
unprecedented in Canada, Mr. Speaker. The commitment that 
we’ve made was just a few months ago in our provincial budget 
where we increased the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s budget 
by seventeen and a half per cent, Mr. Speaker. And on average 
the increase in budget to the Saskatchewan cancer care’s drug 
budget, Mr. Speaker, over the last five years, has averaged an 
increase of 22 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very committed to cancer care in this 
province. We’ve demonstrated it by the money that we’ve put 
there, Mr. Speaker. We are continuing to work with the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and we’ll continue to provide 
good care for Saskatchewan cancer patients in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Foster Care Issues 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
finally the minister started to do the right thing earlier this year 
because of overcrowding in foster homes, and a recruitment 
campaign was begun. This was long awaited and much needed. 
But the minister has never reported to us whether he believes it 
was effective or that alternate methods that Community 
Resources should pursue in the recruitment of foster families. 
 
Can the minister confirm here today that the actual total number 
of foster homes has increased from its base, plus the new 
families, as a result of this recruitment strategy? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to point out before I give the answer that, 
first of all, in Saskatoon alone, Mr. Speaker, we have seen a 41 
per cent increase in terms of children needing foster care. In the 
city here, the local city alone, we’ve seen a 21 per cent increase, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s no question that as of . . . in terms of us 
recognizing the child’s need and recognizing child . . . 
[inaudible] . . . today that there’s significant pressure being 
placed on the foster care system, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
something that all of Saskatchewan should know. 
 
I want to point out, since the campaign began to recruit more 
foster families, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a net gain of 50 more 
families. Even though the figure is 750 to 771, which only sees 
a net gain of 21 but, Mr. Speaker, we lost 30 families so we’re 
actually starting from 720. We’re now down to 771 so it has 
been a success and things are moving well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, Mr. Speaker, reading reports 
out of North Dakota with the meth epidemic there that we tried 
to raise in this House for two years, the greatest increase in 
North Dakota was a 23 per cent increase in foster families so 
the minister should have seen this coming. 
 
Foster families provide a valuable service to this province. 
Sometimes they’re the only parents the child knows and this 
can be a taxing ordeal, Mr. Speaker, especially when the NDP 
government has allowed the problems with overcrowding in 
many homes. This government has admitted that 10 per cent of 
all houses are overcrowded. Mr. Speaker, even one 
overcrowded house is too many. We know of cases in 
Saskatoon where there are in excess of 10 children in the house. 
Can the minister explain why he allows this problem to persist 
for so long and why foster families and kids are forced into this 
no win situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, out of respect for some of 
the work being done by the Foster Families Association and 
some of the caring contributions of many foster families, I will 
be very succinct in my answer to that member. I will point out, 
Mr. Speaker, that in the case of overcrowding, the member is 
correct, that there is a 10 per cent of our homes that are being 
overcrowded. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that there 
are more children than we would prefer in some of these homes. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I can report to the people of 
Saskatchewan that these homes are specialized, they’re trained, 
and they’re experienced. They receive extensive support and 
funding to ensure that there’s care for additional children, Mr. 
Speaker. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, we also have 
dedicated staff that sometimes work with these homes on a 
daily basis. Nonetheless, as the Foster Families Association will 
indicate, there are more work to be done and we intend to work 
alongside of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
issue of overcrowding is real and is difficult on foster families. 
Yet they have nowhere to turn if they need help. They have 
nowhere to go and get help. They’re isolated, Mr. Speaker. 
What they require is respite care specific to foster families with 
their unique situations, somewhere to turn when times are tough 
and they need a helping hand and a time out. 
 
If this minister won’t do the right thing and fix the 
overcrowding situation, will he at least provide a decent, 
accessible respite care program specific to foster families? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, several members of the 
foster family community have expressed that concern to me, the 
fact that they do need more respite, Mr. Speaker, and it’s one of 
the issues that I’ve asked the members to move forward and 
through the agenda with the Foster Families Association. And 
this minister, Mr. Speaker, has agreed to meet with the Foster 
Families Association four times a year as opposed to one. And 
the intent there is to reach out, Mr. Speaker, reach out to the 
foster families — not only thanking them but to respect them 
and also talk about ways in which we can support them better, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It should also be pointed out that foster care programs in other 
provinces are experiencing similar issues as our province is, Mr. 
Speaker. Nonetheless this government certainly increased 
funding to foster care by close to two and a half million dollars 
last year for a total of $21.3 million dedicated to the foster care 
family costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No question we need more support, more knowledge about the 
. . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Police Staffing for Missing Persons Strategy 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP Justice minister said 
the safety of communities and ensuring police are better 
equipped to deal with missing persons was a top priority for his 
government. Yet a year later not one of the six RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] officers has been hired and no date 
has been given when these officers will fill the positions 
outlined at the Justice minister’s news conference last 
November. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is truly a top priority for this NDP 
government, why haven’t they hired these police officers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the missing persons 
strategy had three components. One was increasing policing 
positions to both Regina and Saskatoon and six positions to the 
RCMP. I am pleased to advise the House that all the RCMP 
positions have been filled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is, 
when were those positions filled? Constable Brad Kaeding of 
the RCMP said last week that the officers were identified but 
the positions were not yet filled. It’s the difference between 
identifying a position or identifying an officer to fill a position 
and actually implementing and deploying that officer to fulfill 
that role. 
 
So my question to the minister is, is Brad Kaeding wrong, or is 
he wrong and have those officers actually started to work on 
this project? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The six positions included two violent 
crime analysts. I’m not sure when they were filled. The 
historical crimes unit I understand was being . . . the cases were 
being handled by major crimes as they came up. I learned this 
in October, Mr. Speaker, and frankly was disappointed to learn 
that the positions had not been filled, was assured they would 
be filled in November, Mr. Speaker. And they were filled in 
November, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Even now I don’t have a clear answer from 
this minister as to whether these people are actually identified, 
have specific names, ranks, serial numbers, and are they 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

actually working in the role for which they were assigned. He 
said that as of a year ago, they weren’t filled. He says October 
and November he thought they were filled. 
 
Are they working in there today? And on what date did those 
officers actually start working in that role? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — And again, Mr. Speaker, I understand 
that these are very specialized positions that need specialized 
people. I believed, I believed, Mr. Speaker, that the RCMP had 
filled these positions earlier than they had. 
 
I am informed as of this weekend that all these positions are 
filled by people who have names and who will have ranks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Fire Protection for Stony Rapids 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, near the 
end of June the communities of Stony Rapids and Black Lake 
had to be evacuated under emergency situations due to a forest 
fire that nearly burned down the community of Stony Rapids 
and threatened the community of Black Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
This forest fire started at least two weeks prior to it jumping the 
Fond du Lac River and threatening the community of Stony 
Rapids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Environment. Why didn’t that 
minister and his government protect the community of Stony 
Rapids? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
answer to that question is that the fire service did protect the 
community of Stony Rapids. There were no structures lost, 
there were no lives lost in that community. 
 
There was a fire that started 32 kilometres northwest of the 
village of Stony Rapids on June 3, and it was 12 miles outside 
of the response zone so it was monitored. It was monitored 
daily by air, and the conditions fluctuated between June 3 and 
June 22. And what happened is that there was a big wind that 
came up and when it got just over 20 kilometres away, it moved 
very quickly towards the village. At that point the reports came 
in and the response was provided according to the program we 
have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that the 
community was protected and there were no lives lost, and he’s 
right. But that had nothing to do with that minister and his 
government. It had everything to do with the heroic efforts that 
the residents of that community put forward in averting a near 
catastrophe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They were faced with a raging inferno that advanced rapidly 
towards their community — jumped a wide river, the Fond du 
Lac River — and it was only through the extraordinary events 
of those residents that we didn’t have a tragedy in that part of 
our province, Mr. Speaker. And all of this is because of that 
government’s let-it-burn policy. 
 
When the fire had started, as the minister said, in the driest area 
of the province between two communities and it got out of 
control . . . It could have been controlled much earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ve asked that minister: why didn’t they control 
that fire earlier? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the province has a wildfire 
strategy which has been developed in line with the Canadian 
wildfire strategy which all provinces and territories are part of. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the policy that we have in this government is 
to protect people, to protect businesses and structures. And we 
have a very clear way of doing that. 
 
At this time in June, as the member knows, there were a number 
of fires right across the North and the protection was allocated 
to protect some communities where the fires were burning right 
within these communities. When this fire started moving very 
quickly towards Stony Rapids, full deployment was made and 
Sask Environment personnel and equipment were used to help 
the local community keep the fire out of that town. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that when the fire 
was threatening the community a full deployment of resources 
was made. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the helicopter that was there 
left the community and left that community unprotected, Mr. 
Speaker. The only people there were the residents and a small 
fire suppression crew, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But during the height of the forest fires, Mr. Speaker, both the 
member from Athabasca — who coincidentally when he was 
minister of the Environment approved the new policy — and 
the Premier both said that this policy must be reviewed. It must 
be reviewed to make it more effective and to prevent future 
catastrophes, Mr. Speaker. My question to the minister is: has 
this firefighting policy been reviewed and, if so, what are the 
results of that review? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I invite that member to read 
the policy. In the policy it has an annual review where you 
review every fire that happens during that year and then update 
your policy. So, Mr. Speaker, this particular fire and all of the 
fires this summer are being reviewed as we speak, and it will be 
part of our plan as we look forward to next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that we use our resources to 
protect our people, protect our communities, and protect the 
commercial structures. We have in our province a map of every 
structure in the North with a digital photograph. People know 
where these places are, and they make their plans to protect the 
fires based on that information, supplemented with satellite 
information which is recorded every 6 hours on a 24-hour basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 

National Drug and Addictions Awareness Week 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 
pleasure to rise and inform the members of the legislature that 
this is national substance abuse week in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
in keeping with recognizing this important week, a new 
advertising campaign aimed at young adults was launched 
today. The goal of the campaign is to raise awareness of the 
risks and consequences associated with excessive drinking as 
well as to promote the responsible use of alcohol, which is the 
most abused substance in Canada and in Saskatchewan. 
 
The campaign will consist of television ads, restaurants and bar 
washroom posters, campus advertising, and entertainment 
newspapers. Mr. Speaker, this campaign will help educate 
people about the risks of drinking alcohol. We hope they will 
exercise moderation and think about the situation and 
consequences when choosing to have another drink. 
 
In 2005 the provincial government launched Project Hope and 
made a commitment to educate young people and their families 
in Saskatchewan about substance abuse. This campaign assists 
in fulfilling that promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of our government is to build a better 
future and a better life for families and a bright future for our 
youth. By educating the young people of Saskatchewan about 
the effects of binge drinking and encouraging them to exercise 
moderation and make healthy choices, we are working to ensure 
that they grow up safe and healthy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand and respond to the ministerial statement just put forward. 

The campaign to better educate people — and it’s targeted, as 
the minister said, to the young people — regarding binge 
drinking, I think, is a very worthy goal. Not that I would be 
stereotyping, but it’s rather interesting that it comes on Monday 
after the Grey Cup weekend in Winnipeg and some of the 
activities that take place there. But certainly any time that we 
can raise public awareness on responsible alcohol use and the 
consequences of alcohol use that isn’t responsible. 
 
It was interesting to have the group of Students Against 
Drinking and Driving here today. And that’s been their whole 
mission . . . is to educate people on the effects of alcohol and 
driving. And this campaign certainly goes towards that — 
which we applaud — because again public education is how 
you prevent some of the horrific situations that we’ve seen on 
our streets and highways. And also in domestic disputes, quite 
often alcohol is a major contributing factor. So the more we can 
do to educate the public on this aspect, we think, the better off. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Infrastructure Fund Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to move that Bill No. 35, The Infrastructure Fund 
Act be now introduced and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 35, The Infrastructure Fund Act be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 36, The Income Tax Act, be now introduced 
and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 36, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 
2) be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Speaking Directly to Gallery Visitors 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I wish to 
bring to members’ attention a point of order. Today during 
member statements, the member for Regina Rosemont was, in 
her remarks, speaking directly to the members of the gallery. 
That ought not to be done during member statements. I would 
ask all members to adhere to that ruling. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Government 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions number 51 through 54 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for question 51 to 54 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006. This Act provides a 
framework for the self-governance of this group of 
professionals through the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ 
Association. 
 
There are currently approximately 72 land surveyors and 
professional surveyors who are licensed members of the 
Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association. Membership has 
declined in recent years due to the retirement of many 
long-standing members. Levels of admissions to the association 
have remained steady but will not be sufficient to meet future 
Saskatchewan industry demand for surveying professionals. 

Demand will increase because of retirement of many baby 
boomer members of the profession, coupled with the rapid 
growth of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
There are many students who are enrolled in surveying courses 
approved in the association’s bylaws and who are interested in 
applying for membership as student land surveyors in the 
association. The Act however currently restricts admission to 
those applicants who have already completed a two-year course 
of study in surveying and mapping. The Saskatchewan Land 
Surveyors’ Association views this requirement as being a 
barrier to qualified applicants who wish to become land 
surveyors in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the proposed amendments will allow applicants who are 
studying toward the academic requirements for admission as a 
land surveyor-in-training, to be admitted as student land 
surveyors without the additional requirement of having to have 
already completed a two-year course in surveying and mapping. 
 
This will also broaden the range of potential applicants for 
membership in the association, attract more individuals into the 
land surveying profession in Saskatchewan, and make the 
provisions regarding requirements for admission as a student 
land surveyor more consistent with similar legislation 
governing surveying professionals across Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act 
to amend The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 30, The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise and speak briefly on An Act to amend The Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the minister is quite correct in saying it is 
very important for the economic growth and well-being of the 
province that we make sure and do everything that we can to 
make sure that we have sufficient numbers of surveyors in order 
to allow for the staking out of lands and properties for the 
purpose of building the economy. Mr. Speaker, I understand 
that this request is in keeping with the wishes of the association 
in order to expand their membership to allow individuals to join 
the association who are, up till now, classified as student land 
surveyors. 
 
We look forward to having the opportunity to speak with the 
surveyors to make sure that these amendments properly reflect 
the needs and desires of their association. And in order for that 
to be facilitated, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 30 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I am pleased this afternoon to have the 
opportunity to speak about the proposed changes to the Act 
governing a very important Saskatchewan training institution. 
At the end of my remarks, I’ll move second reading of the 
amendments of The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology Act. 
 
Our province is recognized for its highly skilled and dedicated 
workforce. We want to ensure that everyone has the training 
they require to participate in what is a most promising future in 
our province. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We’re working hard to ensure Saskatchewan has the most 
accessible and affordable post-secondary education system in 
the country, and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology] is a major component of that system. 
But SIAST is much more than Saskatchewan’s largest skills 
training institution. Its training activities go well beyond the 
borders of our province, and in fact SIAST delivers technical 
and vocational education and training services in more than 33 
countries across the globe. It’s been doing so for 15 years. The 
amended Act will reflect our current practice. 
 
It is also important to refine SIAST governance practices, 
beginning with representation on the board of governors. 
Currently the student body is not represented by a student. The 
student body is represented by an alumni member. While that 
has been a positive contribution, we believe it’s important to 
address current student issues. 
 
Under the amended Act the board will now include one current 
SIAST student representative. The amended Act will formalize 
the current practice of requiring that board membership include 
representation from the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission and from our province’s regional colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s currently required that the SIAST board meet 
10 times a year. Our research shows us that the best practices in 
terms of board governance indicates that eight times a year 
constitutes the best practice. The amended Act will reflect, 
recognize best practice. The Act will reflect the current practice 
of allowing the board to establish committees, and it will allow 
for the ratification of board committee minutes. Mr. Speaker, 
the amended Act will formalize the current practice of SIAST 
presenting a business plan and a budget to the minister every 
year. 
 
The Act will reflect current governing legislation regarding the 
public employee benefits plan, and the current requirement for a 
five-year SIAST review is more frequent than the review 
requirements for most colleges and institutions. The amended 
Act will allow the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 
periodically appoint a review committee. The proposed wording 

is similar to that in the apprenticeship and trade certification 
commission Act, and the current requirement that the review 
committee report within six months will be deleted. The 
reporting date will instead be reflected and specified by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SIAST is a strong training institution and 
Saskatchewan’s future success is dependent upon the strength 
of our training system. These legislative amendments will make 
a strong and responsive institution stronger. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that the amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 33, The 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise in the 
House to make comments on An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to start by making some favourable 
comments about SIAST. It’s an institution that has got a long 
and interesting history in our province and, generally speaking, 
the services provided by that institution are very successful and 
should be recognized by all the citizens of the province. 
 
Three of the four children in my own family have attended and 
are graduates of SIAST, and of my nephews and nieces, fully 
one-half of them either are attending SIAST now or are 
graduates of SIAST. So in our family there’s certainly very 
good attendance and support and recognition of the value that 
SIAST provides. 
 
I can also add that my understanding is, Mr. Speaker, that 
graduates of SIAST are sought out by employers, not just in 
Saskatchewan but elsewhere in the country, and have a very 
high success rate in obtaining employment and retaining that 
employment. And I think the instructors and senior 
management of SIAST should be made aware of the fact that 
that certainly has filtered through to the members of the 
legislature. 
 
We’ve had the opportunity to very briefly review this piece of 
legislation and have some issues with some aspects of it. We 
note that there’s no inclusion on the proposed changes to ensure 
that there’s suitable Aboriginal representation on the SIAST 
board. Over the last number of years it’s certainly been the 
desire of the Saskatchewan Party to try and ensure that First 
Nations and Aboriginal people are able to fully participate in 
our workforce and in our work environment, and courses and 
schools that are offered through SIAST would go a long ways 
to meet that need. 
 
I’m also surprised and somewhat troubled to see that the 
statutory obligation on the minister to review SIAST’s mandate 
at least once every five years has been dropped and it’s now up 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

to the discretion of the minister to decide. For too long since 
I’ve been a member, I’ve heard members opposite say it’s an 
independent institution; we don’t want to get involved. And I’m 
hoping that if there’s issues at SIAST that this isn’t an excuse 
for them to say, we don’t want to get involved. Once every five 
years is not a long time or terribly often to try and do that. And 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it’s an appropriate exercise 
of the advanced learning minister’s obligation to try and review 
SIAST’s mandate and determine is it meeting it, and what are 
the changes that may be necessary by way of upgrades. 
 
We’re pleased to hear that they’re looking at — and I believe 
it’s probably come from the SIAST board — they want to 
change the number of meeting dates and things like that. I 
question the need to have some of those things in the 
legislation. On one side we hear the minister saying, we don’t 
think we want to have the minister review the mandate. And on 
the other one we want to control exactly how many times a year 
the board meets because this complies with best practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the board is capable of going this extended 
period of time without a ministerial review, I would think it 
would be appropriate for them to determine how often they 
should meet. Best practices or various issues that may arise may 
want to change or increase or even decrease that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note as well that they’re creating an 
annual business plan in addition to the annual budget — 
obviously something that current practice would indicate is a 
desirable and appropriate thing for all institutions to do. And 
perhaps that’s something that should be included in some kind 
of an omnibus Bill that would affect all of the government 
institutions, not just SIAST. And it’s something that we should, 
as citizens, look to when we want to ensure that our government 
institutions have the utmost in accountability, transparency, and 
give good value to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
It goes without saying that the largest amount of SIAST’s 
budget comes from the taxpayer — some from tuitions, of 
course, but to the extent it’s largely funded by taxpayers’ 
dollars, it’s certainly the goal of the Saskatchewan Party to 
ensure that citizens of this province get the best value. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by just commending the hard 
work that the staff and instructors do at the various SIAST 
campuses throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that the debate on second reading of Bill 
No. 33 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 

introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery this afternoon we are joined by Holly Hetherington 
from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and Larry 
Hubich, the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour. 
 
And they are here this afternoon to listen to the second reading 
speeches regarding the proposed new Saskatchewan Labour 
Market Commission. Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the Assembly 
is that both Mr. Hubich and Ms. Hetherington have been 
intimately involved in the legislation that we are going to have 
second reading on. And I want to thank them for the work that 
they’ve done on behalf of the business and labour community in 
this province in bringing this Act together, Mr. Speaker. So I’d 
like to welcome them to the Assembly and thank them for the 
work that business and labour have done to bring forward this 
piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cypress Hills on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
minister in welcoming our two guests who are here to view the 
introduction of this legislation today. I’ve had a chance to meet 
with both of them previously to discuss the legislation, to talk 
about some of the benefits of this particular exercise for the 
labour force development in this province, and I appreciate the 
time they’ve committed to this exercise. And I look forward to 
talking to them more as this Bill and the proceedings of this 
legislation works its way through the House. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to have the opportunity to 
speak about a proposed new Saskatchewan Labour Market 
Commission which really, Mr. Speaker, is a historic piece of 
legislation. 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

Mr. Speaker, our economy is booming. There are more jobs in 
Saskatchewan than ever before in our history. In fact there are 
more jobs than qualified people to fill them. That presents an 
unprecedented challenge and an unprecedented opportunity. 
Our government is committed to ensuring that all Saskatchewan 
residents benefit from our strong economy, especially our 
young people and disadvantaged people who are seeking career 
opportunities right here at home. Our entire society, our entire 
population needs to be included in building that strong future. 
 
Critical policy decisions will be required. The challenges facing 
the province with regard to the labour market cannot be solved 
by the government alone. Our labour market partners are 
absolutely essential to coming up with workable and sustainable 
solutions and each of the partners has to have a strong sense of 
its role and responsibilities within the labour market. The 
Government of Saskatchewan has a strong record of engaging 
partners for critical policy decisions. The Saskatchewan Labour 
Market Commission is being created to bring together the 
appropriate sectors in responding to our province’s changing 
economy and labour market. And, Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased 
and honoured that labour and business have worked with us in 
creating this historic commission. 
 
Our labour market faces complex and urgent issues. The 
economy is booming and the baby boomers are retiring. And 
yet not everyone who could be involved in our labour market is 
participating. There are pockets of high unemployment in the 
midst of unprecedented opportunity. These issues and these 
challenges require a concerted effort by all partners — labour, 
business, First Nations and Métis organizations, and the training 
system, as well as our government. 
 
And through this partnership the commission will help 
Saskatchewan people connect to the large and growing number 
of jobs that support our economy. The commission’s mandate 
includes providing strategic advice to the minister on labour 
market issues, trends, and strategies. And the commission is to 
foster co-operation among business, labour, First Nations and 
Métis organizations, and institutions, and governments to 
develop strong labour market strategies, policies, and most of 
all, Mr. Speaker, solutions. 
 
This Labour Market Commission will have the capacity to 
research and analyze labour market issues, trends, and 
strategies. It will communicate and consult with business, 
labour, government, First Nations and Métis organizations, and 
others on labour market issues. 
 
The scope of the commission is province-wide. And the 
commission will establish linkages to regional and sectoral 
planning bodies and examine regional and sectoral labour 
market plans, ensuring that rural and northern Saskatchewan are 
included in labour market issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is great excitement about Saskatchewan’s 
potential. There is great respect for our training system and its 
partners, and there is an assumption that the system as a whole 
is responsive to the needs of the province. It is the role and the 
mandate of the Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission to 
enable our labour market partners to work together and to 
advise government on the tools that we’ll need to build a 
prosperous Saskatchewan for everybody. 

I am confident the commission, with the leadership of Mr. 
Hubich from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and Ms. 
Hetherington for the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 
will help our province, Mr. Speaker, achieve our goal of making 
life better for today’s families and building a future here for our 
youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, with a great deal of pride, the 
Saskatchewan labour market commission Act, that it now be 
read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 34, The 
Labour Market Commission Act be now read a second time. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House and to make a few comments regarding The Labour 
Market Commission Act. I would like to start off by thanking 
Ms Hetherington and Mr. Hubich for their work on this. 
 
I met Ms. Hetherington some years ago during my tenure at the 
Saskatoon school board and worked with her on a search for an 
executive at that time. And I was very supportive of the work 
that she had done at that time and felt that she was an incredibly 
competent person. 
 
I have not yet met Mr. Hubich. And I may not agree with him 
on every issue, but I do have tremendous respect for the 
sincerity of his beliefs. And probably when it comes down to it, 
there is probably far more overlap in our positions than what 
some members might suggest. And I look forward to having 
discussions with him as this Bill works its way through the 
legislative process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult for the Saskatchewan Party to stand 
up and be critical of yet another Bill that has come forward as a 
result of Saskatchewan Party initiatives. This certainly sounds a 
lot like the Saskatchewan Party leader’s booklet that came out 
earlier called Enterprise Saskatchewan, which outlines a 
consultative process to try and bring the province and the 
economy forward. 
 
Enterprise Saskatchewan has a lot in common with the Labour 
Market Commission report. It talks about the necessity of a 
consultative process. It wants to go on to identify barriers to 
growth, plan for a strong infrastructure, and involve the labour 
force in developing a strategy for retention and recruitment of 
good labour in this province. Given the labour shortage that we 
have especially in areas of medical and health areas, we think 
this type of initiative is certainly worthwhile. 
 
We note when we look at this legislation that there does not 
appear to be — and it’s somewhat troubling — involvement 
from universities or from the regional economic development 
authorities. We assume that there may well have been some 
consideration given. And as the Bill progresses through, we are 
going to be asking those questions, and we presume that there 
may be some very valid reasons for that. 
 
We note as well that within the mandate that was given this 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

piece of legislation, focus is limited to labour market issues. So 
we are very supportive of that because we recognize the 
valuable role that labour plays in this province and in our 
economy. But what we will be also looking for is companion 
legislation to be put forward by the government dealing with 
the rest of the economy, dealing with marketing, dealing with 
infrastructure, and dealing with the other issues that are very 
significant in moving the province forward. However this is a 
very significant and very important first step, and we look 
forward to working with this as this goes forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I felt was somewhat 
troubling was this Bill gives a mandate of the commission to 
provide advice to the Labour minister. During my brief tenure I 
have seen two different Labour ministers and frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, they need significantly more than advice. I think their 
political careers probably need advanced life support and help 
in a lot of other different ways. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
34 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 4 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise today to speak on the adjourned debates on the Act to 
amend The Education Act from 1995. Mr. Speaker, the 
educational system in the community have undergone a 
tremendous amount of changes in the last couple of years. And 
this has indeed placed a lot of pressure on them in order to meet 
the challenges that are placed before school boards, and keeping 
in mind that the primary function is to make sure that the 
welfare of the children entrusted to their care, that their 
well-being and education is being properly looked after. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, school trustees from across this 
province, public board members, and separate school board 
members have worked very diligently to make sure that the 
challenges of amalgamation have been done properly and that 
they have moved forward in a very constructive fashion. In this 
whole process there has been from time to time some issues that 
have come up that have actually placed some pressure on the 
relationship between the public and separate school trustees 

about jurisdictional issues and procedural issues and things of 
that nature. And the Saskatchewan School Boards Association I 
think very appropriately and astutely struck a group within their 
board to deal with some of the issues that were being discussed 
and were creating friction for these two groups of people and, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as a result of the work of these 
trustees — public and separate — these recommendations have 
come forward. There are several recommendations in this 
legislation that deal with the process of the formation of a 
separate school. 
 
As we know, under the constitution there is the constitutional 
provision for the ability of the people in the communities 
representing a minority faith to form a separate school, and in 
the past they have had certain guidelines. They’ve been rather 
minimal in terms of direction as to how the exact process 
should occur. And as a result, there have been a number of 
instances where the process has not gone completely as would 
be desired and as expected. 
 
And so these groups of trustees have come together and said, 
let’s make sure that we have in place some policies that will 
give proper time and sufficient time for careful reassessment 
and careful consideration of all of the issues surrounding the 
formation of a separate school. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
they have placed these requirements into this legislation so that 
going forward from this point in time, there should be very little 
lack of clarity in terms of the proper process that’s required in 
order for a separate school to be formed in the province. And I 
think that that is good news. 
 
In this whole process when a group of people go through the 
process to consider formation of a separate school, there are a 
lot of issues that need to be considered, and there has to be 
sufficient time for consultation and consideration of all of these 
issues. And this legislation will provide for that framework. 
 
The other component of this legislation that I think is worthy of 
note is that when the government embarked on this 
amalgamation process, one part of that process was the 
formation of local school advisory committees. And that I think 
is a very important linkage of the local community to the 
institution in their community, be it an elementary or a high 
school. And it allows for the public’s input into the well-being 
and the excellent standards that a school would maintain, and it 
involves people from the community, people from the school 
itself, both professionals and students. And this is an advisory 
board to the school principal to make sure that the specific 
needs and desires of that local school community are being met. 
 
In the original legislation there were some items that were 
omitted and the School Boards Association has pointed out a 
couple of these issues. And in these amendments there is 
clarification and the correction of some of the issues that were 
overlooked in the original legislation. And so insofar as that this 
is getting corrected as well, this is important legislation to 
consider. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the official opposition caucus took the 
opportunity to move forward the consultative process as quickly 
as possible in order to potentially accommodate the school 
boards’ desire that this legislation be passed in a timely fashion. 
I had the opportunity to meet with the president of the School 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Boards Association and the executive director to be briefed on 
the intent of this legislation before we even saw it in the House. 
We also had the opportunity . . . and we invited the School 
Boards Association to come to one of our caucus meetings to 
present the issues from their perspective. And we’re very happy 
that they did it. It certainly made these issues much clearer to 
us. 
 
And we also understand that in discussion that I’ve had with the 
minister, that the School Boards Association is going to be 
invited to present their position directly to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services in order to make sure that they 
have the opportunity to indicate on the official record that they 
are supportive of this legislation and that this legislation was 
drafted at their request. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, at this point I look forward to 
the presentation of the School Boards Association to the 
committee’s meeting. I believe that’s scheduled for later this 
day. And I look forward to the opportunity for them to present 
their perspectives on this and for committee members to direct 
questions to these officials and to have this legislation 
considered in a timely way. And I would recommend at this 
time that this Bill be now referred to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 4, The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 4, The Education 
Amendment Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 4 be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 1 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 

Deputy Speaker, it is a pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 
No. 1, an Act to amend the Labour Standards Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the simple description of this Bill of 
course is to add an additional statutory holiday to the current 
number of holidays that exist within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s important for people to understand the relative 
position of Saskatchewan to other provinces, especially our 
three Western provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and 
Manitoba. Madam Deputy Speaker, currently the province of 
Alberta recognizes nine statutory holidays. The province of 
British Columbia recognizes nine statutory holidays. The 
province of Saskatchewan recognizes nine statutory holidays, 
and the province of Manitoba recognizes seven statutory 
holidays. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, you can see that up until 
the introduction of this Bill, the province of Saskatchewan has 
been in a very similar position with our two neighbours to the 
West and in fact an additional day ahead of the province of 
Manitoba. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, though, it’s also wise for people to 
take a look at other clauses and other terms that can affect the 
number of days that a worker is entitled to as a paid holiday. 
And many provinces have additional days that are provided. 
 
And I look at the province of Alberta, which recognizes a 
number of days like Boxing Day, Easter Monday in Alberta. 
Heritage Day by the way, Alberta Heritage Day in Alberta is in 
August. And many employers have those additional holidays 
within agreements. And the employees for those particular 
employers of course earn those statutory holidays in addition to 
the public holidays that I outlined. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s also interesting to note that the 
province of Saskatchewan has lead in one other category, in 
terms of the number of weeks of vacation pay that an employee 
is entitled to in the province of Saskatchewan. We are the only 
province that has a three-week vacation. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I think that’s interesting when you look at the whole, 
wide picture and say, well has that been a great benefit in 
increasing the labour force. And we’re looking at a province 
right now, Madam Deputy Speaker, that has lost population. 
We continue to lose people on a regular basis. So I’m not sure 
that that was a circumstance that has retained workers and as a 
result we need to look at how the additional statutory holiday in 
fact is going to affect people. 
 
This government, this NDP government has not put forward a 
youth and population growth strategy. And if you don’t have 
growth, Madam Deputy Speaker, you can be in the same 
situation that we are in right now — a complex labour shortage 
where we’re looking at a number of initiatives, some initiatives 
that the NDP already used from the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 
Ideas, when we start to look at the suggestion about mandatory 
retirement and addressing that concern, when we start to look at 
the number of training seats that are needed to address the 
problem within the nursing profession. Those are ideas that 
should have been looked at a long time ago. 
 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

This government seems to act surprised when they hear about 
labour shortages in so many of the sectors. And I guess, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, when we hear from the people on the street 
regarding the addition of Family Day, there was a very positive 
reaction of course. People are excited about the fact that from 
New Year’s Day until Easter — whenever Easter would occur 
— was usually a fairly lengthy period. And people reacted in a 
very positive way by saying that Family Day was a nice idea. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think what we have to look at is 
the whole job opportunity and job positions that are available in 
Saskatchewan. There’s no question that jobs are important to 
the people that have them. But they’re also very important in 
terms of who is actually paying for those jobs when we look at 
a combined strategy, as we heard discussed today in the 
legislature, where we heard that labour and business have been 
together developing a new strategy regarding a labour 
commission and ideas have been put forward. 
 
And the question then, Madam Deputy Speaker, that has to be 
asked is, has there been consultation regarding the introduction 
of Family Day? As indicated, many people reacted that it would 
be a great idea. We know that of course as population in 
Saskatchewan has declined, a number of those people have 
moved elsewhere, many to the province of Alberta. And I know 
there are many members in this Assembly who have children 
who work in Alberta, me being one of those, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, as my daughter has just obtained employment in the 
city of Calgary. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, a Family Day will 
probably be a great idea for us to be able to enjoy visiting with 
our daughter who now is in Calgary. But the question that has 
to be asked is, what kind of consultation occurred? 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, not everyone is unanimous in 
suggesting that a Family Day was the correct introduction. I 
know that there are many people in business . . . and of course 
business owners are the ones that are going to be responsible for 
paying the additional costs. The Government of Saskatchewan 
will be responsible for paying additional costs. The regional 
health authorities will be responsible for paying additional 
costs. The school boards in this province will be responsible for 
paying the additional costs. And I’m wondering, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, on behalf of all of those people who sit on 
those boards is, was there consultation with those different 
boards to address the concerns that they had regarding the 
costs? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Premier of the province has 
received a letter dated November 16 from the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, and it’s a letter addressed 
to the Premier that raises a number of concerns. And it’s a long 
letter, and I’m just going to read into the record three of the 
concerns of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business. 
 
First one says, and I quote, Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

The impact of closing on a day where the rest of the 
country is open. As many Saskatchewan firms do business 
all over the country and globe, it would be very difficult 
for some to close. Firms may risk losing sales if they are 
not open to their customers or, if they stay open, would 
face unhappy employees and increased costs. 

 

So you can see, Madam Deputy Speaker, that business owners 
are concerned about the competitive nature of Saskatchewan. 
Are we competitive with the rest of the provinces in this 
country? Are we competitive with the rest of the states as we 
look at closing on a day in February? 
 
And by the way, Madam Deputy Speaker, if there are people 
who are not aware of the proposed date, the third Monday, as 
indicated in Bill No. 1, third Monday of February will be now 
Family Day. So that is the date that people will be looking at. 
 
Now one of the other paragraphs that was sent to the Premier is 
this, and I quote again: 
 

Extra costs incurred by the provincial government — 
There will be extra costs for Saskatchewan’s public sector 
as a result of another statutory holiday. For example, the 
City of Regina just announced it will cost $550,000 in 
overtime pay and lost work. Most of it will be to pay 
overtime to police officers, firefighters and other city 
workers. CFIB would therefore like to know what 
additional costs will the provincial government incur as a 
result of a new statutory holiday? 

 
So you can see, Madam Deputy Speaker, that very valid 
concerns are being raised. The city of Regina must have 
firefighters that are on duty. They must have police officers that 
are on duty. And of course their fiscal year has been 
established, and now we’re starting to look at additional costs. 
 
A third paragraph and a final paragraph that I’d like to read into 
the record, Madam Deputy Speaker, is this: 
 

Over 64 per cent of Saskatchewan small business owners 
are concerned over the shortage of qualified labour. 
Business owners who are already struggling to find staff 
and who want to operate on ‘Family Day’ will now be 
scrambling to find workers. 
 

So you can see, Madam Deputy Speaker, that businesses have 
some concerns, and they would like to have been consulted. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity to speak 
with a number of directors of boards of education who have 
expressed some concern over the matter that they have not been 
consulted. And it’s pretty easy to understand why school boards 
would be facing a bit of a dilemma. 
 
The Minister of Learning has set the school year for ’06-07 at 
197 school days. Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, school boards 
knew that before the beginning of this school term, and 
accordingly set the number of teaching days at 197. There are 
regulations regarding the break at Christmas and the break at 
Easter, but really from about August —middle of August — 
until June 30, there’s quite a bit of flexibility in terms of the 
kind of school year that a board of education will set. Now they 
are compelled to set 197 days. 
 
Now let’s look at the scenario that will affect two different 
school division. One school division that has set the third 
Monday of February 2007 as a holiday, as a day when they are 
on a leave that has been already predetermined, well, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, there is no additional day of cost because that 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

day has been worked into the system. Schools are closed. So 
school bus drivers, teacher assistants, teachers are not . . . there 
won’t be a concern. 
 
But let’s look at a second situation. Let’s look at a school 
division who has declared the third Monday of February to be a 
professional development day. And usually professional 
development days — now that the school divisions have 
become extremely large — are in the larger centres, most often 
cities like Regina and Saskatoon. There are examples where 
school boards have already planned that professional day for 
Monday, the third Monday of February. They have booked 
speakers. They have put down down payments and actually 
spent money on speakers, and now there is going to be a 
situation where that is now going to be a statutory holiday. So 
we’ve heard from various people that are involved in the 
education community that the Minister of Learning is in fact 
contemplating changing the school year of ’06-07 to 196 days 
to make sure that that accommodates that. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the third situation develops is 
that when the day . . . The third Monday of February is actually 
a regular teaching day and now has to be a statutory holiday. 
Well I’ve already identified the problem with 197 days, and 
maybe the government solution is to change the school year to 
196. But the other situation is there will be people that have to 
be paid. There are people like teacher assistants and school bus 
drivers whose year is set on a specific number of days, and that 
was predetermined long before this school year started. 
 
So the question that has to be asked of the minister is, will there 
be additional compensation for school divisions, regional health 
authorities because as they have to have people employed on a 
stat holiday there are additional monies that will be awarded to 
each of these people? 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think you can see from the points 
that people have raised by calling us, there has not been, there 
has not been a lot of consultation on the introduction of Family 
Day. 
 
While it is a . . . Is it a good idea for workers? I think we know 
that people who benefit from a long weekend they come back to 
work probably more rejuvenated, the ability to be a more 
productive worker, and as a result the holiday, the Family Day, 
is a good introduction. It’s an introduction where again 
Saskatchewan will have 10 statutory holidays when our 
neighbours will not have as many. So that maybe will put us in 
a position that we will have a positive asset on our side, and 
maybe that will be able to contribute to additional workers 
coming back to this province. 
 
But if the government believes that the addition of a stat holiday 
is a retention strategy or a recruitment strategy, I think you have 
to look at the additional costs that will be placed on school 
boards, will be placed on municipalities, will be placed on the 
regional health authorities. As I’ve indicated, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the city of Regina suggests that it might cost as much 
as $550,000 for that additional statutory holiday. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think you can see that the Act . . . 
While the actual terms of the Act are very straightforward, 
they’re put forward to ensure that the third Monday in February 

of each year is going to be a statutory holiday known as Family 
Day. I think you can see that for this first year, the year ’07, 
there will be a number of difficulties, there will be a number of 
uncertainties, and that’s what we’re hearing from the people of 
Saskatchewan. They don’t know what will in fact be a deciding 
factor for this government when they actually put in place the 
rules and regulations. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill will be moved forward 
to committee as the concept is there and employees across this 
province are going to look forward to Family Day. But most 
important, I think many parents will look forward to Family 
Day as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 1, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 1, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 1, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be now referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 29 – The Labour 
Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006/Loi de 
2006 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Labour Standards Amendments Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. My remarks to this Bill will be much shorter than the 
previous remarks. Madam Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 29 is a 
consequential amendment Bill that is necessary as a result of 
the passing of Bill No. 1, the introduction of Family Day to The 
Labour Standards Amendments Act, and what it does is it 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

changes the specific Act, The Education Act, and adds the 
words Family Day to the statutory holidays that are already 
described. And in The Interpretation Act, 1995, it’s also 
amended by adding the words Family Day. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, these are necessary housekeeping 
amendments, and we see no reason to not allow this Bill to 
proceed to committee. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 29, The 
Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 29, The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 
2006 be now referred as well to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth, and Recreation that Bill No. 29, The Labour 
Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 2 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to enter into the debate on an Act to amend the PST 
[provincial sales tax] Act. It’s an Act that members on this side 
of the House call, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s about time Act. 
It’s about time that the government did something in this. And 
we’ve been talking about it. Members on this side of the House 
have been talking about this for a number of years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to fully understand . . . And I know that 
members opposite will appreciate the history of the PST in the 

province and I know that they will listen closely when we talk 
about the history of the PST under this administration, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. In order to fully understand this Bill, we must 
look back to what happened at the last election. What happened 
when groups across the province during the election campaign 
asked to meet with Premier Calvert, asked for him to outline his 
policy on taxation across the province? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you know what happened? He didn’t 
have time to meet with them. He didn’t have time to meet with 
the chamber of commerce. He didn’t have time to meet with 
businesses across the province. What he did instead was said, 
send me a letter and I’ll respond back to it or I’ll get back to 
you on it. So indeed, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s what 
business groups across the province did. That’s what consumer 
groups across the province did. They asked the Premier to 
outline his policy in a very concise form on what he would do 
with taxes in general in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you know what the Premier’s 
response, you know what the response on behalf of the NDP 
party was? No new taxes. Period. End of sentence. No new 
taxes. Madam Deputy Speaker, imagine their surprise — and I 
use the word, imagine — imagine their surprise when the first 
thing, the first financial matter that this government did after 
that election was to raise the PST, Madam Deputy Speaker. It 
was certainly a surprise for people. It wasn’t only a surprise. It 
hit them hard. It hit them hard in the pocketbook. Not all of 
them were excited about having four more years of an NDP 
government. That’s for sure, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, people across Saskatchewan, I think 
it’s fair to say, have seen this pattern developing with this NDP 
government. They lower taxes before an election, and then they 
raise them following an election. Madam Deputy Speaker, all 
members of this House and most members across the province 
will remember those words by the member from Regina 
Douglas Park when he was asked during the election, what 
about your future plans? What did he say regarding the finances 
of the province? He said, elections aren’t a time to talk about 
tax increases. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we know why they weren’t 
talking about it during the election because they knew then 
what they were going to do. And that’s all they did for three 
years, Madam Deputy Speaker, was raise that PST. Three years 
of a tax increase that Saskatchewan people neither voted for or 
wanted, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well what happened on this side of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is the Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, we 
presented our alternatives. We said, keep your promises from 
the last election and reverse the unfair increase in the PST. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we went farther. We told them to 
make sure that taxes in Saskatchewan were competitive across 
the board. Lower the corporate capital tax; lower business 
income taxes. Why, Madam Deputy Speaker? Because they 
were the highest in the country. And it was the right thing to do, 
the thing that had to be done. 
 
Day after day members on this side of the House rose from their 
seats, talked about the need for competitive taxes. What did we 
hear from the other side? It just couldn’t be done. It just 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

couldn’t be done, Madam Deputy Speaker. Well we knew it 
was the right thing to do to propose those ideas. 
 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, we went farther. We proposed 
100 new ideas for the new century. Every member of this 
House will remember that booklet that came out with 100 ideas 
from the official opposition. Madam Deputy Speaker, I am 
happy to report that on the latest count, 42 out of those 100 
ideas have been implemented in some way. 
 
And we know that it’s . . . we know that the government is 
bereft of ideas, that they’re lifting those ideas. Well, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I can report to them that we’ll have more ideas 
coming from them every day until the next election. Mr. 
Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well it would be a 
refreshing change to have a new idea a day. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, members from the opposite side of the House, they 
chastise us for coming up with ideas. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
just wait till we become government and are able to implement 
those ideas directly instead of having to wait to filter it through 
an NDP government. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s also interesting to look at how this 
PST cut was done in the forum of this legislature. Was it done 
in the Throne Speech? Was it? I ask members . . . the surprise. 
We came into this House, we heard the Throne Speech, and two 
days later we hear that there’s going to be a PST cut. Well, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, why? Why did it have to be that way? 
Why wasn’t a major change like that included in the Throne 
Speech? 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we hear of this meeting in the 
middle of the night, on Monday night, where some mean 
polling information came in. Some very mean polling 
information. The Throne Speech was already written but the 
Minister of Finance had under his arm some pretty mean 
polling information. It showed the NDP dropping like a rock. 
He said something radical had to be done. Something had to be 
done to change the focus of this Throne Speech that obviously 
was going nowhere on its own, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I can just imagine the debate that went on, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, in that caucus. Those on the left saying, how can we 
ever lower taxes? What did we campaign on? The NDP pull out 
their ads from the last election and it’ll show that they said it 
couldn’t be done; that we couldn’t have competitive taxes in 
Saskatchewan. So those on the left were very upset, those that 
happened to have their copies of the election platform of the 
NDP in the last election. 
 
But those on the right said, look at the polls. What are we? 
We’re 14, 19, 23 points behind the Saskatchewan Party so 
forget about what we said in the last election. That’s what the 
NDP said. We’ve got to do what the Sask Party advocates 
because we’ve got to close that gap. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s very transparent and the 
minister used that word himself last week. People can see right 
through it. The NDP aren’t doing that for the right reasons. 
They’re doing it to try to close that gap. I’d say, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it’s too little too late. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan residents know the 

NDP has a record of decreasing the PST before an election, 
increasing it after an election. However, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, what will be different this time around is they won’t 
have an opportunity to increase it because they won’t be in 
government after the next election, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan is indeed tired of the NDP’s high taxation policy 
— highest taxes in the country for a large part of their term in 
office. It’s about time that the NDP listen to the call of 
Saskatchewan Party and decrease the PST. 
 
Now if we look at just this term in government, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and what the impact the PST has had on the provincial 
treasury, they increased . . . they broke that promise. They 
increased the PST for a period of three years. For three years 
they got $160 million per year extra revenue, which they broke 
their word to Saskatchewan people. That’s almost $500 million 
that they’ve taken from Saskatchewan people and that they 
broke their word on. Now yes, this PST decrease will create 
some tax savings but the net benefit, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the net benefit to the treasury will still say that this NDP 
government took in more money than they gave back even by 
this desperate attempt to stop their sagging popularity in the 
polls. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as is often the case, the NDP managed 
to make mistakes even when they were doing the right thing. 
Many businesses have expressed frustration that that they have 
had to correct the PST for the remaining days of October 
because many invoices are billed on a monthly basis. 
 
And I know that the Minister of Finance, I know the Minister of 
Finance is chirping from his seat. He’s upset about that. I’m 
merely articulating some of the emails that we’ve received and 
I’ve been copied on, that he’s received directly. I know he will 
not stand up in this House and talk about them, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, so I feel it’s important that I do that. 
 
Many businesses did not know about the PST cut and had to be 
informed by people purchasing products in their stores which 
raises the question, Madam Deputy Speaker — a question that 
has been asked many times in this House — how much 
consultation did this government actually do? 
 
How much consultation did they do when they talk about nurses 
in Saskatchewan? We’ve heard about SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses]. My colleague from Indian Head-Milestone 
has mentioned it many times — zero consultation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we just heard an eloquent speech from 
the member from Canora-Pelly about the Family Day. How 
much consultation was done there? Zero, Madam Deputy 
Speaker 
 
And now we’ve found out on this, an important financial matter 
for the province, how much consultation was done — precious 
little, Madam Deputy Speaker. More notice, I think it’s fair to 
say, should have been given to businesses so they could make 
the necessary adjustments without facing much hassle and 
making changes to invoices at the last minute. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the NDP may think they’re off the 
hook as far implementing or trying to correct a broken promise 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

from last time around but, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is the 
Boughen report, the Boughen Commission report. It’s 
something that the government I think just wishes would go 
away. They’ve done very little with it. They haven’t 
implemented it. Indeed, they ignored most of the commission’s 
recommendations. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to 
read for the record what the Boughen Commission report talked 
about as far as implementing changes to retail sales taxes or 
changes to property taxes. 
 
It talks about the need for competitive property taxes in 
Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker. It talks about a single person 
with a $35,000 income. In this day and age, it’s quite modest. 
They would pay in retail sales tax, $516, Madam Deputy 
Speaker; in property taxes, an average of $1,800, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. If the government chose to consult with people 
across the province, they would know this information as well. 
 
A dual income family — both people with a total income of 
$50,000 — the retail sales tax that they pay in this province, 
$803; the property tax, $2,400, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s all 
here on page 124 of the Boughen Commission report. 
 
You hear very little from the government about this report 
because they chose to ignore it. A lot of fine work was done by 
Ray Boughen, and he made recommendations. And I know he 
would be very frustrated in knowing that the government 
virtually ignored this report, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the lack of consultation that has taken 
place is something that’s quite concerning. It’s something that 
this government has been doing time and time again. It’s 
something that concerns us. And I know it concerns groups 
across this province. I know that public policy would be better 
done if the government adopted a policy of consulting with 
individuals. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, at this time I’ve had a chance to make 
some points. But far be it for members of this side of the House 
to stand in the way of this Bill, since many of us has been 
talking about it for a long period of time. I’d like to move that 
this Bill go to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 2, The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m pleased to move that The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that Bill No. 2, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment 
Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:45 

Bill No. 16 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 16 — The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise and join the debate to offer some few . . . a 
few brief comments regarding the Act to amend The Tobacco 
Tax Act, 1998. The purpose of this Bill is to increase the tax on 
tobacco to offset the decrease of the PST. 
 
I understand that the tax will be increased to 18.3 cents from 
17.5 cents on every cigarette or tobacco stick. It’ll also increase 
the tax on every gram of tobacco, on other cigarettes and 
tobacco sticks, and we’re not sure about the cigars though. I 
understand the tax will apply to tobacco in bulk form but not to 
cigars and maybe we can have that explained in committee. 
 
The government certainly recognizes that . . . the problem in 
tobacco and in our society. We have to really denormalize the 
use of tobacco. And much work has been done by an all-party 
committee. I know members from this House were . . . played 
an important role in that committee and it extended beyond 
partisan lines. It’s something that all of us are concerned about. 
We’re concerned as parents. We’re concerned as members of 
society to make sure that tobacco use doesn’t indeed increase in 
our province. 
 
In controlling tobacco use there’s a number of factors that come 
into play. There’s the packaging. There’s indeed an education 
component; something I want to speak about a little bit more. 
But there’s also the costs, the rate of taxation, and the overall 
costs that play a factor. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we know that smoking has a 
huge health cost. It weighs heavily on Saskatchewan’s public 
finances, on the health care system. It’s costing millions and 
millions of dollars to Saskatchewan taxpayers. But despite 
knowing all the dangerous side effects of smoking, the 
government still manages to make a huge profit from tobacco. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was quite surprised I guess to 
find out in the mid-year report which was tabled last week that 
the actual increase in tobacco revenues, it’s gone up quite 
substantially. 
 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

The budget estimate was $165,400,000. It actually went up by 
$19 million from forecast to projection. So I would say that 
we’re probably not doing as good a job as we could as far as 
ensuring that there . . . ensuring that people don’t increase their 
use of tobacco. Now that’s $20 million increase — nothing to 
sneeze at, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
it’s something that we have to work harder at. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have to make sure that this 
money is indeed not just a tax grab. It has to be something that 
has some focus to it. I would suggest that the government 
should target where this money goes to ensure that consumption 
actually does decrease. 
 
I know we’re making some efforts, and I’ve listened closely to 
the Minister of Health and other members talk about the 
progress that we are making. But we know that with some 
demographics in our province, we still have a ways to go — 
specifically the demographic of young women. Those between 
18 and 25 years old, Madam Deputy Speaker, have seen an 
increase in the use of tobacco, and that’s something that could 
be done. 
 
With the extra revenues, I would say that public education and 
schools is a good way to direct the money. Classes to indeed 
help all individuals stop smoking would be something that 
should be done. 
 
And I hear the minister offering some information from his seat 
on exactly the breakdown of the increased revenues. And I look 
forward to further conversations with him to talk about exactly 
where the $185 million is going to go and where it’s broken 
down. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, at this time I’d move that this Bill go 
to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 16, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
move Bill No. 16 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 16, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 
2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 

the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
great pleasure to rise in this Hon. Assembly to debate Bill 17, 
The miscellaneous statues Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill appears at first blush to 
introduce new requirements of municipalities — very onerous 
requirements, Madam Deputy Speaker — and possibly puts in 
place new penalties for municipalities that decide not to pass 
property tax revenue on to school boards in a prompt manner. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, municipalities face the prospect 
of having to pay interest on any funds that are withheld from 
school boards or other taxation authorities. And this Bill 
appears to be a knee-jerk reaction to the tax revolt that took 
place in Saskatchewan last year, where over 100 RMs [rural 
municipality] refused to pass property taxes on to school boards 
promptly. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, since this NDP government has failed 
utterly to address the education portion of property tax, last year 
many RMs felt that a tax revolt was their only option and their 
only way to bring this serious taxation inequity to the attention 
of this government. And in spite of the $1 billion surplus — in 
windfall oil and gas revenue mostly — that this government sits 
on, they’ve been unable to provide anything more substantial 
than band-aid solutions for the real problem, the property tax 
situation as it relates to funding K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] education. And they now seem to feel that their best option 
is to legislate these RMs into ending their revolt or face 
financial penalties in the future, Madam Deputy Speaker, for 
any such behaviour. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, municipalities will now be required to 
provide monthly financial statements to school boards that 
indicate the amount of funds that have been collected through 
property tax. And it makes me wonder, it makes me question, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what is the cost of that and who’s to 
cover that cost? Is this government going to reimburse RMs and 
other municipalities for additional costs incurred as a result of 
this Bill? Or will they have to go back once again to property 
taxpayers, who are the most overtaxed property taxpayers in 
North America, and recover those funds as well? 
 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill contemplates changes 
that are somewhat more benign. For instance the Saskatchewan 
municipal hail insurance premiums will no longer be collected 
in the same manner as municipal taxes. And this is being 
blamed on the actions of some RMs which have lead to delays 
in payment of premiums to Saskatchewan Municipal Hail 
Insurance. 
 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

Through this Bill, the government would also be able to take 
further action toward municipal governments that withhold 
property tax monies from school boards. So not only would 
they charge interest on those funds payable to the school boards 
or taxing authorities, but the minister would also be able to 
reduce or withhold revenue-sharing grants to offending 
municipalities who tend to temporarily withhold tax revenues 
from school boards or other taxation authorities. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, it makes me wonder why this 
government — sitting on $1 billion of windfall revenue, 
spending like drunken sailors on all sorts of things — will not 
address this, the most serious taxation issue in the province. 
Why not deal with the underlying and real issue which is the 
funding of K to 12 education and this government’s abdication 
of their responsibility to directly fund that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This NDP government would rather go to war with 
municipalities than spend any part of their $1 billion windfall to 
solve the problem of education funding. And accordingly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek has 
moved to adjourn the debate on this Bill. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 9 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today to talk about Bill No. 9 which is An Act 
to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts and to The Public 
Service Regulations, 1999. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill deals with the removal of 
mandatory requirement exemptions in The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code. Now we have been . . . the human rights 
committee have been saying this for a number of years, as we 
have also . . . is why do we have a mandatory retirement age? 
And I’m wondering, I’m wondering who this really applied to 
because we know, we know that there’s an awful lot of 
occupations where there is no retirement age. Take members of 
this Assembly, there’s no retirement age for members of this 
Assembly. Farmers, now we know an awful lot of farmers that 
go well beyond age 65. So I wonder who this Bill really, really 
was directed at. 
 
But I can say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I have received 
calls since, I’ve been elected, on this particular legislation 
where you must retire at age 65. And we, from this side of the 

House, have been saying that for some time that we should 
remove the clause that you have to retire at age 65. Now the 
government has now instituted this which is just another 
example of the NDP government using ideas from the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
We heard earlier that there was up to 42, up to 42 of our ideas, 
that the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs commented on 
that have been adopted by the NDP government. This to me just 
clearly illustrates that they do not have any plan. They have no 
imagination so they’re using our policies. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, as you can tell by the amount of spending that’s going 
on from that side of the House, they’re sure trying to buy votes. 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s no way that they can buy 
imagination. 
 
Now when I look at this Bill, amending the Act to remove the 
mandatory retirement age, I’ve always looked at it as an issue 
between the employer and the employee. If a person has the 
ability to do the job he or she is hired to do, then why would we 
have an age retirement on it? And that’s why we have on this 
side of the House been saying for some time that age should not 
be a factor. Age should not be a factor in one’s ability to do the 
job. It should be whether they are capable of doing the job. And 
if a person is capable of doing his or her job, then why would 
we let age be the sole deciding factor as to whether they would 
stay employed or not? 
 
[16:00] 
 
We can look at any number of professions and look at it in the 
context that . . . Can you imagine putting an age retirement on a 
sports player, for an example? Can you imagine a hockey player 
saying, oh we’re going to have to retire you at age 35 because 
that’s where your most productive career ends, is 35. Well we 
know that’s not true because an individual can be in great 
physical condition, be a great hockey player, and why should he 
or she have to retire strictly because of age? There is absolutely 
no reason that that should happen. 
 
So why should it happen in the workplace? We look at an 
individual that . . . We will use a doctor for example. And gosh 
we sure know we’ve got a shortage of doctors. Why would we 
as a legislative body put an age restriction on the retirement of 
nurses or doctors if they are physically capable of doing the job 
and mentally capable of doing the job? So it’s nice to see that 
this Bill is removing the mandatory retirement age. 
 
Another issue that I think needs to be addressed is in the Bill it 
states that the amendments will not come into force until one 
year after Royal Assent. Now I’m a little bit curious about this 
because what happens in the interim? We know that we have 
received calls, I have received calls from people that are retiring 
now. And I’m wondering if there is a period of a one-year 
grace. If somebody is forced to retire because of age within the 
next couple of months, is that going to be retroactive? Can they 
come back to work? Or is it just cut and dried — one year after 
Royal Assent? Anybody prior to that will have to be forced to 
retire and not be able to come back to work. 
 
Well there again, they are being forced to retire because of age 
and not because their ability to do the job, and I do not think 
that is correct. I think this age restriction should have been out 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

of there some time ago, and it based on an employee-employer 
relationship. If they are capable of doing the job, they should be 
allowed to do the job. That should be between the two parties 
involved. 
 
Now basing it solely on age to me is a violation of the human 
rights. In my mind it’s a violation of the human rights because 
why would somebody in a legislative body say, this is your 
retirement age like it or not? 
 
Now I’ve dealt with an age retirement situation when it comes 
to occupational qualifications. And I can understand in 
occupational qualifications. And I know it’s quoted in the 
minister’s talk about firefighters and policemen. I can 
understand that. But I also question why it isn’t between an 
employer and employee there also because just because 
somebody hits the age wall does that mean that they’re not 
capable of doing the job? And I don’t believe that that is 
actually the case. So it’s nice to see that this is being changed, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now there’s some that will say that this could be abused, that 
some people that . . . And I think I’ve heard some people talk 
about some people will stay on, they’ll stay on just to increase 
their pension or to collect a paycheque. Well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, if one is a supervisor and an individual is not doing his 
or her job, why would you keep him on? It’s taking it and 
putting it squarely on the hands of supervisors where it should 
be. It should be a supervisor’s right to determine whether an 
individual can do the job, is capable of doing the job, and 
performing the job that he or she is hired to do. And if they’re 
not doing that job, there should be repercussions. If they can do 
the job, then why is there an age barrier on it? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, generally we’re very, very supportive 
of this Bill, but I know I have an awful lot of colleagues that 
would like to speak to this Bill so at this time I’ll adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Wood River has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The debate is adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 8 – The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I 
am glad I get the opportunity just to say a few words on this 
Bill. We were still in the process of checking with concerned 
citizens across the province, but we understand that this Bill 
actually grants self-regulation to paramedics under the 
Saskatchewan College of Paramedics. 

We also have understood that at some point through the making 
of this Bill, or the concerns about what is in this Bill, 
firefighters and actually other groups have had some concerns, 
and we will be checking to make sure that those concerns have 
been addressed. We will also consult with various groups across 
the province to address the changes that are in this Bill, but at 
first glance there does not seem to be all that many things that 
are actually wrong with it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister, when he spoke on this 
Bill, talked about the consultation and working closely with the 
Saskatchewan College of Paramedics, organizations that 
represent the firefighters’ sector members, and regional health 
authorities to develop the Act. And this Act will actually 
regulate 1,800 emergency medical service personnel in the 
province of Saskatchewan. He also talked about Mr. Dale 
Backlin, chairman of the College of Paramedics having input 
into the Bill, and that’s good to see that consultation has taken 
place. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill actually talks about the 
self-regulation that will give the Saskatchewan College of 
Paramedics the legal authority to register, license, and 
discipline emergency medical responders and all levels of 
emergency medical technicians. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
think there’s very little that we can find wrong but are waiting 
for more consultation and more feedback from the community 
in general, from the people that this Bill will affect out there. 
 
I would like to say though also, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
especially those of us in rural Saskatchewan, but actually across 
all of Saskatchewan whether you’re urban or rural, owe a great 
deal to our paramedics and our EMTs [emergency medical 
technician] and emergency service workers for the work they 
do. Whether it’s . . . In our case in the rural ridings, whether it’s 
an agriculture accident or a traffic accident or whatever the case 
may be that we rely — in many cases because of distance from 
hospitals — we rely on these peoples for life-saving, and to 
actually address the problems that are caused by that. And we 
owe a great deal to these people. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, at this time being that we are 
waiting for some more feedback from the public, we would like 
to adjourn this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats that we adjourn debate on this Bill. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 24 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 
de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 
boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up today to talk about this Bill and make a few 
points on it. One of the ones I see that it talks about is dealing 
with liquor in provincial and regional parks which have become 
a problem unfortunately over the last number of years. More so 
in parks — provincial parks, regional parks — that are close to 
cities or ones that I guess over the years have been kind of 
designated by the kids as party campgrounds and quite a bit of 
damage has been done at that end of it. 
 
Out in my constituency we’re quite a ways from a major city so 
the regional parks, it hasn’t been a problem out there. They’ve 
been lucky I guess and that the parks, the people who use them 
parks out there so far have treated them with respect at that 
point of it. I guess my point is with the regional parks is I’m 
hoping out in our area that they will consult with the people that 
are running them and the groups out there before they do put on 
maybe just a ban straight across. That maybe the people that are 
running the parks would request it, saying yes it is a problem, or 
we would like to have alcohol banned throughout or have a 
designated area. 
 
So my point on that particular one would be that they would 
talk to the regional managers, regional parks, regional groups 
that run some of the parks out in my area. Some of them, I 
think, the Kinsmen run. One or two, there’s service groups that 
run them. There’s rec groups from towns that run them. 
 
They put quite a bit of time and effort into it and quite a few 
people go to them. They go to them on the weekends and do 
quite a lot. They do a little fishing, a little boating, and sit 
around the campfire. And the odd time, yes, they like to have, 
you know, one or two beer there. So I hope that if there is a 
problem . . . If there isn’t a problem in parks, and if the people 
that are running them request that they still have maybe alcohol 
in certain areas or that it be used in a way that doesn’t affect 
your neighbour or that you’re not having a loud, rowdy party at 
that end of it. I haven’t talked to any of my regional parks that 
much lately this summer, but I know that it hasn’t been a 
problem. 
 
And I know I will talk to them about this particular Bill to see 
that if it . . . what their feeling is, the managers, if it has 
increased in problem over the last few years. Because I know 
we seem to hear the stories on long May weekend of the parks 
. . . certain parks that are, you know, quite a bit of damage is 
done out there. And that’s a shame because these are beautiful, 
beautiful parks. People go, take their families there to enjoy 
them and at that end of it, you know, can’t end up enjoying 
them. So if this anyway helps that, I mean, yes that is a good 
thing. 
 
But I also hope that they consult with the groups and the 
managers and the people that are running them that it’s . . . If 
they don’t request it or if they say, yes we still allow some 
liquor in maybe a designated area. Have a little area for guys or 
people if they want to camp in this area, there is a little bit of 
alcohol you can take and maybe have one or two drinks there. 
You know, as long as you’re not bothering anybody and have 
an alcohol-free area in that . . . I know that, I think, that some of 
my regional parks have already kind of brought that in and it’s 

worked very well kind of on a voluntary basis. 
 
Another thing this Bill talks about is dealing with . . . the way 
that it deals with charitable organizations. And that affects my 
constituency a lot, Madam Deputy Speaker, because I have a 
numerous amount of towns and villages that are out there that 
the only way they seem to be able to support their recreation 
facilities is through their charitable organizations that run it, 
whether that be the Kinsmen or the Elks service groups or just a 
recreation board that has gotten together. And they do various 
fundraisers. 
 
I was just at one on Saturday night. Bladworth, they had what 
they called Bladworth variety night where . . . put on local 
talent and that money is keeping the hall going. I think the 
heating bill alone per month in January coming up will be $500 
just to heat a hall in a small town of Bladworth. So that groups 
have been working quite diligently over the last number of 
years to keep their rinks open, their halls open, their Legions 
opened. 
 
I was in Simpson for Remembrance Day and that was . . . They 
put on a very good service but it was also a very sad day for . . . 
the simple fact is that was their last service that . . . as a Legion. 
They were giving up their charter. You know one of the reasons 
they just said, you know, and actually they’re small town. They 
just didn’t have members. But they had their own Legion hall. 
They’ve had it since nineteen . . . I believe ’69 and they just 
couldn’t maintain it anymore. The cost of heating it, to looking 
after it, was just always onerous on them. They had lot of 
trouble raising money and their members rolled, and they said 
we . . . you know, that was our whole focus was just trying to 
raise money for this hall. 
 
Now I know this particular Bill talks about bingos and that’s 
one of the events that quite a few hold. The newest craze out 
there I guess is the Texas hold ’em craze and I think this allows 
for charitable organizations to run tournaments at that end of it. 
And that’s popular. I’ve seen a couple, been to a couple. I know 
in the city up here to the casino, it’s huge. I think they used to 
start with . . . When they first had them they used to get maybe 
30, 40 people. Now I know . . . I think the tournaments are well 
over a hundred with waiting lists going on. 
 
So it’s a latest craze where there’d also be in the casinos, in the 
local bars, Internet, or just . . . if you’re just at a Christmas 
party. A Christmas party, I imagine that there will be a deck of 
cards out before long and people will be playing it. So I think 
this allows it . . . that for people that charitable organizations are 
run . . . that run . . . that want to run a mock casino, stuff like 
that, or just throw a tournament on by themselves. I believe this 
allows for that. Which is good, because it’s . . . as you need 
more ideas out there. 
 
If you’ve been involved in rural Saskatchewan — small towns 
— I mean every town throws on an event, but I mean every few 
years you just have to change it. People like to have something 
different, whether it be a steak night . . . some clubs will throw 
that on. Some will have a gambling night, a casino night. Some 
will have a raffle. Some will throw bingos. They’re always . . . 
groups are always looking out there for a new way to draw 
people out. The people like to come to something that’s new, 
that’s different. And Texas hold ’em, I think maybe some of the 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

charitable organizations will probably be throwing on a few 
tournaments at that end of it, and going to that of it. 
 
I see it also deals with announcing a 25 cent grant for every 
dollar the groups and organizations raise through licensed 
bingos, break-open ticket sales, raffles, Monte Carlo, Texas 
hold’em tournaments. That’s a good idea. It’s one of the few 
good ideas the government has had. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I know that I’ve talked about that before that you should be 
dispensing money to these charitable organizations to help them 
run the halls and the rec boards and rinks. Because right about 
now is when I travel around usually on Friday, Saturday night 
I’ll go to a different senior hockey game in my constituency. 
And that’s, you know that’s one of the biggest concerns right 
now in November and December and January is, how are we 
going to keep this rink open? As towns start amalgamating . . . 
Even just close to me Kenaston and Hanley amalgamated their 
senior team so that’s a little less revenue for each rink now. You 
know they won’t have as many home games in each rink. 
 
And if you have artificial ice, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a 
huge expense. Power, power is a huge expense out there to run 
artificial ice out there, at that end of it. And groups need any 
kind of a help they can to help keep these — whether it’s halls, 
whether it’s rinks, recreation facilities — open. 
 
And any way the government can help them they should at that 
end of it because that’s the backbone of rural Saskatchewan. It’s 
the backbone of — even in the cities here — the recreation 
facilities. You know, I know that, I imagine it’s quite costly to 
run them here in the cities. 
 
And it’s mostly groups and organizations and volunteers that 
are doing that out there. Any rink, any hall, whether it be in 
urban Saskatchewan or rural Saskatchewan probably was put up 
and run and still run by volunteer organizations. It’s the parents 
that are running the kids for hockey and for soccer. And they’re 
the ones that are doing the fundraisers even here in Regina, 
Saskatoon, and major cities as well as they do in the small 
cities. That’s what’s keeping the groups going and the funding 
that helps keep the kids be able to go to these sports facilities 
and other facilities, at that end of it. 
 
So looking at this I don’t see I have a lot of problem with it but 
I know I want to talk to my regional park about some of the 
issues I raised and also some of the charitable organizations, see 
how . . . what they feel like it, and I know our critic will be. 
And I know that, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s going to be 
other members that are going to want to possibly talk to this 
particular Bill so with that I’ll adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 3 — The Fuel 
Tax Accountability Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and speak to Bill No. 3, An Act to 
amend The Financial Administration Act, 1993 to Introduce 
Fuel Tax Accountability and to make related amendments. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the intent of this Act appears on the 
surface pretty simple, pretty easy for everyone to accept. 
However when we look a little deeper into the Act and possibly 
the reason for its coming forward, I’d like to refer to one item 
. . . actually two items that were in the Throne Speech. The first 
one stated, and I quote, “During this Session, my government 
will deliver a multi-year strategy of road and rail, to build a 
transportation network that will serve the economy of today.” 
 
My question, Madam Deputy Speaker, is, what have we been 
doing for the last 15 years? Have we not had a multi-year 
strategy for road and rail, or have we just been going from day 
to day? Like that seems fairly basic that there would always be 
a multi-year strategy for road and rail in a province like this. 
 
My second point from the Throne Speech refers more directly 
to this proposed legislation. And it states that “In this Session, 
legislation will be passed to dedicate every dollar of fuel tax 
collected from motorists towards the maintenance. . . of 
Saskatchewan’s road networks.” 
 
That seems also, Madam Deputy Speaker, pretty 
straightforward. But when you look a little further into the Act, 
there is certainly a number of questions at least that I come up 
with. 
 
In the first section, 18.1, it specifically excludes: 
 

amounts received by the Government of Saskatchewan 
from the Government of Canada for the fiscal year for the 
purpose of constructing, operating, preserving or 
maintaining transportation systems and infrastructure for 
motor vehicles; 

 
So my question, Madam Deputy Speaker, is, if these funds are 
not going to be used for the purpose of which they are intended 
in receipt from the federal government, then how are these 
funds going to be utilized? 
 
The next question I had, Madam Deputy Speaker, was in 
talking. . . There’s a few exclusions of revenues that need not be 
used for the road programs. The first and the third I don’t have 
a problem with. They’re respecting specific taxes that are 
collected for locomotive fuel and aviation fuel. But the second 
item indicates that what will be excluded, including “any tax 
that is collected for the fiscal year respecting propane.” 
 
Now my point on propane, Madam Deputy Speaker, is at the 
present time I don’t think there is a lot of propane being utilized 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

for highway traffic. This was certainly not the case four or five 
years ago when the price of propane was substantially less than 
the price of gasoline, and there’s no reason to believe that that 
same discrepancy could not occur again in which case a lot of 
propane may again be used for highway purposes. And yet the 
tax that’s collected from the sale of that very propane is not 
going to be directed towards the purpose for which it is being 
collected. So to me that’s a bit of a discrepancy. 
 
Another item that I have a bit of a problem with is that another 
item that’s excluded is — and this is 18.1(1)(b)(v): 
 

any grant or other financial assistance that is made or 
provided for the fiscal year pursuant to an Act, that relates 
to encouraging the use of ethanol or other fuel alternatives 
and that is prescribed in the regulations. 

 
My question, Madam Deputy Speaker, is: does that mean that 
for every dollar that is allocated to promote ethanol and biofuels 
is going to be excluded from the money that goes towards 
highways? It seems like it would be a double-edged sword. It 
means if we promote biofuels we are, by doing that, reducing 
the amount of money that we need for our highway programs 
for which the fuel is going to be used. So I think there’s some 
problems in the wording or the intent of that part of this 
proposed Act. 
 
I guess my only other concern is the purpose of the Act 
obviously . . . or appears to be to set aside more funds for our 
highway projects. Now whether that in fact is the case is not 
perfectly clear. My other point and my last point, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is that it’s not only the conditions of the 
highways that are deplorable in this province. It’s also the 
condition of the roads in our rural municipalities and the streets 
in our cities. And to me this does not satisfy these problems in 
the least. 
 
So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 3, The Fuel Tax 
Accountability Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 12 — The 
Planning and Development Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up and talk about this particular Bill. It’s quite a 
hefty piece of legislation; there’s quite a few pages on it. I 
haven’t had the time to go through it at that end of it. But 

anything that deals with . . . when it comes to planning and 
development, when it comes to cities and towns and rural, 
urban, northern, southern areas of the province, I can see where 
it would be extensive. But that particular . . . With that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I could see why it would interest every group 
out there. 
 
This particular piece of legislation, I think, will need to be 
consulted with quite a bit because it will affect villages and 
towns, major cities, RMs. It will impact First Nations. It will 
impact . . . I think it even does some changes to the northern 
Act when it comes to that. So I think this particular piece of 
legislation will need to be consulted with and out there quite a 
bit. 
 
When you talk to cities and towns in my constituency, I can 
relate to the planning and development, because just about any 
town that I talk to now, what they talk about right now is 
growth. They want to draw businesses. They want to know 
what’s the best way to draw business in. A lot of towns have 
economic development officers. They’ve hired them. They’ve 
had a lot of . . . They’ve had meetings. And a lot of it deals with 
when you’re bringing in a business there is . . . you’re changing 
the face of the town, that you get into the planning and 
development end of it. It could be a small business which may 
not affect a town very much or it could be a huge plant. 
 
Like in Wynyard, I have Lilydale’s which has come there, has 
drawn a huge amount of workers to that area and helped that 
town in that area immensely at that end of it. But to bring a 
company in to that town that size probably would have had to 
do quite a bit of planning. A business of that size would have 
naturally would have . . . needs a huge water supply — a good 
water supply at that — and which Wynyard luckily had. But 
that also takes planning and it also takes development, at that 
end of it, and the foresight of the people in Wynyard to be able 
to plan and develop that. And also it would need to, when you 
. . . it would need to. . . the word I’m looking for is easements 
on land and at various . . . a huge tract of land at that, that the 
town would have to set aside as business development. 
 
Now I’ve had a couple of smaller towns that did that now. They 
kind of zoned their area for business development that only 
businesses can set up on, which is a good idea. That was 
probably some of the things they’ve got from the residents in 
their town because everybody kind of, you know, when you get 
to town, everybody likes it. You live in town, you want it to be 
quiet. You don’t want trucks rolling around. Or your kids are 
playing; you don’t want them close to where there’s an 
industrial site or industrial area. 
 
So a lot of the towns are zoning and planning and developing 
industrial areas where they can set up, businesses can set it, set 
up there. And that’s what businesses want too. They want an 
area that’s . . . They don’t want to be in the residential area. 
They want to be off to the side if they can. But they also want 
good roads in at that end of it, and good service for the area — 
whether it be water or sewer or whatever needs that they 
particularly need when they’re setting up that business. And I 
don’t know if this Bill deals a bit with that but when you talk 
about planning and development, that them issues naturally 
have to be raised of it. 
 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

Also when you’re dealing with RMs, I know there’s always 
quite a bit of talk about intensive livestock operations. 
Whenever an intensive livestock operation talks about moving 
into a particular RM, it always evokes feelings — some of it 
very passionate — people for and people against it. So that’s 
where you need good planning and development. And RMs 
have, a lot of them are looking at passing certain pieces of 
legislation that follow it or zoning it in maybe part of the RM. 
 
I know at our RM we have an intensive livestock operation 
that’s west of our farm. And you start going west from us, I 
think the nearest town between Bladworth and Hawarden is 
something like 45 to 50 miles across country, about 40 miles I 
would say, across country. And in between that, very few farms 
if you get to western part of my constituency. You get to the . . . 
You start going east, there is farms. They’ll seem to be a little 
smaller. But in the western area, a lot of cattle, livestock. Some 
of the farms are huge. 
 
So they set up an intensive hog operation there and basically 
had no, no opposition at all. I mean, you know, because there 
wasn’t, the nearest farm is like, you know, miles and miles 
away from it. And it worked very well for the operation. It 
worked very well for the RM. It brought in extra tax money at 
that end of it. It also helped employment for the local towns. 
There’s probably about, right now, probably 12 people that are 
working, never mind the spinoff. 
 
I know a small trucking outfit has sprung up from that that they 
haul the hogs once a week and moving them either from barn to 
barn or moving them to slaughter at that end of it. So he started 
with one truck and now I think he has about five or six trucks 
that are hauling. He’s got local neighbours. They buy a one-ton 
and a trailer and they haul. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So it applies to employment and then you get the spinoff from 
the trucks, the maintenance, tires, whatever, you know. That’s 
how business works. That’s how business helps grow this 
province at that particular end of it. 
 
So when you’re looking at planning and development, any kind 
of a municipal Bill dealing with that, you should be looking at 
is this Bill going to help RMs? Is it going to help villages? Is it 
going to help towns? It is going to help cities — Regina, 
Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw? Is it going to help them 
grow? That’s what you have to be looking at with this particular 
piece of legislation . . . any legislation you’re dealing with 
planning and development at that end of it, because it should 
allow for the growth, for aggressive growth or growth 
industries. It should be allowing for a city or village or town or 
RM to grow businesses. There shouldn’t be any roadblocks 
with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I know our critic will be looking at it and I know we will be 
passing it out to numerous, numerous interest groups. Because 
like I say, this particular Bill, basically it will affect everybody 
from one corner of the province to the other at that end of it 
when you’re talking about planning and development at that 
end of it. 
 
In the past unfortunately this province hasn’t had a very good 

growth agenda. We haven’t had a very good record of growing 
businesses especially in rural Saskatchewan. Even the cities 
haven’t grown. I know Regina. . . Since I’ve been a kid coming 
up here it may have grown on the outside but basically it’s more 
the doughnut effect. It’s more people leaving the inner city 
moving to the out. It hasn’t really grown in population — very 
little since probably over the last 40 years. 
 
And the city, your capital city should probably have doubled in 
size I would say in 40 years. If you look at Calgary or 
Vancouver, Toronto, a lot of them cities over 40 years have 
doubled, doubled in size, a lot of them tripled. And I don’t think 
there’s many cities in Saskatchewan that can make that boast 
unfortunately. 
 
And then that’s sad because if you want to keep up your 
programs in here you need growth. And the only way you’re 
going to get growth, Madam Deputy Speaker, is through 
business, is business bringing in people, business coming in. 
And with that comes jobs. And with the jobs come people and 
with that comes money and with that more jobs and a better 
way of life. And that’s what this province unfortunately has 
been lacking over the last . . . Especially under this last . . . 
present government we had there’s been very little growth. 
 
In my constituency it’s been nothing but shrinking at that end of 
it with businesses. Like I say every town in my area for say 
maybe except Dundurn, which has got a little bit of spinoff 
from Saskatoon as a bedroom community, is shrinking. Very 
little businesses coming here and a lot of it isn’t because . . . It’s 
not the fault of the small towns. A lot of it is the fault of the 
provincial government. A lot of the roadblocks said that tax is 
one, road infrastructure is another one. I’ve had businesses say, 
you know, I’d like to set up out there, but they say pfft, you 
know, we can’t get our product in and out. 
 
I’ll use an example at Drake. They make . . . town of Drake and 
Bergen trailers. He said, we made trailers, he said. We’re 
pulling two of them to Saskatoon. We got to Saskatoon and 
Regina, he said we had to repaint them. The highway was so 
bad that we had to repaint them. So now he says, we’re loading 
them on a flatbed. That’s an extra cost I would have if I wasn’t 
set up in . . . if I was set up in Calgary or whatever or Saskatoon 
or Regina, he said. He said getting them . . . He said once I get 
to a major highway I’m all right, but he said getting out of 
Drake, down that highway, he said I was pitting up trailers. And 
you can’t sell a brand new trailer with chip rocks on it. So that’s 
just one example out there of where the government should be 
doing some planning and development when it comes to 
helping businesses grow. 
 
I’ve got Highway 20 that are looking at a biodiesel plant and 
also looking at a feedlot combined, but they need a primary 
weight highway. They told me how much they lose on a 
secondary highway. If they set up . . . They did their business 
plan. I mean they’re very sharp; they’ve gone through 
everything. And they’ve got it figured out, if they have to haul 
secondary weights compared to a feedlot and a biodiesel plant 
that’s set up along a primary weight highway, what they’re 
going to lose. 
 
It was something like — I’ve got the figures — it was 
something like $20 an animal or $15 as they let it go finished at 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2006 

that end of it. And he said, sure it doesn’t sound like much per 
animal but you start sending out five semi loads a day and you 
start adding that up. He says, a lot of times that’s our profit, 
profit margin at that end of it. 
 
And so that’s why a lot of towns, Deputy Speaker, are 
struggling out there with businesses coming in at that end of it. I 
would . . . When it comes to planning and development the 
towns have been I think bending over backwards trying to get 
businesses to come to Saskatchewan at that end of it. They’ve 
been basically doing whatever they can the last . . . since I’ve 
been elected and I know even before I’ve been elected. They’ve 
did whatever they could, whether they form committees, do 
anything to help rural Saskatchewan grow, the towns. 
 
And anything the government can do could help it. I mention 
that’s one of infrastructure and that when I’ve attended many 
meetings and road infrastructure comes up at every meeting. 
Because throughout my constituency, secondary highways are 
in very poor shape. It is some places on 15 Highway east, east 
of Kenaston . . . I’ve told the story in here about the lady 
coming from BC [British Columbia] that ended up in the ditch. 
But he says, people of Watrous say I can’t haul stuff there. 
There’s businesses, I can’t haul stuff up and down there. I mean 
it’s a muddy, gravel road. It’s not even a good gravel road any 
more because it’s so banged up and potted up. He says I can’t 
even bring stuff down there any more, he said, so we’re either 
bringing it way around which costs us way extra money. 
 
So you get a business coming there. You got an entrepreneur 
that says, yes Watrous, be a nice place to set up. They’ve got a 
good water supply. Yes, we’ve got some workers there. And 
then he looks at the highway, and he says, but how am I going 
to get a . . . I got to bring in 10 semis a day, and I got to take it 
down this highway. He said, I can’t do that, you know. So that’s 
a strike against that town of Watrous or whether it be Wynyard, 
the same situation. 
 
Many of my towns, if they’re not on No. 11 Highway, have no 
roads whatsoever at that end of it. So you wonder how you can, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, grow these towns where they talk 
about planning and development at that end of it. And that’s 
something they should be addressing, you know. It’s all right to 
change the Act and that, but some days you’re going to have to 
address your fundamental problem out there — one of them is 
infrastructure at that end of it — if you’re going to grow this 
province. 
 
Now I know this also is . . . I just read briefly the . . . because I 
think this is only the second time it’s been up for adjourned 
debates on the minister’s remarks. And it deals, talking about 
changing the northern Act, which I know very little about. So, 
you know, our critics like I say will have to be looking at that 
end of it. 
 
But like I said, this particular piece of legislation affects . . . it’s 
going to affect the whole province at the end of it. And I hope it 
affects the right way because a lot of times I can remember 
when the civics Act was brought in, I think there was problems 
with that particular piece of legislation and I think problems 
that we had started raising. But not so much us. It was problems 
that SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 
had raised. And eventually, if I remember, that particular piece 

of legislation was pulled, if I remember right, and then 
amended. 
 
So with this particular Act too I’m hoping that they consulted 
with the groups out there because we will be too. And I hope 
that they will be consulting with them. And there is many 
groups out there because like I say this affects RMs right on up 
to your largest city and from one corner of the province to the 
other corner, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, I will adjourn debate on this particular piece of 
legislation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Addley that Bill No. 6 — The Youth 
Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. An Act to 
amend The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act. 
This Act amends current legislation, and we think that’s good. 
It strengthens numerous clauses and provides clarification to 
others. The role of the police officers dealing with youth is 
made clear. Youth rights are now made clear in the legislation, 
and confidentiality rights are also clearly stated. 
 
On the surface, we like what this Bill is saying. It’s got some 
meat to it and we’re pleased with it, but we have some 
questions. We must know that it protects the most vulnerable of 
our society. These are our children and it can be anyone’s child, 
including ours, and we must be very careful. Under the 
influence of drugs, youth cannot make the choice. The drug has 
control and they can’t make those decisions. So this Bill 
addresses that and we’re glad to see that. 
 
We understand that involuntary care — taking these kids and 
locking them up — it’s a very sensitive issue and you have to 
watch human rights and all. But I think it brings in the rights of 
parents and grandparents. There’s concern with these children 
and up until now, they haven’t been able to do what they know 
has to be done. So it’s protecting these children. 
 
This Bill also must be monitored very carefully. Because we’re 
walking a fine line, you have to watch when that line is crossed. 
So we’d like to see that it’s monitored and watched all the way 
along. Even once the Bill is passed, there must be check valves 
and safeties to make sure that they’re looked after. 
 
Youth are our future. They are our today, and we need to 



November 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

protect them. I’d like to compare them to a new blooming 
flower that’s very gentle and soft and hasn’t been weathered 
and handled yet, and it can’t take it and needs protection. 
 
We’re hoping that the government has consulted all of the 
stakeholders. This has been a weakness, we feel, of the other 
side. So we’re asking them to please, please check with the 
stakeholders very carefully. It’s a good Bill to start with, and 
we’d like to see more consultation on it. And at this time, I’d 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Batoche has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 7 — The Public 
Health Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This Bill 
deals with public disclosure and health inspectors. And on the 
surface we’re looking at this Bill, but we haven’t had any 
feedback from our stakeholders yet. And once again we’re very 
concerned whether consultation has been done. As we’ve 
discovered in some other Bills in the past, this consultation 
hasn’t been done. And it is very important and we haven’t had 
any confirmation from our stakeholders. So at this time we’d 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The member for 
Batoche has moved that debate be adjourned on item no. 9, Bill 
No. 7. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to 
accommodate the works of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services, as well as the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The Government 
House Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 

House now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:42.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................456 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................457 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................457 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................457 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................457 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................457 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................457 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................457 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................458 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................458 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................458 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................458 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................459 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................459 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................459 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................460 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................460 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................460 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Huskies Capture the Mitchell Bowl 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................460 
 Recognition of Foster Families on National Child Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................460 
 Canadian Western Agribition 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................462 
 Red Ribbon Campaign 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................461 
 Corrections to Premier’s Statement 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................461 
 New Democratic Party Convention 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................462 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Screening and Treatment for Cancer 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................462 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................462 
 Foster Care Issues 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................464 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................464 
 Police Staffing for Missing Persons Strategy 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................465 
 Fire Protection for Stony Rapids 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................466 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 National Drug and Addictions Awareness Week 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................467 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................467 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Infrastructure Fund Act 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................467 
 Bill No. 36 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................467 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Speaking Directly to Gallery Visitors 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................468 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................468 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................468 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................468 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................468 
 Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................469 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................470 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................471 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Higgins (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................473 
 Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................473 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................475 
 Bill No. 29 – The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards Amendments Act, 2006 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................475 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................476 
 Bill No. 2 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................476 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................478 
 Bill No. 16 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................478 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................479 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................479 
 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................480 
 Bill No. 8 – The Paramedics Act 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................481 
 Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................482 
 Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................483 
 Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................484 
 Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................486 
 Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................487 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


