






















































Hansard: November 06, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 7B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 219 
 November 6, 2006 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

The Speaker: —The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to continue the 
debate on the Throne Speech this evening, I ask leave of the 
House to move a motion for the adjournment of the debate on 
the address in reply at 5 p.m. to be rescinded. I ask leave of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave for rescinding the motion of the adjournment of the 
debate. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Rescinding the Order for Adjournment of Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Okay there, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast, the 
government Deputy House Leader: 
 

That the order for adjournment of debate, address in reply, 
moved at 5 p.m., be rescinded. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Government House Leader, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast, the opposition Deputy House 
Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for the adjournment of debate on the 
address in reply, moved at 5 p.m., be rescinded. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Debate is continued on the 
address in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, before I start the main part of my speech, there are 
some very important people that I would like to thank. 
 
First my wife, Valerie, without her support none of my dreams 
of politics would have been possible. To her I say a very deep 
and heartfelt thank you for your love, friendship, and for always 
being there. Also a big thank you to Mary Anne Telfer, my CA 
[constituency assistant], my advisor, and my friend. I would 
also like to thank my family and friends for their kind support 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s the plan. And last but not 
least, I would like to thank the people of Batoche constituency. 
So far this three years has been quite a ride. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time of year I’d also like to make a 
few comments on November 11th, our veterans. I am a son of a 
veteran, and November 11th is very important to me. And I’m 
very disturbed by the negative comments I hear about the job 
our soldiers are doing in Afghanistan. Our soldiers know why 
they are there. Let’s all speak up and support them. 
 
I’d like to now speak of my constituency, the Batoche 
constituency. Batoche is a farming community, small 
communities. I think our largest town has a post office box of 
about 600. 
 
It’s been a year of mixed blessings, and most of it’s been in the 
blessing of rain. We’ve had too much. We’ve had rainfalls 
where in two hours, eight inches. And I travelled to one side of 
my constituency where a creek that runs eight feet wide was 
now flowing a quarter mile wide, where fish had travelled 
upstream and were now flopping in ditches. And then we’ve 
had, during harvest, six inches more. And we’ve had a lot of 
areas where they couldn’t finish the seeding. It was just too wet. 
And then to top it off, they couldn’t do what seeding they could. 
They couldn’t get the harvesting because of the wet. So it’s 
been a tough year in Batoche, but we have a strong people. 
 
We also have a declining population, and in our small 
community it is very severe, very severe. We’re having that loss 
of youth. Our school numbers are getting lower and lower, and 
it’s very few schools that are actually adding numbers. And 
they’re all concerned of course with the downloading of costs 
onto the rural economy, the burden of the education portion of 
property tax. They are an optimistic group, but they are running 
out of tomorrows. If we intend to have future generations of 
farmers, we have to find ways to support them. 
 
I’m very proud to represent the Batoche constituency. It is a 
very beautiful and scenic constituency, and if you ever want a 
tour, come see me. I’m very proud and would love to show you 
Batoche. 
 
In Batoche we have the town of Middle Lake which is my home 
community, and it’s a town of just 300 people. Its biggest 
industries — which are two — are the regional park which 
brings in a lot of people to the community. It’s a beautiful 
regional park with a beautiful lake, lots of trees. And it does 
very, very well. People that visit it say it’s one of the finest 
regional parks in the province. 
 
Our other industry, if you could call it an industry, is Bethany 
Pioneer Village. It is an old folks’ home, and for a community 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

of 300, has a population of 100 residents. When they measure 
care levels, Bethany measures as one of the highest quality care 
levels in the province. Beautiful care home, they’ve got their 
own quarter section of land, their own lakefront property, their 
little trails through the bush, their own beach, their own privacy, 
and they’ve built their own community. When someone passes 
away in the Bethany community and somebody asks, who’s 
going to look after the widow, and everybody says the circle of 
friends in that Bethany community does that. 
 
There’s one little problem that we haven’t been able to get 
fixed, though, in our community, and that’s cellphones. The 
older people when they’re travelling would like to have 
cellphones for safety’s sake, especially in the winter. And when 
they go to buy a cellphone, the map shows that yes, we’re right 
in the heart of good cellphone coverage. But our cellphone 
coverage is terrible on the best of times. It just doesn’t. 
 
We were told last year, after a farmer from Middle Lake right 
alongside the highway got caught in the machinery and got his 
leg crushed, and they tried to reach help by cellphone, that 
cellphones would soon be available. It made the news. It was all 
over the papers. That’s more than a year ago, and we still don’t 
have cell coverage that amounts to anything. We’re asking the 
government, when will it happen? This is a viable, beautiful 
community. And these elderly people — which is the core of 
this community — need cell coverage. 
 
I also have in my constituency the village of St. Brieux. And on 
November 8 of this year, the village of St. Brieux is going to 
become a town. St. Brieux is the highest per capita income town 
in Saskatchewan. They are a town that will not sit back. They 
just keep on advancing and progressing. It’s a little town that 
actually even has condos. It’s a growing town. 
 
And just October 28, I was in St. Brieux for the opening of their 
daycare centre. A town, just reaching this 500 status now, and 
they’ve got a daycare centre with 128 kids enrolled. Now 
there’s a town with a future. There’s a town that could teach a 
few lessons to a few other places, maybe even to a government, 
if they’d care to take lessons. 
 
But of course their big, big problem is Highway 368. And for 
three years I’ve been yelling about 368. It’s won the award for 
the worst highway in Saskatchewan. Nobody will do anything 
about it. We get the patch jobs but no real fixing. Millions and 
millions and millions — and I’m not exaggerating — that’s 
how much money travels up and down that highway. It is one of 
the jewels in the Saskatchewan crown, and we can’t even give 
them a highway. Mr. Speaker, it is time. Enough promises. Why 
not a highway? 
 
Also while on my travel this year, I travelled up to Waskesiu. 
Mr. Speaker, Waskesiu is a national park. It is big in Canada’s 
crown, and we can’t even keep up the highway to Waskesiu. It 
was a game of dodge . . . [inaudible] . . . hole all the way up to 
Waskesiu. 
 
Also while I’m on highways, in my constituency I have the 
town of St. Louis. And I have been told that the bridge on St. 
Louis on No. 2 Highway is the only winged bridge left in North 
America. By winged bridge, I mean the train goes down the 
centre or used to go down the centre, and then there are wings 

stuck out on either side. And that’s where the traffic travels. It’s 
the only one left in North America. And I’m asking, what is its 
future? What are the plans with this? 
 
We’ve heard that there is a new bridge — 8, 10 years ago talk 
was — but still nothing is there. How long will it be? Three 
elections or how many does it take to get a promise? 
 
The next item I’d like to talk about is the education portion of 
property tax. The program used to be 40 per cent for the 
farmers, 60 per cent for the government. It is now 70 per cent 
for the farmers and 30 per cent for the government. This is the 
biggest burden of agriculture in Saskatchewan. This must be 
addressed and not just with flowery . . . [inaudible] . . . not just 
with a few dollars. It must be a major concern and must be 
addressed strongly. 
 
Also my constituency is Wakaw, and Wakaw has a hospital yet. 
And this year the signs to the Wakaw Hospital had to be 
covered because there weren’t enough doctors on staff. If you 
knew the fear that the parents of young children and elderly 
have to see these signs covered. It might be just an insignificant 
thing to put a black, plastic bag over a hospital sign. But do you 
know how that affects the people? Mr. Speaker, they need more 
doctors. They need them now. 
 
This is also a factor in rural population. My wife and I do 
auction sales, and we do them in that area, and there are elderly 
couples that in their retirement are saying, I was going to retire 
in this area, but will we have a hospital? So they’re going to the 
city. 
 
And while we’re on the subject of hospitals, also used by my 
constituency extensively is the Humboldt hospital. Four 
elections, Mr. Speaker, four elections and we haven’t even had 
a sod-turning. The price goes up 35 million. We’re getting loss 
of population there again. People are saying, if there isn’t a 
doctor here, I can’t get an appointment here, I go to Saskatoon. 
And that’s where they end up moving to. 
 
We’ve got people that are living in Humboldt but they say, well 
the doctor I see now is in Saskatoon, so while I’m in Saskatoon 
I do my shopping there. So we have a loss of population and a 
loss of economic growth, a loss of sales. And once again the 
rural community suffers. 
 
People are voting with their feet. These are strong communities, 
but they need support. The cost of the hospital has tripled, Mr. 
Speaker, tripled. And the communities keep coming to bat and 
paying that 35 per cent rural health tax, and they’re asking why. 
Why do they not deserve an equal share to what the others 
have? 
 
We’re also experiencing quite a shortage in RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police]. The rural areas aren’t getting the 
patrolling that they used to have, and it’s not the fault of the 
RCMP. It’s a shortage of staff. On the edge of my constituency, 
I’m also served by the RCMP from Prud’homme. And there one 
day was a parade, and the officer that was supposed to lead the 
parade in his bright scarlet uniform missed the parade. And he 
came in his scarlets and he said that he had to do a domestic 
dispute dressed in his felt hat and scarlet and high boots because 
there was nobody else to answer the call. And he said he was 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

sure glad he didn’t have to use his firearms because in the dress 
uniform, the gun is so high up he doesn’t know if he could get 
his elbow up there fast enough. But he was saying there’s just a 
shortage. They used to have, I think he said nine, and they were 
down to less than half, less than half. 
 
I also was in Prince Albert, which is at the edge of my 
constituency. In fact part of Prince Albert is in my constituency. 
I was stopped by a Department of Highways officer who 
recognized me and wanted to talk. And he told me that 
Department of Highways officers cannot give cars speeding 
tickets. He said it’s not in their jurisdiction. He says that’s only 
the RCMP. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Could we not have Department of Highways writing speeding 
tickets for cars as well as the semis they are already looking 
after and let the RCMP spend their time on serious crime as 
compared to speeding? Maybe I don’t consider speeding such a 
serious crime because I do a lot of it myself, Mr. Speaker. But I 
really don’t think it is major crime. The member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook has ridden with me, and he will attest to 
this. 
 
Another item that I find very passionate is geothermal, solar, 
and wind generation. This definitely comes under the category 
of green, and we’re falling very, very short on that. 
 
I met with a contractor in Prince Albert who has travelled the 
world over, spent years in the United States and in Germany 
learning on the best on geothermal and wind generation and 
solar panels. Mr. Speaker, he has a solar panel on the roof of his 
house so sensitive that at 30 below on a bright moonlit night — 
he happened to be up for some reason — and midnight or 1 
o’clock it was, the solar panels cut in and were collecting 
energy from the moonlight. 
 
So he had solar panels, he had geothermal, and he’s got a wind 
generator. Well, Mr. Speaker, guess what? SaskPower took 
offence, and he now had to take the blades off his wind 
generator. They were afraid that he was generating too much 
and would be pushing power back into the grid system. And 
their excuse was that he could electrocute a lineman that was 
further up the line if they shut off, and his system was pushing 
into the line. 
 
And he says the system that they have is so sophisticated it’s 
like one-tenth of a millisecond or some fantastic number like 
that where his system would cut out. He has installed complete, 
self-sufficient, geothermal, solar, wind systems up north in La 
Ronge, that the only thing they need from the government is a 
telephone line hooked on — totally self-sufficient, totally 
independent. And he can’t spread the systems out. He is so 
upset that, Mr. Speaker, he says he’s going to pack his bags and 
move to BC [British Columbia]. 
 
We talk about green, but where is the green? We’ve got 
coal-fired power, which is the dirtiest, the dirtiest electricity 
there is, and we’re denying these people who could cut our 
consumption with geothermal and solar. The technology is 
there. The government has to have the desire to go there. 
 

I heard a member over there saying geothermal uses electricity. 
Yes, geothermal does use electricity, but look at the whole 
benefits. I happen to know of a store on the edge of P.A. [Prince 
Albert] that is 20, 30,000 square feet, and it is entirely heated by 
geothermal. The whole system before the price of natural gas 
jumped up would have been paid for in 10 years. Now with the 
high price of natural gas, their whole system will be paid for in 
five years. Totally self-sufficient. They do not have any outside 
heat at all. They’ve even got extra water to run their showers 
and all the other systems in this unit. It’s entirely geothermally 
done. And if you want a tour, I’ll take you there. 
 
If you really want a tour of sophisticated geothermal, travel 
with me to the edge of my constituency into the member from 
Humboldt’s constituency, to the town of Aberdeen, and you’ll 
see one of the most sophisticated geothermal units in this 
country. The geothermal system not only makes the ice for their 
NHL [National Hockey League] size rink, it makes the ice for 
the curling rink. And the spinoff is all the extra heat. They’re 
heating their library. They’re heating their bowling alley. 
They’re heating their offices. And once they can afford it, 
they’re going to add a swimming pool, and it’ll be heating that. 
Mr. Speaker, there are alternatives, and it’s time to look at 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am the forestry critic for the Saskatchewan 
Party, and I’d like to mention a few things on forestry. I hear 
there’s a possible sale of the Meadow Lake mill, and we sure 
welcome this, and we’d like more information on it to know 
what’s happening there. We’d also like to hear if anything’s 
happening with the P.A. mill because there’s a lot of talk about 
taking FMAs [forest management agreement] away and things 
like that. And we’d like to know where the members on the 
other side stand on this. 
 
We’d also like to know what’s going to happen at Big River. 
There’s a very modern, up-to-date saw mill, completely 
computerized, and we’d like to know. The task force came out 
with a big report. And at the presentation not much was said 
when a logger from up north got up and spoke out against it. He 
said, this report, nice report, but it is a repeat of the Romanow 
report, he says. There’s nothing different. And he says there 
was no substance. And most people that were there agreed with 
him. 
 
And now we hear that there’s a minister’s task force report that 
was released on the day of the budget. I believe it’s 28 ideas on 
that one. What happened to that one? When the first report was 
released, the first task force, there was a big wine and cheese 
party. There was all kinds of speakers. There was a big 
celebration. And now all of a sudden the minister’s task force 
report comes out, and nothing — not a word. And this report, 
the second report, has . . . the majority of the input is by 
industry, by people who are out there in the forest. And their 
report has been muffled. I understand there’s 28 ideas on good 
things to do in the Saskatchewan forest. And the Saskatchewan 
forest has so much to offer. It’s time that we get at it and get 
something seriously done. 
 
We are very glad to see the sale of the Carrot River saw mill 
and the Hudson Bay plywood mill. From what we can learn so 
far — and we don’t have all the facts yet — C&C Wood 
Products does value-added wood products and they look like 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

they’ll be a very good fit for the area. And we wish them well 
and we wish the people of Carrot River and Hudson Bay. 
They’ve signed a letter of intent but I understand that they have 
to have government approval on the FMA being transferred into 
a joint FMA with C&C Wood Products and Weyerhaeuser. 
 
So we’re looking forward to this. We’re hoping good things can 
happen and wishing all of them the best in the future. And 
we’re looking forward to something in Meadow Lake and P.A.. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to get very, very serious for a 
few moments. There is an issue in the Throne Speech that 
bothers me. That is the balanced budget statement. According to 
the auditor’s report, three of the last five budgets were not 
balanced, or seven of the last sixteen. Yet this government 
keeps on repeating and repeating this balanced budget statement 
as if repeating it would make it so. Mr. Speaker, let me repeat. 
If the auditor says it is not balanced, it is not balanced; and all 
the hot air in the world will not balance the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an injustice to every taxpayer in 
Saskatchewan. Is this how we treat the people of this province? 
Mr. Speaker, the government should tell them the truth. I think 
the people of Saskatchewan can handle the truth. Mr. Speaker, 
maybe the reputation of politicians can move a little higher up 
the moral ladder with issues like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] speak of their 
new campaign called Imagine. What I see when I imagine is 
imagine what we could have done with 38 million from 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]. Imagine the cellphone coverage we’d have had in 
Middle Lake if we’d have spent the 75 million that’s been spent 
on Navigata. Imagine the roads if we’d spent 100 per cent of the 
money allotted for highways instead of 57 per cent. Imagine 
highway 368 with its booming economy. 
 
Imagine the uranium industry, what it would be like if we’d 
have started a long time ago and we’d take our proper share. I 
understand that the Alberta economy sells 1 per cent of the 
world’s oil and gets very, very rich on it. Saskatchewan sells 3 
per cent of the world’s uranium and we don’t hear anything 
about it. 
 
Imagine the oil patch and what would happen if that map, that 
oil map that we love to show, was coloured the correct way. 
Imagine Humboldt with a hospital and imagine this government 
with the Sask Party in control. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I cannot support this Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is Andrea 
Smotra, a Regina resident who is the constituency assistant for 
Tom Lukiwski, the MP [Member of Parliament] for Regina 
Lumsden. I had the privilege of working with Ms. Smotra 
during the last provincial election. She was the campaign 
manager for the candidate from Saskatoon Sutherland. We 
shared campaign offices and found it to be a pleasant and good 
working relationship. Since that time we’ve had the pleasure of 
working with her in Regina and want to wish her well and 
welcome her to her legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley on his feet? For debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased today to be able to join in with colleagues in 
the legislature in the Throne Speech debate. I want to say from 
the onset that I will be speaking in favour of the motion. I think 
it’s a very, very, good, commendable Throne Speech, and I’ll 
say more on that in a minute. 
 
But I also want to join colleagues in congratulating the newest 
member to the legislature, the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy on his win, and wishing him all the best in whatever 
time he spends here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also recognize that none of us would be here 
were it not for many supports of family and the people that 
work around us, and I would like to acknowledge some of those 
people who are key in my life that enable me to do the work 
here that I love doing. 
 
First of all, I know that my parents are watching this evening 
from up in Saskatoon, and I want to thank them for many years 
of inspiration and guidance and certainly support in my political 
career, as well as their very able criticism of the work that I’m 
doing. Throughout all of my life they have been there, 
supportive, encouraging, and challenging as I’ve explored 
various facets of opportunity that have been provided for me. 
 
I also want to thank my wife, Gail, for her tremendous support 
through the years; my children, Alaina, who is now in China 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

teaching English as a second language, and my son, Daniel, 
who is studying international studies at the University of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, around us also are people who work in our offices 
who provide tremendous support and I want to thank 
particularly my constituency assistant, Donna From, who has 
been my constituency assistant since I was first elected in ’99. 
Donna does tremendous work. She cares for the people of the 
constituency in times when I’m not able to be there for them. 
She continues to learn and to grow in her work and I’m very, 
very thankful for all that she contributes to the constituency and 
to enabling me to do my work. 
 
[19:30] 
 
In the office here, in the ministerial office, just a tremendous 
staff — second to none — who are committed, who are 
dedicated, and who, Mr. Speaker, are compassionate. And given 
some of the very difficult times that there have been in 
agriculture they have faced many very challenging phone calls, 
people who are deeply hurt, who are in danger and some of 
them losing their farming operations. And I believe that my 
staff has always been thoughtful and compassionate with them 
and I do appreciate so much the work that they do. The work of 
the Department of Agriculture and Food has also been very 
enabling, and I’m thankful for all of their support and hard 
work and commitment to helping build a strong agriculture 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that said, I have to say that today in Saskatchewan 
our future looks brighter than it has looked for a very, very long 
time. Mr. Speaker, we have seen so much progress and 
development over these last years. In each of the last two years 
Saskatchewan’s real GDP [gross domestic product] per capita 
increased the most of any of the provinces in Canada. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is significant. We are setting records in private sector 
investment, in retail sales, in construction, and in employment. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re doing this because this government has set 
the right stage. We have actually shifted the economy of this 
province and provided the strength and the opportunity to 
enable these industries to go ahead. 
 
This past September saw the largest number of people at work 
in our province than at any time in the recorded past, and in 
October again almost 8,100 more young people working in 
Saskatchewan than there were in October 2005. Mr. Speaker, 
this province is hot and it’s moving. 
 
The New Democratic Party government is supporting 
technological advances that are being made in petroleum 
industry, greenhouse gas research, biofuels, infectious diseases, 
and research in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Major investments are 
being made in oil, in gas, in diamonds, in uranium, in potash, 
and yes, Mr. Speaker, in value-added agriculture. This evening 
earlier on we had opportunity to meet with Canadian canola 
growers, Saskatchewan canola growers and with people in the 
industry, and we know that in that part of the industry there’s 
been tremendous expansion. We are seeing the expansion in 
crush in this province, Mr. Speaker, all of the major players 
here. 
 
Now we’re seeing new developments in terms of the research 

that is being done to help improve this Saskatchewan crop, Mr. 
Speaker — Saskatchewan gold. The canola industry is 
providing tremendous, tremendous opportunity for farmers of 
Saskatchewan and for the residents of many of our communities 
where the crush operations and other research and development 
operations are taking place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in five short years we have become a have 
province with the fifth largest economy in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. What an incredible turnaround. Fifteen years ago, 
when this government came to power, Saskatchewan was not 
doing well at all. The Grant Devine government had basically 
gutted the economy of Saskatchewan. Our debt was horrible, 
Mr. Speaker. The deficit was creating chaos. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we look back we can see the 
debt-to-GDP ratio was at about 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
Unbelievable that so much of our economy would have been 
locked up in debt created by those Conservatives who were in 
power here in this province prior to this government coming in 
in ’91, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we have built upon the successes of that government that 
came here in ’91, who balance the budget, who turned things 
around. And, Mr. Speaker, in the last five years, as I said, we 
have become a have province under the leadership of our 
current Premier. 
 
The previous member, the previous administration of which the 
member from Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition, and 
many of his colleagues were a part, had racked up huge debt 
and nearly driven this province into bankruptcy. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of this province need to remember that. The young 
people of this province need to know the history of this 
province so that mistake of electing those people will never, 
never happen again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our first task beginning in 1991 was to fundamentally change 
the province so that we would never end up in that kind of 
situation. To fundamentally change the economic fortunes of 
Saskatchewan. To make the changes that would allow this 
province to move forward successfully and in sustainable ways. 
 
Knowing that social progress cannot come without economic 
progress, we set a course to balance the books and to restore 
fiscal health to our province and to our people. And we have 
had, Mr. Speaker, as evidence of that work, we have had 14 
straight credit upgrades, Mr. Speaker — 14 straight credit 
upgrades to build and sustain this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan New Democrat government has a vision of a 
strong and a prosperous Saskatchewan. A province where we 
could use the many advantages to help build a better future for 
Saskatchewan families, for Saskatchewan young people. A 
bright future where our young people could live and work and 
raise their families and have hope and continue to gain the best 
education possible, Mr. Speaker. That’s the work that we’ve 
engaged in. That’s the work that we have successfully been 
doing as we have built and strengthened this economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, like a family wanting to build a new house on 
the site of an old one that’s fallen in, Mr. Speaker, we had to 
remove the debris before we could build this new house, Mr. 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

Speaker. Those folks who were elected in 1991 worked hard 
removing that debris so that today we can build a successful 
new house that will provide for a strong and wonderful future 
for the people of Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, we are 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We paid down that staggering debt 
that was 70 per cent of the province’s total economic output. 
We grew the economy so that the ratio was changed. And today 
our total Crown government debt ratio has moved to around 20 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is economic success. 
That is a major turnaround. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it would not have happened without the 
leadership that this Premier and this government has been able 
to provide. Mr. Speaker, it would not have happened, would not 
have happened, without the leadership of this Premier and this 
government. We set the conditions for the economic success 
that we are now experiencing today and that we will continue to 
experience as we move forward. 
 
What have we done, Mr. Speaker? As we’ve balanced the 
budget, as we’ve moved forward, investing in our province, 
investing in the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, what did 
we do? We invested in tax cuts, in infrastructure, in research, 
and in that most important of our resources, Mr. Speaker — we 
have invested in the people of Saskatchewan. And we are 
enabling people to continue to seize the Saskatchewan 
advantage. 
 
We did that by first simplifying the tax system and then by 
cutting personal income taxes — the largest cuts in a 
generation, Mr. Speaker. We introduced the single largest 
capital tax cut in history to encourage businesses to make 
investments, the investments that they need in order to be strong 
partners in this province. And that’s how we see them, Mr. 
Speaker. As partners in developing this province. 
 
We cut royalties, Mr. Speaker, to stimulate growth and 
development in our resource sector so that it would continue to 
contribute to our economy. And do you know what cutting 
those royalties did, Mr. Speaker? It encouraged those 
companies to invest more and more, and we are prospering. 
Because of those investments the people of Saskatchewan are 
prospering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We invested in research and development to maintain our 
technological and competitive advantages. Mr. Speaker, we are 
competitive and we have advanced technologically in this 
province in ways that other provinces envy deeply. We have 
invested, Mr. Speaker, in our future and the future of our 
children. We have fundamentally changed — fundamentally, 
positively, and progressively changed — the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
There’s more to do, Mr. Speaker. A lot more. But today we 
have an economy that again can fuel social progress — the 
social progress that we desire for ourselves, that others desire, 
that the people of Saskatchewan want and need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our strategy is working. Saskatchewan is working 

because of the investments that we are making. We are building 
a better future here for young people — our Saskatchewan 
young people, for ordinary working families right here at home. 
And we are opening the door, Mr. Speaker, for young people 
from across Canada and from around the world because this is 
the right place to be to build a strong and prosperous future. 
 
We have the vision and the energy to build a strong and a 
prosperous province. We are committed to working with people 
in achieving that success and prosperity together for the good of 
our children, our grandchildren, and for the children and 
grandchildren of those people who will come here and will help 
to build and strengthen this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key elements to further success in the province 
are outlined in this year’s Throne Speech. It is the most positive 
and hopeful Throne Speech that we have seen in some time and 
it’s based on the concept of people working together, sharing 
and benefiting from each other’s experience and expertise 
together, and reaping the rewards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The four cornerstones are essential to building a strong and 
positive future. We will expand the literacy program. Why? 
Because we know that the young people and the people of this 
province need opportunity to learn to read. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we will do that despite what the political cousins of the 
members across the way have done, the federal Conservatives, 
when they gutted the program, when they cut the money from 
the literacy program. Mr. Speaker, we will make sure that 
program goes forward because we know that literacy is 
essential to building a good, strong province. 
 
And imagine, imagine, imagine, Mr. Speaker . . . I see there are 
some clouded imaginations on the other side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, but I know when I look at this side and I say, imagine, 
imagine, one-third of the $800 million that the federal 
Conservatives have promised to us going to bring relief to 
property tax holders. Mr. Speaker, one-third. What does that 
mean? $240 million relief in property tax, if their cousins will 
keep their promise and provide the equalization formula that 
they said they would provide, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it’s 
about. 
 
Our commitment, our commitment to university students to 
enable them, Mr. Speaker, freezing the university tuition, 
enabling students to go to university because of what they 
know, not because of what they own or how much money they 
have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue to expand training and we will strengthen . . . 
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. I get choked up; there’s so many good 
things happening. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s hard to 
know. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . My parents are right with 
me. They haven’t changed the channels at all, friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to expand training and strengthen 
our regional training in order to bring education closer to the 
students. Mr. Speaker, we know that in our rural and our remote 
areas bringing education to these students is essential to helping 
build and maintain rural Saskatchewan, remote Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’re being innovative in the ways that we do 
that. 
 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

We’ll be hosting a youth summit, Mr. Speaker, to work with 
our youth. Not to tell them what we’re going to do, but to work 
with them to help build a strong future with them and for them 
and for their children. 
 
We will expand partnerships with the First Nations and Métis to 
enhance education and skills training. We’ll receive and act on 
a comprehensive review of access to post-secondary again, Mr. 
Speaker, because we want the people of this province to have 
access based on their desire on what they know and not on what 
they own or how much they have. 
 
We will invest in language training. We will foster strong 
communities for a goal of 5,000 immigrants by 2008, Mr. 
Speaker. We are building a strong and prosperous economy for 
ordinary families, for youth, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
tremendous future here and this inspired and bold government 
is moving that future forward. 
 
[19:45] 
 
We will work with health care providers, Mr. Speaker, to 
further improve access to services and to reduce wait times. We 
will expand the Aboriginal workforce by working with First 
Nations and Métis peoples. We will enhance efforts to recruit 
health providers, using new relocation incentives in return for 
service commitments among other initiatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll increase opportunities for internationally educated 
professionals so that they can come here, work here, and find a 
home here. We will help people understand how important it is 
not just to invite them here but to bring them into our lives, our 
homes, to welcome them as a part of this community. And, Mr. 
Speaker, with that kind of a welcome and invitation we will see 
successful immigration that will grow, that will help this 
province to strengthen and prosper. 
 
There’s so many good things, Mr. Speaker, but I must move 
through and talk a little bit about agriculture. 
 
I do want to talk about some of the other work though. I want to 
talk about the further steps that we will be taking to achieve our 
long-term goal of one third of our energy needs that will come 
from renewable resources. Mr. Speaker, we know that we have 
tremendous renewable resources in this province, and we will 
see one third of our energy coming from renewable sources. 
 
We will see research and development of the first Saskatchewan 
designed utility-scale, clean-coal generating facility. We will 
carry out a comprehensive plan in biofuels; lead in carbon 
sequestration and wind power; implement a plan related . . . we 
have already implemented, pardon me, a plan related to the 
mandated use of ethanol. 
 
We’ll ensure safe water. We’ll expand our vision of 
agroforestry. We’ll expand production and processing and 
marketing of locally grown organic foods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of all, we’ll make sure that families enjoy 
the benefits of this very strong and prosperous economy. And to 
help them enjoy those benefits, our Throne Speech tells us 
we’re introducing a new statutory holiday — a Family Day — 
beginning in February 2007. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say I 

have heard from constituents and people around this province 
how pleased they are that this holiday, this Family Day has 
been implemented. 
 
We will respond, Mr. Speaker, to many, many opportunities 
here, and we will continue to build a strong and prosperous 
province. And we hope that our federal government comes on 
board and keeps its promises — promises that will enable us to 
build a strong economy if they keep their promise on the 
equalization formula. 
 
We want to see, Mr. Speaker, a commitment of the federal 
government to public infrastructure renewal. We need, Mr. 
Speaker, to see the federal government put in the same 
proportion of investment into our infrastructure in this province 
that we put in. I mean the trivial 10 per cent of what they take 
out of this province in fuel tax, put back in less than 10 per cent 
is almost meaningless, Mr. Speaker. It’s time that they came up 
to the plate, time that they invested significantly in helping us 
rebuild this infrastructure, much of which was broken down 
because of federal government decisions which have changed 
the shift of our transportation industry in this province and put 
much more heavy haul on roads that were never designed to 
handle it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is their obligation to come to the table and to put 
more money on that table so that we can build infrastructure — 
roads, heavy-haul roads, social development, improvement in 
our infrastructure around the province, Mr. Speaker. Our federal 
government can help, should they choose to keep their promise 
on equalization, should they choose to work with us, work with 
our cities and our municipalities to build infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will look for strong, safe communities as well. 
We are introducing legislation which gives police new means to 
combat violence. Mr. Speaker, no one wants violent 
communities. We want communities where our children can 
grow up safe and happy, where they can go for a walk and play 
out in the parks and do so without fear. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is making changes that will enable that to happen. 
 
We will continue to develop an anti-racism strategy because, 
Mr. Speaker, this province really benefits from the variety of 
the racial mix that there is here. And we want to see that grow, 
Mr. Speaker, over the years. 
 
Investments in the North will continue to strengthen those 
investments to build a strong northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard members opposite talk about 
agriculture and talk about the farm. I want to say that the family 
farm in Saskatchewan is absolutely a cornerstone of building a 
strong province. And we have committed, Mr. Speaker, every 
year to fully fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] and have done so, Mr. Speaker, and this year well 
ahead of our budget. In the Throne Speech we have said again, 
we will fully fund the CAIS program. Mr. Speaker, we will do 
that, and we will help to strengthen the programs in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I go to the federal-provincial meetings on 
agriculture, I work for a better program, Mr. Speaker — a 
program that will provide better support for Saskatchewan 
farmers, a program that will provide a better opportunity for the 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

people of Saskatchewan because the federal government should 
be picking up a greater portion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province pays more per capita than any other 
province for agriculture support. Mr. Speaker, it pays almost 
four times what the federal per capita average is support for 
agriculture. Mr. Speaker, we have shown our commitment. We 
will continue to show our commitment as we build strong 
agriculture programs for this province. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will contribute to the fabric of building strong programs for the 
nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my time is winding down, I just want to remind 
people of some of the things that we’ve done. I know the 
members opposite want to hear more, Mr. Speaker. But I do just 
want to remind them that we have committed significantly to 
pushing for a better deal, calling for $575 million last spring. 
Mr. Speaker, where were they when we went to Ottawa calling 
for that? Nowhere to be seen. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, why didn’t they come? Because they don’t 
like me. Why don’t they like me, Mr. Speaker? Well there’s 
probably lots of reasons, but the main one, Mr. Speaker, is 
because I think I just hit a little too close to home. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I go and work with the farmers, I work with the 
ranchers to help build a strong system for the people of this 
province. And you can tell by their howls, Mr. Speaker, that 
they resent the fact that we have built some very good, strong 
relationships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to engage a little bit later in 
discussions around the Canadian Wheat Board which provides 
significant benefit to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And so for that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll leave it to another day. I just 
want to say this is a fine Throne Speech. This clearly indicates 
that this government is progressive and moving forward to build 
a better, stronger province for Saskatchewan young people, for 
Saskatchewan families. And I’m thankful to be a part of it, and 
will vote in favour of this Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you. I welcome this opportunity to 
address this Assembly and offer my comments on the Speech 
from the Throne. Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to welcome our newest MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly], the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — I look forward to working together with the 
member to pursue together the vision that this young man has 
for this province. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this 
opportunity to thank the people of Cut Knife-Turtleford 
constituency for their support in the past and their continuing 
support. I would also like to thank our constituency assistants, 

in particular Cheryl and Becky from my constituency, but 
indeed for all the constituency assistants working throughout 
the province. Their role is crucial in providing the conduit 
through which the concerns of our constituents can be directed 
to the appropriate arms of government as well as keeping us, 
the elected representatives, aware of the concerns of our 
constituents. 
 
I would like also to thank my wife, Heather, for her support and 
my sons for their encouragement, and to my friends, Bob 
Prodahl and Randy Rutley for spending their holiday time at 
Chisholm Farms to allow our farm to continue to operate. To 
my mom, if you’re watching, I think Dancing with the Stars is 
on. You may want to switch. 
 
The economy of our constituency is dependent on agriculture, 
grain, and mixed farming, and oil and gas, and the businesses 
that support these industries. As my constituency borders the 
fourth meridian, the pull from the red hot economy to the west 
is very evident. Unfortunately what I have seen in the past 
number of years are many of the support service companies 
starting up locally in our constituency but as they grow, firstly 
setting up a branch in Alberta, then moving the main office to 
Alberta, and then moving their families to Alberta. 
 
This NDP government has dragged its heels on addressing this 
situation and the results are all too obvious. Some recent 
initiatives by this government may help to address this 
situation, perhaps even slow down the out-migration of our 
young people and young families that has been occurring at an 
alarming rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate reality of this is that had some of 
these changes that we on this side of the House had been calling 
for, had these changes been initiated some years ago, this reality 
may have been very much different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity over the past number of 
months to be a member of the Public Accounts Committee and 
to become more familiar with the role of the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor. It has become very clear to me that should 
this NDP government have heeded the revelations and warnings 
of the Provincial Auditor in the past, a number of unfortunate 
situations could have been avoided, for which this government 
must now take full responsibility. These situations involve fraud 
and theft and most recently, the failure of this government to 
protect the most vulnerable — our youth at risk. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne on page 1, this NDP government 
states that the province has incurred 13 consecutive balanced 
budgets and significant reduction of public debt. This is what 
this government is telling the people of Saskatchewan. On the 
surface these statements by this government should provide a 
relatively high degree of optimism and security for the people 
of our province and for those people and businesses who might 
be considering Saskatchewan as a place to live, to work, to 
locate, or to invest. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, on closer scrutiny we find that these 
claims are not only misleading; they are in fact refuted by the 
very office that is charged with the responsibility of reporting 
the results of the government’s financial activities and the 
government’s financial position. 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

So what does the Provincial Auditor’s report have to say about 
the government’s annual surplus or deficit? Remember, this 
government in this Throne Speech has indicated 13 consecutive 
balanced budgets. In the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Legislative Assembly, Understanding the Finances of the 
Government, 2006 report volume 2 dated August 28 of this 
year, the report states, and I quote: 
 

The annual surplus or deficit shows the extent to which a 
government spends less or more than it raises . . . in one 
fiscal year. In simple terms, it shows whether a 
government is living within its means. An annual surplus 
means the government is living within its means. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the accompanying graph no. 1 on page 7 of this 
report indicates the government’s annual surplus or deficit from 
1991 to date. The report goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

Graph 1 shows that since 1991 the Government has lived 
within its means for nine of the last sixteen years (that is 
. . . raised more revenues than it spent in each of these 
years). 
 

This government claims that in the past 13 years it has 
experienced 13 consecutive balanced budgets. The Provincial 
Auditor report indicates in fact that three of the most recent five 
years up to 2006, the present time, were in fact deficits. Who 
then are we to believe? And how can the apparent discrepancy 
be explained? 
 
Coming to this Assembly with a background in accounting, I 
have no difficulty in deciding who I believe. However what I 
believe to be the truth in this matter is not what really matters. 
What do the people of this province believe? And what do other 
readers of these reports believe? 
 
These statements by this government are at the least misleading 
and void of the principles of accountability and transparency. 
The trick in this apparent discrepancy, as to what is real and 
what is not, has to do with the government’s recording of a fund 
— really a non-funded fund — called the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. Since the inception of this fund, which is devoid of any 
money, this government has toyed with the very basic definition 
of balanced. In simple terms, this government uses this fund to 
balance the General Revenue Fund, but there is no money in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
[20:00] 
 
As my colleagues on this side of the House have pointed out in 
the past, this fund is akin to a credit card. At the end of the year, 
if this government has spent more than it has raised, it takes a 
cash advance on its credit card, transfers this cash advance to 
the General Revenue Fund, determines that this transfer is in 
fact revenue for the General Revenue Fund, and voila, there it 
is, another balanced budget. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we still have this pesky little cash 
advance to deal with. Oh well, we’ll address that issue in the 
next fiscal year or the next fiscal year. Or perhaps we’ll leave 
that to the next government of the day. 
 
We’ve seen a number of examples in the corporate world where 

corporations have been taken to task for misreporting their 
revenues. Companies like Nortel, Enron, Bre-X come to mind. 
In some of these cases, individuals responsible of unsavoury 
accounting practices proven to mislead their shareholders have 
found themselves doing time in a government facility — a 
facility much unlike this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also indicates a significant 
reduction of public debt. Once again referring to the auditor’s 
report, if we look at the total liabilities of this government from 
the period 1991 to the present — including borrowings, 
unfunded pension liabilities, and liabilities of government 
business enterprises — the total liabilities of this government 
have increased from $17.6 billion to $21 billion. 
 
In fairness, Mr. Speaker, as the auditor points out, net debt is a 
more meaningful indicator in that it takes into consideration the 
changes also in the assets of the province. The net debt in 1991 
was $7.9 billion dollars. It is presently at $7.8 billion dollars. 
Mr. Speaker, over the past 16 years, the net debt has decreased 
by less than the unbudgeted, unforeseen windfall that this 
government has collected in resource royalties alone in the last 
recent months. 
 
The accounting practices referred to earlier put the Provincial 
Auditor’s office in what I would describe as an embarrassing 
position. At the outset of their reports they’re required to 
explain to the readers of the financial statements that, unless 
examined very carefully, they may be misleading and in fact do 
not comply with generally accepted principles. 
 
In my constituency the concerns that are most often relayed to 
my office include the sorry state of our highways and roads, the 
expensive but inefficient delivery of health care, the continuing 
exodus of our young people, and the increasing rate of crime. 
 
This Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, does not adequately address 
these concerns, and this government has proven to not 
adequately address these concerns. I will not be supporting the 
motion to adopt the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure and an 
honour to rise in this Hon. Assembly to reply to the Speech 
from the Throne read on October 26 by Saskatchewan’s new 
Lieutenant Governor, His Honour Dr. Gordon Barnhart. 
 
To begin my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate His 
Honour on his recent appointment to this important and 
prestigious role and to express my confidence that he will be a 
great Lieutenant Governor for the province. I also predict, Mr. 
Speaker, that this first Speech from the Throne will also be the 
last one delivered by this tired, old NDP government for a long 
time . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I also wish to welcome our new 
colleague on this side of the floor from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

That member won a decisive victory, Mr. Speaker, there in the 
recent by-election, so decisive that he, under the Saskatchewan 
Party banner, reduced the once powerful NDP to a third place 
finish in a seat that once was the home to their hero, Tommy 
Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker when that tired, old Premier across the way, or 
whoever replaces him, finally screws up the courage to call a 
general election, there will be many more decisive wins for the 
Saskatchewan Party and many more second and third place 
finishes for the NDP, or whatever they’re calling themselves by 
then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely proud to represent the 
hard-working, productive, independent people of Thunder 
Creek. My constituents don’t complain much about the 
problems that this socialist government causes for them 
directly. Although when I talk about agriculture and the 
economy and infrastructure later on in my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, you will see that they certainly have plenty to 
complain about wherever this weary, old government conflicts 
with their lives. 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, when my constituents talk of the political 
situation in this province, they usually talk about the big 
picture. They ask why our young people and retirees leave the 
province and resource boom and they wonder why agriculture is 
such a low priority with this government. And they question the 
closing and downsizing and downgrading of our rural health 
care facilities and schools. They can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, 
why our transportation infrastructure is allowed to crumble 
while government coffers are full to overflowing because they 
understand that if we are able to develop the economy of this 
province, most of that development will come from agriculture 
and oil and gas and forestry and mining. All of which will be 
conducted solely in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They understand that it is a spinoff from these industries that 
will make our cities more prosperous, and they know that these 
industries can’t grow without solid transportation, health care, 
and education infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They shake their heads, Mr. Speaker, at a government that 
allows rural infrastructure to deteriorate at the same time as that 
government enjoys an embarrassment of wealth from our rural 
areas, mostly from the resource sector. And the most common 
question that I get from them is, when can we have an election 
so we can get rid of these clowns once and for all. My people 
are selfless, big-picture people, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 
represent them in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are nearing Remembrance Day, the time that 
we take to remember our war dead and our surviving veterans. 
And this year once again, Canada is at war, and our long, sad 
list of wartime casualties is growing again. Mr. Speaker, I 
remember as a Cub Scout and later a Boy Scout, marching from 
the town hall in Pense to the cenotaph, sometimes in short pants 
in November 11th, with the veterans in their legion uniforms 
and how proud . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member 
from Lloydminster is trying to get that image out of his head. 
How proud I was to march with those veterans, Mr. Speaker. I 
saw them differently on that day, those men and women that I 
grew up around and those men who fought for us and then came 

back and continued to build this country. 
 
I remember my Scout leaders, Gordon Hagerty and Frank 
Stafford, both veterans, Mr. Speaker. I remember Jack Harlton 
and Charlie Maupin and Ken Gilchrist and Jack Lovell and 
George Swain and Jack Good and my uncles Jack Munroe and 
Murdock Bev Norma — all gone now. I think of Grant Ogilvie, 
Norman Morrison, and my friend and mentor John Wood who 
are still with us. These are just a few of the veterans that had a 
influence and an effect on me in my formative years. I consider 
myself fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have known them and to have 
them along with my dad for role models. 
 
Now we’re at war again, and our young people are doing us 
proud, and I am very proud of the work that they are doing in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, in the areas that Canadian 
soldiers have made safe in Afghanistan, children are now going 
back to school — something that hasn’t happened in some of 
those areas for a very long time. And some of those areas made 
safe by our soldiers are being resettled again, if we can imagine 
that in this country — resettled again, some of the most 
war-torn areas in that besieged country, Mr. Speaker. Our 
young people, our soldiers, are involved in some very deadly 
fighting, the kind of fighting that the soldiers of Canada have 
not really been involved in for about 55 years. They are serving 
us with great distinction, Mr. Speaker, and that is borne out by 
the comments of our allies who serve in that theatre with them. 
But none of this comes without a terrible price, Mr. Speaker, 
and God be with them. 
 
On the economic front, Mr. Speaker, the only thing new in this 
Speech from the Throne is the 2 per cent cut to the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. Now nobody on this side of the house is 
criticizing the NDP for lowering the PST or any tax for that 
matter. But we have seen this government previously cut taxes 
before an election, only to raise them right after. Former 
Premier Roy Romanow did it. And more recently we have seen 
this Premier raise the PST in the first budget after the 2003 
election, and now just before the next election, we see him 
lower it again. I wonder what would be in store for us if the 
NDP were to win that election. Thankfully that’s not likely to 
happen because the people of this province are wise to the ways 
of this Premier and this NDP Party. 
 
Coincidently I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, this Premier is staring 
down the barrel of a leadership review at his party’s convention 
this fall, and a few points on the public opinion polls wouldn’t 
hurt his chances. Well good luck, Mr. Premier. And for what 
it’s worth, I don’t think the $325 million cost of the PST cut is 
too big a price to pay to save your floundering leadership. 
 
On the economic front, Mr. Speaker, what this Speech from the 
Throne is noticeably lacking is any kind of a plan for youth 
retention or any plan to solve the labour shortage that is now 
one of our most serious economic problems in this province. 
But fortunately a few days after the Speech from the Throne, 
the Leader of the Opposition did just that, and I recommend it 
as bedtime reading for NDP cabinet ministers as there are many 
points contained in the document that that party may want to 



November 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

steal, as is their custom. Really, Mr. Speaker, we would rather 
they just plagiarized it word for word because if they reword it 
to make it sound less like our idea, we’re so afraid that they 
may misunderstand some of the more complex passages, and 
public policy would suffer as a result. 
 
The institute of chartered accountants recently released their 
annual financial checkup document that offers a look at how the 
province rates as a place to invest, among other things. And 
they say some interesting things including, and I quote, “One 
troubling statistic is the low rate of job creation here over the 
last five years — the lowest rate among jurisdictions studied.” 
They also state, and I quote: 
 

The ratio of research and development expenditures to 
gross domestic product . . . is the lowest amongst the 
jurisdictions surveyed. Such, it seems, is the price of 
having so few corporate head offices. 
 

They go on to say that, and I quote: 
 

The comparatively low appreciation in the value of 
housing means Saskatchewan entrepreneurs willing to use 
their homes as collateral for loans can amass relatively 
little capital via that route [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

A recently commissioned Ipsos Reid poll of 400 senior 
executives found that only about 25 per cent have a favourable 
view of Saskatchewan’s economy despite low unemployment 
levels, a booming resource sector, and gross domestic product 
growth. This clearly shows that Saskatchewan under this NDP 
government has a branding problem, that there are serious trust 
issues in the investment community. How can a jurisdiction 
ever reach its potential when only 25 per cent of senior 
executives — those who direct investment — have a favourable 
view of it? Incredibly, the Deputy Premier blamed the whole 
thing on the executives’ perception of our agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Deputy Premier, that member from Yorkton, 
was Saskatchewan’s Minister of Agriculture for a very long 
time — or at least it seemed like a very long time to farmers. In 
all that time, why didn’t he do anything to solve the problems in 
agriculture and improve the perception of that industry if it’s 
such a problem? 
 
While we’re on the topic of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
say in their Throne Speech that they will improve crop 
insurance. Well, Mr. Speaker, they have a lot of improving to 
do to make up for the damage they have done to crop insurance 
since they started tearing it down in 2001. Every year since 
then, this government has raised premiums and reduced 
coverage until that program is nothing more than a shell of the 
program that it once was. These days, the only reason that most 
producers bother with it at all is because bankers require them 
to as security for their operating loans. 
 
[20:15] 
 
They have gutted the program, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t 
believe them when they say that, now in their eleventh hour, 
they intend to turn around and fix it. Otherwise on the Ag file, 
Mr. Speaker, they chose to politicize, provincially politicize the 
wheat board issue, a federal issue, Mr. Speaker, and an issue in 

which 47 per cent of producers favour a dual marketing system; 
7 per cent favour a straight open market system; and only 45 
per cent favour a board monopoly with all the compulsion that 
goes along with it. And those are the wheat board’s own 
figures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the infrastructure issue, Mr. Speaker, they say that they will 
implement a multi-year road and rail strategy. That’s a good 
idea, Mr. Speaker, and one that we have been suggesting for 
some time. This tired, muddled, boring, old government is been 
in power for 15 years. Do they really expect anyone to believe 
that now with a huge electoral defeat looming that they are 
suddenly going to focus on infrastructure? I sure don’t believe 
it, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think that many will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is old and tired and devoid of 
new ideas or any sign of life for that matter, and they are 
boring. 
 
You will remember, Mr. Speaker, when the opening of the 
legislature was one of the great provincial social events of the 
year. Excitement surrounded the opening, and invitations to it 
were much sought after. Contrast that to the dull, boring affair 
that we recently witnessed here — no enthusiasm, the galleries 
not much more than half full. My constituency assistant, Bonnie 
Donison, who I thank very much in passing for the great work 
that she does, spent a lot of time, spent a lot of time on the 
phone trying to get some constituents to attend. But they just 
couldn’t be bothered coming to Regina to hear anything that 
this sorry, old excuse of a government had to say in their 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not much of a dancer. In fact I’ve been known 
to go to extraordinary lengths to avoid dancing. But I 
remember, Mr. Speaker — and you will as well — when there 
was a ball associated with the opening of the legislature. 
Previous Conservative governments always had a ball. The 
NDP government before them would have a ball. The Liberal 
government of Ross Thatcher and the NDP and CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] governments before 
them would have a ball associated with the opening. But this 
government has never had any balls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I doubt, so I doubt they will call an election any time soon. 
And we, in the official opposition, will have to continue to feed 
them the only ideas that they will get. And our constituents will 
continue to ask when we can get rid of them and start to move 
the province forward, and agriculture will continue to suffer, 
and our infrastructure will continue to deteriorate, and investors 
will continue to have serious trust issues with them. And 
schools and hospitals will continue to disappear, and our young 
people with continue to leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the reasons that I will be voting 
against the motion. And I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2006 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as tempting as it is to 
break into some kind of a jig or something — I’m not sure — 
but I will move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried, and this House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:19.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
MOTIONS 
 Rescinding the Order for Adjournment of Debate 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................219 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................219 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................222 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................226 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................227 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................222 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


