
















































Hansard: April 03, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 33A  MONDAY, APRIL 3, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 935 
 April 3, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I return again today 
to the topic of the condition of Highway 32 running from the 
community of Leader through to Cabri. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is signed by individuals from 
the community of Prelate, Leader, Sceptre, and one signature 
from Lethbridge, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the drug Avastin and the government’s refusal to fund 
this drug. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people in 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are concerned about Highway No. 55. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 55 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Carrot River, 
from Porcupine, and from Tisdale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of Saskatchewan asking the government to 
fund Avastin. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition from a 
number of communities including North Battleford, Hudson 
Bay, Saskatoon, and Bonnyville, Alberta. And I’m pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Martensville and Saskatoon. And I’m pleased to be able to 
present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 
to stand and present several pages of a petition with citizens 
concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, LeRoy, 
Carmel, Pilger, Lake Lenore, Muenster, Watson, Bruno, 
Annaheim, Martensville, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this 
province who are very concerned about the government’s 
refusal to fund the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens that are upset about the 
government not funding the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Asquith, Prince Albert, Leask, 
and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
families across Saskatchewan concerned that Saskatchewan is 
the only province besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that does 
not have a children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live on Kutz Crescent, Perehudoff 
Crescent, and Skeena Crescent in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Shellbrook Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to present a petition. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Shellbrook, and Estevan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
to read a petition for the widening and upgrading of Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Humboldt. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with possible closures of section shops. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closures. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by good citizens from Watrous 
and Young. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorders. I will only read a small 
portion of the prayer for relief. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the 
recommendations made to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And some of those recommendations 
include: increase the early diagnosis of children with ASD, 
have respite and family support accessible based on need, 
and make access to specialized equipment and supplies 
based on need. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 55. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 55 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

Mr. Speaker, signed by people from Zenon Park, Bjorkdale, 
Mistatim, Tisdale, and Weekes. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

Petition concerning overtime paid to workers north of the 
62nd township, that’s sessional paper 643; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 5, 7, 64, 67, and no. 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall no day no. 38 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for First Nations and Métis 
Relations: is the management of the department aware of 
any allegations of fraud or other illegal activity within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2000-2001, such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? If so, what is the 
nature of the activity? 

 
I have a similar question for 2001-2002, 2002-2003. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for First Nations and Métis 
Relations: what did management of the department find as 
a result of its monitoring of any of the established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or detect 
fraud in the year 2000-2001? 

 
I have a similar question for 2001-2002, 2002-2003. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for First Nations and Métis 
Relations: does management of the department have any 
knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activity within the department during the year 2001-2002? 
If so, what is the nature of the activity? 

 
Same question for 2001-02, 2002-2003. 
 
I give notice I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for First Nations and Métis 
Relations: how did management of the department monitor 
any established programs and controls to mitigate fraud 
risks or help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001, 
2001-2002, 2002-2003? 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for First Nations and Métis 
Relations: did management of the department have any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001, 
2001-2002, 2002-2003? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
written questions to the Assembly. And I will read a few of the 
questions I have here. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: did 
management of the department have established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or 
detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? As well, how did the 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? As well, 
Mr. Speaker, does management of the department have 
any knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activity within the department during the year 2000-2001? 
And if so, what is the nature of this activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or to detect fraud in the year 
2000-2001? 
 
To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: is 
management of the department aware of any allegations of 
fraud or any other illegal activity within the department or 
its agencies in the year 2000-2001 such as information 
received from employees, former employees, customers, 
clients, suppliers, or others? And if so, what is the nature 
of the activity? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the years ’01-02, 
’02-03. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice, 
the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a number 
of guests seated in your gallery. They are here today on the 
occasion of proclamation of amendments to The Police Act. 
And I would like each to stand as they are introduced for 
recognition. 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by introducing the members of 
the newly established Public Complaints Commission: Ms. 
Loretta Elford of Regina, Mr. Ray Fox of the Sweet Grass First 
Nation, Mr. Mike Maurice of Saskatoon, Ms. Catherine Knox 
of Saskatoon, Vice-Chair; and Mr. Robert Mitchell, Q.C. 
[Queen’s Counsel] of Regina, Chair, the current Saskatchewan 
police complaints investigator and a former minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Staff to the commission are also 
joining us today — John Clarke, director; and Gord Laliberte 
and Sherry Pelletier, investigators. 
 
Also joining us, Mr. Speaker, are three guests whose work was 
instrumental in the development of the changes to The Police 
Act and in particular the process to be used for police 
complaints: Lynne Larose, executive director, Métis Family and 
Community Justice Services Inc. and Doris Greyeyes, 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and Chief Terry 
Coleman of the Moose Jaw Police Service. Chief Coleman is 
president of the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police. I 
invite all members of the House to join me to welcome our 
guests to the Chamber this afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, the opposition Justice critic. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the members 
opposite and on behalf of the members on this side of the House 
welcome these people to the House. They’ve certainly 
undertaken a challenging assignment and we look forward to 
working with them and we’re hoping for big things. Many of 
them are people that I’ve met before and have had good 
dealings with. And I’m very optimistic for a successful outcome 
of this project and would like to welcome them on behalf of the 
members on this side. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation, member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce a number of people in your 
gallery: Chief Peter Bill, Chief Bruce Morin, Ron Blocka who 
is the executive director of the agency chiefs, Bill Kordyban 
who’s the president of Carrier Lumber, Terry Kuzma who is a 
forester with Carrier, as well as Don Cody. I wish to invite all 
members to give them a warm welcome to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — On behalf of the members on this side of the 
House, we would also like to welcome you to your Assembly, 

and thank you for coming here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission, the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Seated in your gallery are 
23 members of the public service who are part of the 
parliamentary program for public servants. These 23 public 
servants represent Agriculture and Food, Community 
Resources, Environment, Health, Justice, Government 
Relations, Highways, as well as the Public Service 
Commission. Mr. Speaker, they have spent the day at the 
Legislative Assembly visiting with people and understanding 
how our Assembly operates and the role that they have in the 
operation of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the Assembly to 
welcome these 23 public servants that provide important public 
services to our citizens. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the 23 public servants to 
their legislature this afternoon. 
 
I would like to caution them that in addition to the fact that the 
minister and myself will be getting to visit with you this 
afternoon, please disregard anything you hear in question 
period. It’s the part of this legislature that is rarely covered and 
certainly mostly misunderstood. Mr. Speaker, we look forward 
to setting the record straight this afternoon. And thank you for 
coming to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources, the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very excited and very pleased to introduce a new member 
of my staff that moved all the way from Buffalo Narrows. 
That’s roughly a nine-hour drive. 
 
She travelled here Saturday and Sunday in the midst of a lot of 
tears and goodbyes to her family and many friends. She made 
the effort of coming to move to Regina and work on my team. 
And I think we’re quite excited because she’s a northern 
advocate and a northern champion and a great addition to this 
government. 
 
I’ll ask all members of the Assembly to welcome to the 
legislature for the first time Mrs. Irene Pedersen of Buffalo 
Narrows. Welcome, Irene. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome two people sitting in your gallery: Mr. Paul Bunz, the 
president of foster parents’ association of Saskatchewan and 
Deb Davies, the executive director of foster parents’ association 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to thank them both for the wonderful work they do with 
underprivileged children, children that are most in need, and for 
working with the foster families. And I’d like to welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join my 
colleague in welcoming our two special guests from the foster 
family association. It was my error and I missed them; so 
welcome once again. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce and 
welcome two guests to the legislature, Brian Graham and Pam 
Waldbillig. 
 
They are residents of Saskatoon and are active in the Pleasant 
Hill Community Association and are down in Regina today 
meeting with inner-city groups in the city of Regina as well for 
purposes of reducing crime in their neighbourhood and other 
neighbourhoods throughout the province. And I’d like to 
welcome them to their legislature. Thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question Period Relevancy and Personal Charge 
 
The Speaker: — Now members, to guide future debates I wish 
to make a statement by the Speaker at this time instead of 
before orders of the day. 
 
On Friday, March 31, 2006, the opposition leader raised a point 
of order concerning remarks made by the Deputy Premier 
during question period. The Opposition House Leader stated 
that the Deputy Premier made an inference that the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest was deliberating misleading the 
Assembly. 
 
Although the point of order was dealt with at the time, I have 
reviewed the Hansard verbatim of this matter and find two 
additional issues arising from that question period which must 
be addressed. 
 
With respect to question period, it is stated in Marleau and 
Montpetit, House of Commons Procedure and Practice, at page 
431 that, quote: 
 

According to practice, replies are to be as brief as possible, 
to deal with the subject matter raised and to be phrased in 
language that does not provoke disorder in the House. 

 
This Assembly follows the same practice. I want to quote a 
Speaker’s ruling dated December 22, 1986. The quotation 
starts: 
 

I want to re-emphasize that the Chair cannot insist that a 
minister must answer a question in a certain way. As long 
as the answer is relevant, it is in order even if the answer 
isn’t the one the questioner was seeking. I define relevance 
in answers in the same broad way as in all debates in the 
Assembly. A remark is relevant if it deals with the topic 
raised. 

 
Similar rulings were made December 5, 1983; April 29, 1985; 
May 27, 1985; December 18, 1986; and August 12, 1987. 
 
I find that the Deputy Premier’s responses to the questions 
asked by the member for Saltcoats were not relevant and 
therefore out of order. 
 
I want to go on . . . Order please. I want to go on to a second 
matter. It is a long held practice of this Assembly that if a 
charge is to be made against a member, it must be done directly 
by means of a substantive motion. Through the course of his 
three responses in question period, the Deputy Premier in effect 
made a charge against another member of this Assembly. 
 
On page 917 of Hansard, the Deputy Premier states that the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest, quote: “. . . made a number 
of false statements in this House . . .” Later on, the Deputy 
Premier called on the Leader of the Opposition to remove the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest from the Assembly. He then 
goes on to say in effect that the member in question had falsely 
disseminated information and did so knowingly. 
 
Although the Deputy Premier did not state the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest had deliberately misled the Assembly, I 
find after a review of Hansard, taking the Deputy Premier’s 
remarks as a whole, that such a charge was in effect made, 
albeit with different words. 
 
Beauchesne’s 6th Edition, paragraph 481, states: “. . . that a 
Member, while speaking, must not: . . . make a personal charge 
against a Member.” 
 
The comments of the Deputy Premier made during the question 
period are out of order. I therefore ask the Deputy Premier to 
rise and withdraw the personal charge made during question 
period of March 31. Order. Order. I ask the Deputy Premier to 
rise and to withdraw the personal charge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I respect your ruling, Deputy Speaker, and 
I do so. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This month, April, 
is national Cancer Awareness Month. The daffodil is the 
Canadian Cancer Society’s symbol of hope. And last week, Mr. 
Speaker, last Monday we saw the galleries full of daffodils with 
people here trying to get this government to change its mind on 
Avastin. Every spring thousands of volunteers are busy selling 
daffodils to raise money in support for a fight against cancer. It 
seems more and more people are affected by this debilitating 
and sometimes fatal disease. 
 
Over the last several months, the Saskatchewan Party has been 
asking the government to reconsider its position on funding 
Avastin, the drug for treating advanced colorectal cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer 
among men and women in Canada. We have made significant 
strides in detecting and treating breast cancer and making some 
headway as well in detecting and treating prostate cancer, but 
perhaps it’s time to start the fight against colorectal cancer. 
Saskatchewan does not have an early detection program for this 
form of cancer, and perhaps it’s time to start one because, as the 
Minister of Health will know, early detection and early 
treatment leads to the best outcomes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I congratulate the Canadian Cancer Society on once again 
naming April as Cancer Awareness Month. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association 
Tournament 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Elocution and 
Debate Association, SEDA, recently held its E.C. Leslie 
provincial tournament in debate and speech. Hosted by Holy 
Cross High School in my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview, 
the contest saw debaters from many centres throughout 
Saskatchewan compete in both English and French. 
 
Debates and speeches were conducted in five groupings for a 
total of 10 categories. Mr. Speaker, in the category of division 3 
junior, the top team was Josiah Sawatski and Brooklyn Simes, 
who also won the speech competition. Division 3 senior saw 
Meagan Ong and Ariel Bouchard win the debates. Ariel also 
claimed the prize for top speaker. 
 
Megan Burns and Meghan Vossen were the first place team in 
division 4 novice, Mr. Speaker, and Jordan Reddenburg won 
the speech competition. In the category of division 4 open, 
Bobby Xiao and Michael Zhang were the top debaters, and 
Dylan Hardy the top speaker. 
 
The division français senior, SEDA’s only French division, saw 
Jean-Michel Ferre and Jonathan Blanchet win the debates, and 
Jenna-Lynn Senger named the top orateur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate both the winners of 

the E.C. Leslie provincial tournament and SEDA for another 
successful year encouraging and conducting high school debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Recognition of Addiction Treatment Graduate 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize Mr. Justin Mizu from Shaunavon. I attended Justin’s 
graduation on Saturday. Justin successfully completed the 
one-year addiction treatment at Teen Challenge Saskatchewan. 
 
Justin, a crystal meth addict, had been through the system, Mr. 
Speaker. Twice Justin had been through the Calder Centre, in 
the psychiatric centre, and in the emergency ward twice near 
death with a heart condition caused by the drug. Justin’s mother 
Judy, one of the first mothers I talked to, could only say, thank 
God and Teen Challenge for giving me back my son. 
 
Justin thanked those at Teen Challenge for their counsel and 
guidance, thanked his higher power, God, for coming into his 
life and giving him the strength, courage, and faith to see the 
light and find his way. Justin leaves for Moncton, New 
Brunswick at the end of April for six months to start the 
training on becoming an addiction counsellor. He hopes to 
return to Teen Challenge Saskatchewan to help other young 
men find their way. 
 
This summer Teen Challenge will start its new expansion to 
create 24 new long-term treatment beds for young men. There 
are two more graduates scheduled within the next 60 days. This 
will be three more young men giving back both to their parents 
and to society. 
 
Long-term treatment works and I hope that this government will 
announce in the upcoming budget funding for long-term 
treatment for men, women, and children. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 Staff 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — What a celebration it was, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 saw our province host over 
4,000 events in celebration of Saskatchewan’s first century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the 
Saskatchewan centennial communication team for their great 
work in promoting the Saskatchewan spirit and on winning a 
number of prestigious international communication awards. 
 
The International Association of Business Communicators has 
recently recognized the centennial communication team with 
several Gold Quill awards. Mr. Speaker, these awards represent 
the highest level of professional acknowledgement. In the 
category of marketing communications and the category special 
events, Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 received awards of 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

excellence. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
centennial website won awards of merit in the categories of 
both special events and marketing communications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 Office recently 
closed its doors. And I ask all members to join me in thanking 
and congratulating all the centennial office staff on their talent, 
hard work, and dedication, and for the outstanding job they did 
in helping Saskatchewan celebrate 100 years of heart. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Remembering Founder of  
Soul’s Harbour Mission 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the community of Regina and hundreds of people in 
need lost a very special person. I speak of Gerri Carroll, the 
founder of Soul’s Harbour Mission in downtown Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a near-death experience some 20 years ago 
provided Gerri with a change in direction for her life. Gerri had 
a heart attack. After her recovery, Gerri committed her life to 
serving those who were less fortunate than she. She was a firm 
believer that the Bible was a book to be lived out, not just read. 
The words of Christ would change her life forever: 
 

For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and 
you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you 
brought me together with yourselves and welcomed and 
entertained and lodged me, I was naked and you clothed 
me, I was sick and you visited me with help and 
ministering care, I was in prison and you came to see me. 

 
From her conviction came a vision, Soul’s Harbour. Soul’s 
Harbour would be exactly that, a safe refuge where people 
could experience the love of Christ. Opening in 1990 with a 
prayer, a pot of coffee, and a few wooden milk crates for chairs, 
the mission recently celebrated its 15th anniversary. From 
humble beginnings it has grown dramatically in size and service 
to the needy. Gerri poured her life and resources into Soul’s 
Harbour and people who worked, volunteered, and came there. 
 
Gerri was honoured by receiving the Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit, the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, and the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gerri Carroll was known and loved by so many 
people in the city of Regina because she loved freely, lived 
passionately, and served selflessly. Our thoughts and prayers go 
out to the family and to the many to whom she gave so much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Results of Survey on Smoking in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 
Cancer Society has released the results of a province-wide 
survey it conducted on smoking in Saskatchewan. That survey 
gives us hard evidence that tobacco control legislation is having 
a positive effect and impact on the lives of the residents of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Tobacco Control Act focuses on keeping young people 
from smoking, reducing exposure to second-hand smoke, and 
denormalizing tobacco use by making it the exception rather 
than the rule. And the survey results show that Saskatchewan 
residents appreciate this legislation. For example, Mr. Speaker, 
more than 81 per cent of those surveyed believe the smoking 
ban was a good idea, and 28 per cent said that the public 
smoking ban had improved their personal health. And, Mr. 
Speaker, almost half of those people who quit smoking said that 
the smoking ban was a factor in their decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Canadian Cancer Society 
for its tireless efforts to reduce tobacco use and achieve 
smoke-free environments in Saskatchewan. And acknowledge 
the efforts and achievements of everyone — individuals, 
government, and non-government organizations alike who are 
working hard on behalf of Saskatchewan people — to promote 
healthy lifestyles and stop preventable diseases. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Government Attitude Towards Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was quite a sight we were presented with on Friday in question 
period. I rose to ask the Ag minister questions and the gag 
minister got up. Just shortly before this, by the way . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members if they’re 
referring to other members in the House that they use proper 
titles. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, just shortly before this the Ag 
minister was complaining he hadn’t had any ag questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when farmers are faced with the lowest 
returns ever in history of the province and are struggling to 
meet their financial deadlines, the Deputy Premier sees fit to 
muzzle the Ag minister. And it was bad enough that the Ag 
minister chooses to ignore farm problems, but who would have 
thought the NDP [New Democratic Party] would go so far in 
showing their disdain for Saskatchewan farmers by not 
answering any more ag questions? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that the government doesn’t want 
to answer written questions on fraud, but this is a new low. Mr. 
Speaker, I also believe that this is a realization by the Deputy 
Premier he’s about to lose his own seat in Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, we have an old, tired 
government with no new ideas, and we’ve had 14 years of 
neglect to agriculture and farm families by this government. 
But, Mr. Speaker, Friday was a new low for even that NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Overcrowding in Foster Homes and Recruiting  
Foster Families 

 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a letter last fall, 
I brought to the attention of the minister of Community 
Resources the ongoing problem of overcrowding in foster 
homes. Could the minister tell this House today whether foster 
homes continue to exceed the acceptable limits? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
can certainly point out that one of the challenges that we found 
out very quickly in this new portfolio of mine is that there are 
challenges with us moving forward, finding enough foster 
homes in the province of Saskatchewan. Therefore last week we 
announced and launched an initiative to find more foster homes 
— 150 new foster homes — throughout the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the Saskatchewan people 
rose to the occasion. And I can also confirm, yes, there is 
overcrowding, Mr. Speaker. But yes, there’s a lot of action on 
this part of the House to make sure that we address that, and 
very quick action. We’re working very closely with the foster 
family association to try and find as many foster homes as 
possible so that the overcrowding problem does not exist. So to 
confirm to the member, the answer is yes, but we’re working 
very hard with the various stakeholders to try and solve the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The response I 
received from the former minister states, and I quote from the 
letter: “. . . it is necessary at times to place more than the 
recommended number of four foster children in one . . . home.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are reports coming in from Saskatchewan 
foster families that it is common to have more than four foster 
children in one home. There are also reports that as many as 14 
foster children are in one emergency foster home. Mr. Speaker, 
does the minister continue to allow foster homes to be 
overcrowded? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
point out again that we have admitted on this side of the House 
that there is overcrowding in some of the foster homes. And 
yes, on many occasions we have also worked very closely with 
the association that have highlighted some of these challenges 
and these problems. And we have . . . this morning in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we sat with the executive director and members of the 
executive board indicating some of the things that we want to 
achieve as the Minister Responsible for the DCR [Department 
of Community Resources]. 
 
I would point out that the Saskatchewan Foster Families 
Association receives $400,000 from this government to work 
closely on a collaborative strategy to help address some of the 
challenges that their association members face. And one of the 
challenges as we admitted is overcrowding. 
 
And again we appreciate the information and the question from 
the member. And again we appeal to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Let us find more foster homes so the 
overcrowding doesn’t continue and that there’s good, safe, 
stable, secure homes for these children to raise and to make sure 
that they become productive adults, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a letter I sent to 
the former minister, I also addressed concerns of emergency 
foster homes being used for long-term stays. Emergency foster 
homes are for children facing difficult situations who may need 
to get into a home at any time, day or night. These emergency 
foster homes are intended for temporary purposes. No child is 
supposed to stay longer than two weeks at a time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this Assembly if children 
currently staying in emergency foster homes are staying longer 
than two weeks? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated to that 
member on numerous occasions, we have undertaken to try and 
find as many foster homes as possible. We have targeted 150. 
And the great news, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of Saskatchewan 
families and people have come forward. There’s been a lot of 
inquiries through our telephone system asking how they can 
become foster families. So there’s good progress being made. 
 
And I’ve admitted here in this Assembly that there is a 
challenge with overcrowding. And yes, there probably is a 
challenge in terms of having foster children stay in homes much 
longer than the intended time frame is. However, Mr. Speaker, I 
can point out that we are on top of the matter. We’re working 
very hard. We’re working alongside of the association, and 
again we appreciate the information because the more 
information about the need for foster families, even on the floor 
of the Assembly, is very much appreciated and very much 
needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to correct the 
record, this is the first time the minister spoke to me on this 
issue. 
 
In a report from 1998, the problem of overcrowding in foster 
homes was addressed. This is an ongoing problem for the NDP 
government. I’d like to read a recommendation from a report 
titled the Children’s Advocate death review report: 
 

That the Department of Social Services amend their 
current policy to ensure that multiple exceptions to the 
standard regarding the number of children per foster home 
are not permitted. 

 
My question is quite simple, Mr. Speaker. Why does the 
minister continue to break his own rules? Why does he not 
follow the recommendations laid out in a report from eight 
years ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve answered that 
question four straight times here. And I’ll point out again that 
we acknowledged that there is challenges in terms of finding 
enough foster homes in Saskatchewan. As a result of that effort 
and that work that we’ve been undertaking to recruit more 
families, there has been good progress made. There is no 
question that we’ve admitted and we’ve acknowledged that 
there is overcrowding and that there is a lack of foster homes 
throughout Saskatchewan. We’re saying yes to that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we’re also appealing to the people of Saskatchewan. We 
need 150 new homes because right now there is a need for 
foster homes, and we encourage folks to get active. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that message through the radio, through the print 
media, and through billboards is really paying off because a lot 
of families are coming forward because there is room in their 
heart for foster children and youth. And Saskatchewan will rise 
to the occasion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1998 our 
current Premier, then Social Services minister, assured the 
Children’s Advocate of three things: that he’d direct his 
department to work toward consistence compliance with policy 
and practices; that his department would be increasing its 
emphasis on recruitment, retention, and support of foster 
families; and that he would increase the number of foster homes 
and other resources. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was eight years ago, and still the problems 
continue with this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, why has the 
Premier failed to fulfill his promises from eight years ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, again I reiterate that it’s 
very important for folks to know that there’s been a lot of 
progress made on this file over the years. We will continue 
some of that work, Mr. Speaker. And this Premier and this 
government’s advocated that no one should be left behind on 
the path to opportunity, and that includes, Mr. Speaker, that 
includes foster families which have youth and children 
involved. And we will continue working on that social fabric 
that we speak about. 
 
And it’s very important to note, very important to note that we 
don’t have any ideas from that side of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. All we have is complaining and whining. And I will 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that on this side of the Assembly we are 
working very hard to address the issues. And the answer is yes; 
we acknowledge we have a shortage of foster families. We need 
more foster families, and I’m glad this question is coming up 
because the more awareness out there, the better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad after eight 
years he’s finally recognized the problem. We know that when 
nurses are overworked and frustrated, there are problems with 
recruitment and retention. There’s a similar situation with foster 
parents, Mr. Speaker. Since the minister continues to allow 
overcrowded foster homes, some foster parents are being 
overwhelmed. 
 
These people do great work in trying to help the most 
vulnerable children, but they can’t take it any more. They are 
telling Saskatchewan Foster Families Association that they 
want to help, but they can’t take the stress of overcrowding, 
lack of funding, and lack of support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to real measures in 
the upcoming budget to help recruitment and retention of foster 
parents? Will he commit to going further than an ad campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll point out that we have not waited and will not wait for a 
budget because we’re doing a lot of the work that is necessary 
now. We unveiled an effort last week to try and get more foster 
parents involved. We have advocated a lot of folks out there to 
spread the word amongst many of the stakeholders that we need 
more foster homes. We have billboard advertising. We have 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

radio ads. We have print ads. We support the association that is 
doing a fine bunch of work. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, as I want to say on behalf of 
this government, Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to our 
foster families out there. I want to say thank you to foster 
family association for working very hard and helping build that 
social fabric that we in Saskatchewan are so proud of. I want to 
say thank you very much for their effort and thank you very 
much for their compassion. We must always appreciate . . . 
There’s only one part of that member’s statement that’s correct 
. . . is you must always appreciate foster families, and we do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister speaks of 
retention and recruitment programs. But the association was 
never consulted before the implementation. In this case where 
the stakeholders . . . they were the last to know. 
 
Were the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association given a 
proper avenue to tell the department how best to recruit foster 
families? Did the minister ask for input from the association 
before he put out his campaign? Did he listen to the 
association’s concerns at all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We will continue to work very closely with the association. And 
I would point out, Mr. Speaker, as part of the relationship 
building with any CBOs [community-based organization], it’s 
very important to know what the opportunities are and what the 
challenges are. And we pointed out the association has been 
very fair and have been very pointed in terms of pointing out 
what are some of the deficiencies. And we as a government are 
able to take some of the criticism and certainly acknowledge 
some of the shortcomings. 
 
We will continue working with the foster family association 
through thick and thin, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we reach 
the objective that we have together in terms of the target 
number of foster families. And we hope that we achieve 150. 
We hope we achieve more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a good relationship with the foster family 
association in building a strategic partnership for the future 
because at the end of the day, it’s all about the children, the 
youth, and we’ll continue working hard on that front. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 

Waiting Lists for Training 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 
in Saskatchewan are all too familiar with waiting lists. However 
to date, no one has had to pay a fee to be on a waiting list — 
that is, until now. Mr. Speaker, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology] is now applying a $20 
annual wait-list management fee to people with wait times in 
excess of three years. 
 
In most provinces, Mr. Speaker, you pay to get an education. In 
NDP Saskatchewan, you pay to wait to get an education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment, what will this government do to ensure SIAST 
does not have to charge people money to stay on a waiting list? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that SIAST is reconsidering their fee 
for wait-lists in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Marie 
Broberg used to be one of my constituents. She is now living in 
Calgary. Ms. Broberg is no. 154 on the SIAST waiting list for 
medical radiological technicians training. Now given the long 
wait time, she has decided to move to Alberta in hopes of 
getting her training more quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment tell us why this NDP government is forcing our 
young people out of the province to get the training they need 
and whose skills we need in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I can tell the members of the House is that I’ve had an 
opportunity to look at wait-lists not only in this province but all 
across the country. And I can tell the member opposite that 
SAIT [Southern Alberta Institute of Technology] and NAIT 
[Northern Alberta Institute of Technology] in Alberta have very 
significant wait-lists for high-demand programs like medical 
laboratory programs, MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 
programs, and so on, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order. Order. The 
Minister for Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I can tell the members of the House is that SIAST does a 
labour market analysis. They determine the capacity of the 
market in Saskatchewan to take new students, and I understand 
that the number of people that are presently being trained in this 
particular program meet the labour market of our province. 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it might be interesting to do 
a comparison of the wait-list between SIAST and SAIT in this 
particular instance. One hundred fifty-four is the position Ms. 
Broberg holds on the SIAST waiting list. At SAIT, as of last 
fall, she was number two, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SIAST is not accepting any new applications in a 
number of fields. They include combined laboratory, x-ray 
technology, cytotechnology, and medical radiology technicians. 
Mr. Speaker, like many of our young people, Marie Broberg has 
voted with her feet. To get into NAIT or SAIT, she has 
registered her car in Alberta and now holds an Alberta health 
card. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why not fund these programs adequately so that 
our students can get the training they need right here in our 
province instead of forcing them to move elsewhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to 
review an editorial that was in the Regina Leader-Post where 
they said that our education system needs to remain firmly 
focused on our province’s labour market, that we need to train 
people for our province. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that Alberta 
is a huge draw, but I think that Alberta needs to train their 
labour market as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are training for Saskatchewan labour needs 
when it comes to those particular medical professions, and 
we’re going to continue to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, is the minister saying that 
we don’t have a need for medically trained, specialized workers 
in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have waiting lists in this province — not just 
at SIAST but in health care. And most of the waiting list is a 
direct result of a shortage of trained medical professionals. Mr. 
Speaker, wait-lists for much-needed training for our young 
people are a large part of the reason why we’re losing our 
young people. And once they’re gone, it’s likely that they’ll 
find jobs elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, this province is losing its 
most valuable resource — our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister undertake to stop discouraging 
our young people from staying in Saskatchewan by providing 
SIAST with adequate resources to meet these waiting lists? And 
at the very least, will she promise today to take action that will 
allow SIAST to eliminate its annual wait-list management fee? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Two points, Mr. Speaker. I’ve already 
indicated to the member opposite that SIAST is rethinking its 
policy on a waiting list management fee. 
 
But what I also can tell the members . . . And I have to return to 
the Regina Leader-Post which I think sums it up quite nicely 
when they say: 
 

Given the frequent publicity about a shortage of medical 
professionals, [and I’m quoting] it would be easy to 
conclude SIAST isn’t training enough people — but that 
would be wrong. 

 
It is simply wrong. We have listened to the opposition talk 
about the numbers of nurses that were training in the province. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have 1,557 students in our nursing 
education program in Saskatchewan. That is significant. But if 
you listen to the members opposite, you’d think that we were 
training nobody. And it’s simply incorrect, and the opposition 
has no credibility on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Timetable for Changes to Corporate Taxation 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think we all remember the comments made by the former 
minister of Finance on taxes. In January 2004, that former 
minister said he chose not to talk about taxes in the last election 
campaign because it would hurt his chances of re-election. The 
former minister said, and I quote, “I suspect that anyone who 
talks . . .” And I quote: 
 

I suspect that anyone who talks about tax hikes is not . . . 
[likely] to be very popular during the course of an election 
campaign. 

 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time, that Premier told business 
audiences in the last election that there would be no tax 
increases. And what followed, Mr. Speaker? The biggest tax 
gouge in Saskatchewan history, two years ago that government 
pickpocketed Saskatchewan residents of $150 million. Mr. 
Speaker, the time to reverse it is now. Mr. Speaker, the question 
is: does the minister have the courage to do it now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll be talking a lot about taxes on Thursday, and I would 
certainly encourage all members to listen closely to what is in 
the budget, and I hope that they find the courage to come to 
support it. 
 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What kind of answer is that, Mr. 
Speaker? Mr. Speaker, we’re losing jobs and people in the 
middle of an oil boom. SIAST students are tired of being 
charged money to wait until they move into Alberta. We’ve lost 
2,000 people in the last quarter according to Statistics Canada. 
On Friday a prominent Saskatoon business columnist said, even 
with moderate job success, Saskatchewan will still be losing 
young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Vicq report makes a clear case for changes to 
encourage more investment and job creation in our province. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister today commit to Vicq’s 
recommendations and, most importantly, commit to his 
timetable? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There is a time-honoured tradition in 
this House of simply responding to those questions by saying, 
three more sleeps, Mr. Speaker. Only three more sleeps and the 
budget will be down, and members will have an opportunity to 
see the plan for growth and investment this government will lay 
out. And I would encourage that member to support the budget 
when he sees what it brings forward, when he sees the plan for 
growth, when he sees it goes further than any government has 
gone in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the minister 
it’s not a laughing matter when you have the worst job creation 
record in the country, the worst population of the country. 
People can’t afford to wait even three more sleeps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, page 7 of the Vicq report recommends cutting 
corporate income tax from 17 to 14 per cent on July 1 of this 
year. The report also recommends raising small-business limit 
from 300 to $400,000 and on to $500,000. And the committee 
recommends cutting the corporate capital tax in half on July 1 
this year, and a half again next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Finance commit to this time 
frame today and bring Saskatchewan’s tax regime into the new 
millennium? Does he care if Saskatchewan companies even 
make the short list as Vicq says? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in a few days the 
provincial budget will be brought down in this House. All 
members will have a chance to review it and we’ll have laid 
forward what I believe to be a bold and sustainable plan for 
growth, investment, and job creation in this province. I would 
encourage that member to look past the rhetoric and what he’s 
written on his list of questions and simply support that plan 

when it’s introduced on Thursday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at that 
minister’s record on the Boughen Commission, that’s what 
causes us to worry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unless the minister commits to the timetable outlined in the 
Vicq report, Saskatchewan will fall further behind, Mr. 
Speaker. We will all fall further behind. More young people 
will leave. More jobs will be lost. Saskatchewan’s population 
will continue its embarrassing free fall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why won’t this minister send a clear message to Saskatchewan 
people that investment is needed now in the Saskatchewan 
economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday I’ll bring in 
the new provincial budget. It will lay out a bold plan for 
investments and job growth and job creation. It will speak to 
small-business people. It will speak to those in the oil sector. It 
will speak to those who are looking for a home for investment. 
 
This budget will move Saskatchewan forward. I would 
encourage that member when he sees the budget on Thursday to 
simply stand in his place and say that he will support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, 10 days ago I challenged 
that minister in this legislature. Mr. Speaker, I challenged him 
to the full implementation of the Vicq commission to reverse 
the decision to gouge Saskatchewan people on $150 million. 
Mr. Speaker, what did he do with that challenge? He shied 
away, and he started acting like the Finance critic: he started 
asking me questions. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee him he 
will have time to do that in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is he afraid of? Why will this minister not 
commit to the full implementation of the corporate tax reforms 
recommended in the Vicq commission? Mr. Speaker, what is he 
afraid of? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, all I’m trying to do is be 
in position on Thursday to announce in the budget what the plan 
is that we’ll be pursuing. 
 
I have yet to hear from the member opposite, from the Sask 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

Party Finance critic, any indication as to whether he will 
support the provincial budget if it includes the Vicq 
recommendations. All I say to him is three more sleeps. Don’t 
lose any sleep over this. Three more sleeps and on Thursday 
afternoon we’ll have the provincial budget available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Do you know how many people leave 
Saskatchewan in three days? Quite a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago we learned that the world doesn’t 
stand still for this NDP government. Manitoba didn’t stand still. 
Alberta didn’t stand still. They went ahead with the corporate 
tax relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of this government’s dismal record of job 
creation and the embarrassing population numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, will this minister apologize for 15 years of NDP 
mismanagement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I half worry that the 
members opposite may have gone to sleep partway through that 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Three more sleeps, maybe a couple of quick naps, and we’ll 
have the budget down. And the member then will see very 
clearly what this government plans to do in terms of the job 
creation agenda, an agenda for creating more investment, 
encouraging more investment, more job growth, for helping 
small businesses, for helping industry, for helping working 
families in this province. 
 
I would encourage that member to simply state for the record, 
will he support the provincial budget if it contains those 
measures? This is a very simple question. I’ll even give him a 
couple of, you know, a couple of days. If he needs two nights to 
sleep on it, that’s fine; tell us on Wednesday. Is he prepared to 
support the provincial budget if it contains those kinds of 
measures — yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

The Police Amendment Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to announce that The Police Amendment Act, 2005 came into 
force on April 1, 2006. The amendments in this Act respond to 
the recommendations of the Stonechild inquiry and the 
Commission on First Nations and Métis People and Justice 
Reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation includes fundamental changes to 
the public complaint investigation and decision processes that 
are crucial to improving public confidence in the complaints 
process. 
 
These changes come as the result of the work of a joint steering 
committee comprised of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations; Métis Family and Community Justice Services; the 
police services of Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert; the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police; the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers; and Saskatchewan 
Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the key initiatives is the establishment of 
the Public Complaints Commission, consisting of five members 
from varied backgrounds including members from First Nations 
and Métis communities. The Public Complaints Commission is 
an independent body with the authority to direct and control the 
investigation into any public police complaint including 
investigation into criminal matters. Mr. Speaker, from now on, 
any public complaint will be immediately investigated by either 
the complaints commission, the police service that is the subject 
of the complaint, a subject police service with an investigation 
observer, or by an outside police service, or RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] detachment. 
 
In addition to the new public complaints model, the Act 
requires that if a serious injury or death occurs while a person is 
in police custody or as a result of police actions, an 
investigation observer can be appointed in consultation with the 
deputy minister of Justice to monitor the investigation. These 
changes will ensure objectivity and integrity during the 
investigation process. 
 
The Act also implements the uniform cross-border policing Act 
that was adopted by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada in 
2003. These new rules apply in cases where an out-of-province 
police officer needs to continue an investigation in 
Saskatchewan or when a Saskatchewan police officer must 
leave the province for similar reasons. 
 
Finally the Act authorizes the Lieutenant Governor to annually 
issue commissions under the great seal of Saskatchewan to 
police officers appointed to the ranks of inspector, 
superintendent, deputy chief, or chief. These commissions 
recognize the sacrifices and commitments of our Saskatchewan 
police officers in providing professional municipal policing 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are essential to the success and 
integrity of the justice system in Saskatchewan. This legislation 
recognizes and acts on the need for equal representation and 
co-operation, not only with police services in Saskatchewan but 
also with out-of-province police services and our First Nations 
and Métis communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition Justice 
critic, the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to see any step 
forward in this regard. We know that the history of the 
relationship between police forces and our public has been put 
into question many times, and we look forward to developing 
some kind of a system that can remove the cloud that exists 
right now. In particular the opposition is pleased with the high 
calibre of individuals that have been appointed to the 
commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have considerable concerns about what is 
going to take place and how procedural fairness will continue to 
exist. We have concerns that the legislation does not establish 
the specific legislative timeline for when the complaints have to 
be investigated in any kind of meaningful, short time frame 
when communication has to go to the person making the 
complaint. And we note that there is no specific statutory 
provisions dealing with rights to natural justice. Issues of 
timeliness, rights to counsel, right to fair hearing are not 
adequately addressed in this legislation. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, we have had an abysmal performance 
by the NDP government. In reading previous annual reports of 
the police commission, a third or more of the complaints were 
still pending or still unresolved 181 days after the complaint 
was filed. To regard that as being any kind of an acceptable 
thing would be a travesty, Mr. Speaker. It is unacceptable for 
complaints to go on for that long, and we look forward to 
changes with this new process. 
 
I’m not certain that the necessary legislative framework is there. 
We also have to take steps to recognizes the hardworking and 
competence on the part of our police officers, and possibly we 
should look at better methods of rewarding successes by placing 
notations in police officers’ files when they’ve been 
commended for good work, and often that is something that will 
become apparent as a result of a complaints process when other 
officers are involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of the past performance in the past, we 
want to look forward and with hope and expectation that things 
will improve. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — For ministerial statements, the Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. 
 

Internationally Educated Nurses Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m pleased to rise in the House today 
to speak about the orientation to nursing in Canada for 
internationally educated nurses program. This morning, I 
attended an event with SIAST officials to announce that SIAST 
will be implementing this new program this fall. The orientation 
to nursing in Canada for internationally educated nurses 
program complements our government’s efforts to increase the 
number of nurses being trained in our province. 
 
I want to applaud SIAST for this innovative program that 

addresses important health sector needs. I’d also like to 
recognize Saskatchewan Health and Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association and the regional health authorities for their 
efforts on this worthwhile program. The new initiative is but 
one component of an extensive nursing education program that 
already exists in Saskatchewan. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan will invest $19.4 million this 
year training nurses through SIAST, the University of 
Saskatchewan, regional colleges, the Dumont Technical 
Institute, and the First Nations University of Canada. In 
addition to this significant public investment, our province also 
provides or has provided $3.2 million in bursaries to over 1,000 
nursing students since 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Today, Mr. Speaker, there are 1,557 
students enrolled in nursing education in Saskatchewan — a 
phenomenal number of students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, nursing education 
enrolment in Saskatchewan has increased by more than 50 per 
cent since 2000. And the nursing education programs of 
Saskatchewan alone has experienced a seat capacity increase of 
120 per cent. 1,202 students are currently enrolled in the degree 
nursing program through NEPS [nursing education program of 
Saskatchewan]. And an additional 191 individuals are enrolled 
in the practical nursing program, and 164 people are enrolled in 
continuing nursing education. These are nurses who will soon 
be ready to find their place in the province’s health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the orientation to nursing in Canada program is 
another example of the priority that our government has put on 
recruiting and retaining health care providers in our province. 
Orientation to nursing in Canada provides the theory and the 
practice that internationally educated nurses or immigrants need 
to transition to our health care system in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. Training includes an introduction to the Canadian 
health care system, theory related to Canadian drug therapy, and 
nursing-specific language assessment of clinical skills, 
supervised clinical experience, and assistance in preparation for 
that Canadian registered nursing exam. 
 
The orientation to nursing in Canada program also speaks, also 
speaks volumes to our government’s commitment to 
immigration as a means to increase our population and meet our 
labour-market needs. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan immigrant 
nominee program has recently expanded to include three other 
nursing disciplines. Nursing practising under a temporary work 
permit are eligible under the nominee program to apply for an 
expedited landed immigrant status. 
 
Our work together, Mr. Speaker, on these initiatives, helps 
strengthen our health care system. It strengthens our education 
institutions. It strengthens our communities. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it strengthens our economy and adds hope to those immigrants 
that are in our province that want to use their internationally 
recognized nursing in order to contribute very much to our 
health system, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to rise today and respond to the ministerial statement 
regarding nursing and bringing international educated nurses 
into the province. It’s certainly an issue that we have been on 
for as long as I have been in this House. The former health care 
critic has mentioned it time and time again about the continual 
nursing shortage that we’re seeing in our province. We hear it 
from the workplace. And certainly since I’ve been the critic for 
Health in the last year, I have heard a number of horror stories, 
Mr. Speaker, regarding the shortage of nurses within our 
province. 
 
And it’s no wonder, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you look at 
what this government has done to the nursing program over the 
last number of years. They dramatically cut the number of seats. 
So to hear the minister stand today and pat herself on the back 
about how many people are in the nursing program, first we 
have to look at where it was and where they cut it back to 
because that is the whole reason for the shortage that we are 
experiencing today. They had reduced the numbers so 
dramatically, the number of seats through the ’80s, that finally 
they’re getting back to where we should have been all the way 
along if not even further. We’re still further behind. 
 
The 1990s, when this NDP government was in power, was 
when the number of nursing seats were cut dramatically. And as 
a result, we are finding shortages in many, many different areas, 
whether it’s in registered nurses or psychiatric nurses or nursing 
practitioners or licensed practical nurses. There’s shortages in 
all those areas, as a number of other areas in the health care 
field. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that we’re going to be looking at 
as we go forward with this program — and certainly the number 
of nurses that are in education programs right now — is the fact 
of retention. It’s great to train. If, as the minister says, we have 
1,500 people in education training spots right now, what will 
the retention rate be? Because we certainly hear from SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] that we’re training a lot of 
nurses for export because they don’t get the full-time work that 
they are looking for. They graduate from their classes, and they 
go into a health authority where they get part-time work and 
part-time work in a number of different areas, so they don’t feel 
comfortable in any one area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the program and attracting nurses from around the world is 
certainly a positive. We’ll be looking at the results as to how 
many are offered full-time work so that they remain in our 
province. It’s no good to bring nurses in and have them work 
part time and then leave to other jurisdictions where — 
sometimes I guess they look at Alberta or Manitoba or other 
jurisdictions — where the pastures seem greener. So it’s the 
retention issue that is the issue that we seem to be falling behind 
on in this province, and we’ll be monitoring this program very 
closely to make sure it meets the needs of our province. Thank 
you. 
 
[14:45] 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government, I’ll be tabling 
responses to written questions no. 651 to 672 inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Okay. Madam Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act, 2006. 
 
The Snowmobile Act, administered by Saskatchewan Regional 
Economic and Co-operative Development and by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, is a document outlining the laws 
regarding the operations of snowmobiles in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This proposed amendment are the results of a previous review 
of designated snowmobile trail program and involve 
consultations with several government departments and 
agencies, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association. At these consultations, 
the issues of funding sustainability of trail safety were 
repeatedly raised, and it is for these reasons that the amendment 
is coming forward. 
 
As well, Saskatchewan’s 10,000 kilometres of snowmobile trail 
network is vital to our tourism industry, to our regional 
economies, and to the business community during the winter 
months. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’d now like to outline the following proposed 
amendments. First, licence plates will replace the previous 
system of trail permits as the means to access Saskatchewan’s 
snowmobile trail network. Money collected, Madam Speaker, 
through the snowmobile registration fee, will be used to support 
and provide sustainable funding for the trail network and for the 
trail fund manager. 
 
The trail fund manager promotes snowmobile safety by 
mounting significant public awareness campaigns. These 
include hosting a snowmobile safety week, delivering a I Don’t 
Drink and Drive campaign, distributing safety posters to dealers 
and clubs, and installing thousands and thousands of 
snowmobile signs to help all riders. 
 
Second, these amendments will update and define of such 
words as fund and trail manager, as well as indicating that the 
trail manager will now be appointed through the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. 
 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

These two proposed changes are housekeeping matters. These 
amendments will also move to regulate the rules regarding such 
things as a designation of snowmobile trails and trail manager’s 
responsibilities. 
 
The intention of this change is to allow regulators to more 
quickly adapt to the future developments. In order to ensure 
accountability, we have introduced additional changes that will 
require the annual report and audited statement of the 
Snowmobile Fund to be tabled right here at the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Lastly the proposed changes will specify that snowmobile 
licence plates should be displayed towards the rear or the 
left-hand side of the snowmobile. This was requested by the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association in order to improve 
visibility of the licence plate. 
 
Madam Speaker, we decided that the new approach was needed, 
one that put the safety of riders first, and one that ensured the 
long-term sustainability of the trails. Saskatchewan can be 
proud of its snowmobile trail network and for the role it plays in 
our rural economy. With those proposed changes, 
Saskatchewan snowmobile riders will be able to safely enjoy 
the trails for years to come. 
 
Madam Speaker, I now move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Snowmobile Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy 
Premier second reading of The Snowmobile Amendment Act. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise today to speak on Bill No. 46, 
An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act. Madam Speaker, it’s 
very timely that this piece of legislation is being introduced 
now, especially in my part of the world that has an abundance 
of snow and an abundance of tobogganers, actually many of 
them going right past where we live on a trail that is very 
appreciated in our part of the world. 
 
Madam Speaker, I think that the whole effort that has been 
made by snowmobile clubs across the province to develop and 
maintain and improve the snowmobile trails are appreciated by 
thousands of people in our province and, as the Deputy Premier 
said, is a source of potential attraction of tourists to our 
province. 
 
It is always interesting in the winter months when you’re 
travelling south to Regina that you meet a good number of 
pickup trucks pulling trailers with toboggans heading north to 
the areas of where there’s snow — some of them with foreign 
plates but many of them coming from the southern part of the 
province — to come and enjoy many of the trails that exist in 
central Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Speaker, there are certainly issues surrounding this 
piece of legislation that people have been commenting on. And 
it has a great deal to do . . . If you’re a toboggan owner that 

lives near a toboggan trail and a groomed trail, you certainly are 
very appreciative of this legislation because you’re accessing 
the trails. Other individuals who have toboggans are nowhere 
near the trail program and so they are not as enthusiastic about 
having a part of their licence fee being used to contribute to 
trails that they will not have access to. 
 
And so there are divided opinions in the community about if 
this is a desired program by enforcing mandatory contributions, 
if you like, to the trail system. I think everybody agrees that, for 
those people who access the trail system, it is certainly most 
important and most valuable. And I think there is going to be in 
this province a bit of a debate in terms of those folks that are 
not so fortunate to have ready access to the trail system. 
 
Madam Speaker, we also recognize that many of the other 
pieces of this legislation are indeed housekeeping. The 
appointment of a trail boss and making sure that there are a 
uniform set of standards across the province makes eminent 
sense. 
 
And we think that this Bill is going to generate a significant 
amount of comment from people who enjoy the winter 
recreation opportunities that there are in this province. And they 
are going to want to have an opportunity to not only let the 
official opposition know what the issues are regarding this 
legislation, but potentially to lobby the provincial government 
as well and perhaps even recommend some changes to this 
legislation so that various points of views can be 
accommodated. 
 
So in order, Madam Deputy Speaker, to allow that discussion to 
occur and to allow people who enjoy winter on their toboggans 
in this province to bring forward their ideas — both pro and con 
— and to potentially suggest improvements, at this time I would 
like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 43 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 43 — The Medical 
Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is with great 
interest that I rise to speak on this Bill No. 43, the radiation 
technologists. I’ve got questions on this Bill though. And one of 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

the various questions is: was there any association before, or is 
this something brand new that they didn’t have anything 
before? And is it consistent with what the other health 
organizations are using — the other groups, the technologists? 
 
I’m curious now. If we’ve had technologists all these years, 
what group did they belong to before? Was there any 
association with anyone else? And when they start out on one of 
these associations now is it going to be like from graduation 
they become members, or is there going to be fees charged . . . 
how it’s going to be done. 
 
We’ve had no response at all. We’ve asked for a response but 
we’ve had no response at all from the people that are going to 
be involved in the association. We’ve asked for a response, but 
we’ve contacted them and we still have no reply. So we’re not 
ready to move a Bill until we get a response on it from the 
people that it’s going to involve. If we have some support we 
probably will be willing to work on this Bill, but till now we’ve 
had no interest from them. 
 
And we’re wondering if the Bill would include all technicians. 
Is it going to be a voluntary thing or do they . . . Will there be 
people operating outside of this group? Will they be able to 
exempt the association, go on their own? And will the group be 
able to police and keep them all in order? 
 
And I think the MRI operators would be under this jurisdiction 
and I’m wondering if they’re included. And I’m wondering now 
do we need more MRIs or do we just need more people to 
operate the MRIs? We’re hearing stories of when, in Saskatoon 
when the clinic shuts down for the day — the MRI clinic — 
that the veterinary college brings pets over and they do pets. So 
it’s not that the machine can’t do more, it’s that we don’t have 
enough staff. And yet we’ve got such a long waiting list for 
people to have MRIs. So I’m wondering what the connection is 
there. 
 
And so until we have answers, until we have all of these, so at 
this time I would ask for us to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Batoche has asked to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 44 — The 
Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. As my colleague 
before me mentioned, I’m actually happy to rise today to speak 
on Bill No. 44. Madam Speaker, I have a number of comments 
that I want to make today, and I want to talk a bit about the Bill 
very specifically and some of the parts that are in it. 

I also want to spend just a few minutes talking about the impact 
of teachers in the lives of all of us really, and talk about the 
importance of those people — those professionals — having a 
profession that’s strong and solid and one that is democratically 
run and organized so that they have the opportunity to continue 
to do the fine job that they have done for so many years here in 
this province. 
 
The Bill specifically, Madam Speaker, is . . . One might say, 
you know, at first glance or first blush that it’s not a very 
important Bill that we see before us today. What it really does is 
it repeals the original teachers’ federation Act that was 
established in 1935. The federation itself was established in 
1935 as the professional organization for Saskatchewan 
teachers. 
 
The STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] has taken on a 
number of responsibilities since that time that really go a long 
ways further than their original mandate. And the Act has been 
amended accordingly, obviously, from time to time over these 
last, well, virtually 70 years, Madam Speaker, which certainly is 
quite a long time. 
 
So even if one looks at just the change in the curriculum, the 
change that . . . what we’re teaching our young people, our 
children from K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] really, but also 
in post-secondary education . . . What has changed over those 
last 70 years has certainly been significant. 
 
Even in the last 10 years, the last 10 to 15 years, changes have 
been very significant in what we’re teaching our children. Who 
would have dreamt 20 or 30 or 40 years ago that we would have 
computers, period, anywhere — in our homes, in our offices, let 
alone in our schools, let alone in this Chamber where members 
have the opportunity to use that kind of technology right inside 
this Chamber? 
 
And somebody at some point in time, Madam Speaker, had to 
teach students, whether they be young students or older 
students, somebody had to teach them how to use that 
technology. So in order for that to be taught of course the 
people, the teachers themselves, had to learn those skills and 
that technology from some place as well. 
 
So things have changed in the area of education. And things 
have changed significantly in what teachers have had to deal 
with, what they teach every day, how they govern themselves, 
Madam Speaker. Things have changed certainly in things like 
retirement packages that the teachers certainly are concerned 
about every day. 
 
My mother-in-law for instance was a teacher for a short time 
many years ago, Madam Speaker. And just recently she was 
informed that perhaps she had some earnings that were owed to 
her as a result of her teaching. I think it was probably back in 
the early ’40s, Madam Speaker. I’m not exactly sure of that 
time period, but I’m guessing it was in the ’40s. And she was 
informed, and I know other teachers were too, teachers who 
didn’t receive a pension from teaching because they didn’t 
teach long enough and had left their pension contributions 
within the Teachers’ Federation. And those teachers were then 
informed that they actually had moneys owed to them by the 
people who looked after the fund — and I’m not exactly sure of 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

even who that was. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But my mother-in-law, just a few years ago, became eligible 
and received something in the neighbourhood of 5 or 6 or $700 
which was money she didn’t even know existed. And most 
people didn’t know because when they left teaching for 
whatever reason, they probably went on to other careers or they 
went on to become, you know, housewives and maybe didn’t 
work outside the house for whatever reason. And those earnings 
were forgotten about. 
 
And so that’s why having a strong federation is really 
important. Because they need to look after, they need to look 
after those people who have maybe, for one reason or another, 
not been as diligent as they could have been or should have 
been with regard to their own remuneration or benefits that they 
might have had coming to them or owed to them as a result of 
working in the education field and being a teacher for probably 
a short period of time. 
 
So that’s what this Bill really does. It gets rid of the old Bill and 
it reorganizes some of the sections of the Act. It updates the 
terminology which of course, again as I mentioned before, we 
have sort of new technology but we also have new terms that 
people would not have understood or would not have been 
aware of when this Act was originally brought into being back 
in 1935. 
 
The STF itself, though, undertook an internal governance 
review from 1999 to 2001 which concluded that a request was 
to be made to the Government of Saskatchewan to consider 
updating and modernizing the Act. Now, Madam Speaker, I 
can’t speak either positively or negatively about the time it has 
taken for this Act to come into place. This review took place for 
the two years 1999 to 2001, and I’m not sure what the delay 
was to bring this new Act into being. 
 
And we see it here in 2006, almost . . . well roughly five years 
after the fact, and I don’t know what the reasoning was. Maybe 
it’s . . . I’m not to lay blame on any particular person or group, 
and I’m not here to do that today, but it just makes me wonder 
why there was such a long time in the realization of that. 
 
One thing I am concerned about, Madam Speaker, when I look 
at this Bill, I’m concerned about the consultation that may or 
may not have taken place with teachers themselves when this 
Act was brought into place 
 
I know that the STF is a strong organization. I know that its 
director, Lyle Vinish, who I know personally — and I’ve 
known Lyle for many, many years — Lyle would have done a 
good job making sure that the rights and the concerns of 
teachers of the federation would have been well looked after. 
I’ve no doubt about that, knowing Lyle’s dedication and 
commitment to his organization. 
 
But I’m not sure, I’m not sure how much consultation was done 
with the front-line teachers themselves. And again that’s 
something that I’d like to hear clarification from, from the 
government’s side, to see if in fact that was, that did take place. 
And I’d like to also hear it from Mr. Vinish at some point in 

time and perhaps we’ll get a chance to do that when this Bill 
eventually does go to committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself, again it defines and provides the 
STF with purposes and powers including the representation and 
the supporting of teachers which of course, as I said, is 
important. It represents the teachers in collective bargaining and 
providing for the benefit of members through the establishment 
and administration of plans and their pension plans. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can say I know this from a very personal 
point of view, my wife having taught . . . is a schoolteacher. My 
wife Melanie is a schoolteacher, and without giving away any 
secrets as to her age, Mr. Speaker, I would say that she has 
taught for quite a few years — let me put it that way — and is 
looking at imminent retirement, Mr. Speaker. And obviously 
she is concerned and wondering about the state of her pension 
plan and what that pension plan will include, what the benefits 
are, not just what the monetary value of that pension plan is but 
things like health care and dental care, eye care which are 
certainly, certainly big factors to everybody. 
 
But once one retires and you no longer, maybe you no longer 
have a dental plan or an eye plan or health plan, really becomes 
factors in how you budget for your retirement. So that’s a 
concern. And I know speaking with other teachers . . . I guess 
I’m at the age and many of us in this House are at the age where 
we start to think about retirement. And some of us, Mr. 
Speaker, will retire from this House sooner than we’d like to 
but we all want to know what the future holds for us, and we 
hope that those things are in place. 
 
What the Bill also does, it allows the federation to acquire or 
hold and dispose of real and personal property. It also talks 
about the borrowing of money or creating a security interest to 
secure debt obligations. It’s really an expansion, Mr. Speaker, I 
think of what the federation was originally set up to do. I doubt 
very much that in 1935 the Teachers’ Federation were 
concerned about those kinds of aspects. But again once one 
looks at the change in the entire education system . . . 
 
Another good example, Mr. Speaker, is the Teachers Credit 
Union which has become a very, very strong financial . . . it’s 
been a financial power certainly in Saskatoon. And I know how 
that works just a little bit. I’m not really familiar but I know that 
they’ve become a real strong, viable group. And that’s good. 
It’s well that they should be. But they also need to then have 
other things in place — guidelines and mechanics in place — so 
that they are able to handle and dispose of those kinds of things. 
 
It also defines membership in the STF, Mr. Speaker, which of 
course is important. I know that’s nothing new but as I said, 
what is new about that section of the Bill will be the 
terminology that is associated with that. 
 
Certainly it’ll outline disciplinary procedures for disciplining 
members. Mr. Speaker, I know — again as I said, my wife 
having been a teacher for a few years — I am closer perhaps 
than some people might be, and I know you are, Mr. Speaker, 
as well too. We all are aware of things that go on in schools and 
communities and times when teachers may have come before, 
you know, disciplinary procedures. 
 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

And I guess I’ve seen some of those personally as well in our 
school at Kenaston where teachers over the years have gotten 
. . . I don’t want to use the term into trouble, but have been 
brought before, you know, the school board perhaps or there’s 
been a complaint by a parent about a particular teacher. What 
I’ve noticed though in every time that that’s happened, is that I 
think that the STF has properly represented those teachers. I 
think they did a pretty good job. 
 
And there’s always two sides to every story as you well know, 
Mr. Speaker, and will agree in everything, that wherever you 
have a confrontation, there’s always two sides to every story. 
Not always, I guess, were the teachers right. Not always were 
the parents right who may have brought that complaint forth. 
But what has always been good to my knowledge is the fact that 
the STF and those representatives have done a very good job in 
representing the teachers that were involved. And they didn’t 
always win every case that they entered into but they did their 
best to make sure that the case was heard fairly and properly, 
and whatever punishment was deemed suitable was taken out. 
And in some cases of course there was none required and that 
they handled that very well as well. 
 
I know that the STF has worked with the government on this 
particular Bill. That’s a really good, positive, solid step, Mr. 
Speaker. And again I didn’t stand up here today to be too 
negative to the government because I know that the STF has 
asked for this new Act and so they’ve worked with the 
government on it. I’m certainly not going to stand up here as I 
might have on some other Bill, Mr. Speaker, being critical of 
the government. There are a few gaps in the Bill that perhaps 
we’d like to see changed or fixed or filled. And we still have 
time to make those kinds of efforts should the government be 
willing and should the STF and Mr. Vinish and the people that 
he represents be willing as well to make some of those changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why having a strong, solid 
organization is so important, why having a Teachers’ 
Federation, a Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation that’s strong 
and solid and democratically run, the reason . . . So there’s 
many reasons why we need to have a good organization but 
even more so I think now than in the past, because we are faced 
upon with real significant changes in the way that we deal with 
education. Not only in rural Saskatchewan but, you know, 
everywhere in Saskatchewan, even in urban Saskatchewan and 
the larger cities. 
 
We are seeing a tremendous shift in demographics, in what 
we’re teaching, in the kinds of buildings that we need to house 
the other programs — the new programs that we’re offering — 
that are all good and solid and strong. But it’s even more 
important that we then have an organization that can look after, 
help, support the group of people that are actually instructing 
our children. 
 
And you look back, you know, you look at some of the factors 
that are really weighing in on this issue. The significant loss of 
students is a huge factor. We know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
province will be less about 3,000 students — K to 12 students 
— this year. We know there will be a loss of students, of more 
than 5,000 students over the last couple of years. 
 
Those are significant factors, Mr. Speaker, because what 

happens as the student population drops is there is no longer a 
need for so many instructors, so many teachers. It affects, 
obviously of course, bus drivers. It affects the janitorial staff 
and all the other staff members in a school. But it certainly, 
certainly has great impact upon teachers. 
 
In the paper just this past weekend, Mr. Speaker, there was an 
article on the Limerick School. And I think they talked — if I 
recall correctly — they talked about somewhat in the 
neighbourhood of 50 students from K to 12. They had two 
grade 11 students. There were two young girls that were the 
only two students in grade 11. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, 
you know that that’s a school . . . and lots of rural schools are 
seeing that declining population. 
 
I can talk about the school where our children went to school, 
where my wife teaches, where just a number of years ago it was 
200 or more students from the K to 12. Now I’m guessing and 
I’m guessing as to the number, but I think we’re around 150 and 
on the decline because the number of kindergarten students 
coming into the system are way lower than the number of 
groups of children that are graduating from grade 12. 
 
Just two years ago when our youngest son graduated, we 
graduated a class of 27 and picked up four. Well so that’s a net 
loss of 23 students in one year, Mr. Speaker. You know, you 
know that under those kinds of trends and conditions that 
there’s only one way that this can go and that means job losses 
for teachers. And that’s why it’s critically important that they 
have a strong group to make sure that they’re looked after and 
taken care of. 
 
You know also, Mr. Speaker, that after . . . at the end of this 
year — and this is in relation to this Limerick story that I talked 
about a minute ago — at the end of this year, this calendar year, 
the moratorium on school closures ends. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
normal in the average year, over the last good number of years, 
from 12 to 15 schools in our province close every year. From 12 
to 15. That was the normal loss of schools or closures based 
upon lack of enrolment, which I’ve talked about. If you close 12 
to 15 schools a year, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve had a three-year 
moratorium, that means at the end of this December it would be 
normal — if you want to use the term normal — it would be 
normal to see somewhere in the neighbourhood of 45 schools 
closing. 
 
That has huge impact, Mr. Speaker, on the entire province and 
it really . . . of course it won’t affect the urban centres so much, 
but rural Saskatchewan is going to see a tremendous loss of 
closures of schools based on declining population. Now if you 
look at a . . . Let’s use a school population of 50 for instance. 
Let’s use the Limerick example, and I think they had someplace 
in the neighbourhood of 6 or 6.5 teachers to instruct that school. 
That means that six or seven teachers from every one of those 
schools will probably lose their job. That’s going to create a 
huge, huge impact upon those people. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I know that young people entering into the field of education 
who want to become teachers, who want to join that strong 
group at the STF, are going to have a much more difficult time 
finding a job because we’re going to have an overabundance of 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

teachers. We’ll have teachers that have been laid off because of 
school closures and there will be not the need for new teachers. 
And therefore it’s going to add to our population loss because 
we’re going to educate these fine young people and they’re 
going to go someplace else to get a job. 
 
An example of that, Mr. Speaker, is I happened to be in Nevada 
this winter, and in Clark County for instance, which is the 
fastest growing county in the United States, they cannot find 
enough teachers. Teachers are at a premium. In fact they are 
advertising all over North America. There is a bounty that they 
are paying on new teachers to come and work in and teach 
school in Clark County, Nevada. It’s actually, as I said, the 
fastest growing county in the United States. They’re having a 
tremendous time. The two most . . . The biggest population 
growths or the areas of growth are prisons and schools, Mr. 
Speaker, which seems sort of not to be really an area that we 
would think that would be the case. But certainly with the 
population growth, that’s where they are finding the two biggest 
problems. 
 
So what I’m saying is when we close these schools and they’re 
going . . . I’m not here to say that it’s good or bad or otherwise. 
I’m saying here that it’s not a healthy situation in rural 
Saskatchewan. And we know that if you don’t grow the 
economy, if the economy stays the way it is or it becomes 
stagnant — and that’s certainly the way it’s been the last few 
years under this NDP government — that you’re going to have 
population loss. Population loss equals student loss, and student 
loss equals teacher loss. And none of those situation are a good 
situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a son who wants to go into education, and in fact we 
were just talking about it last night as he came home for the 
weekend. He’s a university student in Saskatoon. My concern, 
Mr. Speaker, is that when he does get finished his education 
degree that there will not be a job for him in Saskatchewan and 
he may well, very well end up going to another jurisdiction to 
teach school. And that would be a sad thing for lots of reasons 
obviously but not to mention the least of which, he would not 
have the benefit then of having that good, strong organization 
behind him that my wife has had. And there are jurisdictions 
where they don’t have nearly as strong of support group as the 
STF has been to teachers in Saskatchewan. And from that 
perspective, Mr. Speaker, that would not be a good, healthy 
thing. 
 
I think back to a number of the teachers that taught me over the 
years, and I want to mention just a few of them because I think 
it’s relevant to this debate today. It’s relevant because of the 
part they played within the STF as I think it’s worth mentioning 
to this legislature. 
 
I want to talk about probably the teacher that had the greatest 
impact on my life. His name was Don McMillan, who was a 
young teacher that came out of the Kamsack area to teach 
school at Kenaston a good many years ago, Mr. Speaker — I 
guess 30-plus to be honest with you. He had a great impact on 
my life. But he had an impact on a lot of people, and in fact he 
had an impact on areas that were much broader than just a 
small, rural school. 
 
He was very strong believer in the STF movement. He was a 

strong believer in the right to associate, the right to belong to a 
union and also to bargain and collective bargaining and so on 
and so forth. He actually ended up, Mr. Speaker . . . He taught 
school in Kenaston for a good number of years. He ended up 
moving to Alberta where he believed . . . His socialists beliefs 
were strong, so strong that he actually ran for the New 
Democrats in Alberta probably, I’m guessing, about 10 or 15 
years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As you know, in Alberta it’s very difficult to get elected as a 
New Democrat, and he didn’t get elected. He did not win, Mr. 
Speaker. But the reason I say that is that it’s not so much that he 
expected to win that election, but he believed strongly. He 
believed strongly in the values that were instilled in him by the 
STF when he was a teacher in Saskatchewan. He believed so 
strongly in those values that he wanted to promote them to other 
people. And he believed so strongly in them, and he agreed to 
run for the New Democrats. And as I said, of course in Alberta 
at any time but certainly back in the ’80s it was pretty difficult 
to get elected as anything but a Conservative. Thank goodness 
for that, Mr. Speaker. And hopefully that’ll turn, that’ll head 
east just a little bit in the next election. 
 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, who’s a really, a really good, solid 
friend of mine — he became a friend of mine; he taught me in 
grade 11 — his name is Michael Hertz. Mr. Speaker, he has a 
different story, but his beliefs in the STF were similar. He 
believed strongly in the values of democratic governance. He 
believed strongly in the values that the STF promoted. He was 
on the executive at the University of Saskatchewan back in the 
late ’60s and early ’70s. He believed that that group of the STF 
should represent teachers who were accused of ill-doing by, 
perhaps, by parents or groups in a community. 
 
In fact as I mentioned earlier in my remarks, over the last . . . 
He taught a long time, I should say — before I say that, Mr. 
Speaker — for many years, for 30 years in Kenaston, taught 
with my wife for a long time. And I remember the both of them 
working hard. And when another teacher was accused of 
wrongdoing by a parent — and they worked hard — and Mike 
Hertz went to the STF on behalf of this teacher and lobbied 
them that the teacher had done nothing wrong. And to make a 
long story shorter, Mr. Speaker, what happened was the STF 
became involved in this case and protected the rights of that 
particular teacher and at the end of the day was found not guilty 
of the accusations that were made against her by some parents 
in the community. 
 
So it doesn’t seem to matter what their personal politics were. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, Michael Hertz, if you ask him today 
— who has recently retired from teaching — but if you ask him 
today, he would be a strong supporter of not the NDP but rather 
small “c” conservative people. He’s been a really strong 
supporter of mine, and I know he votes small “c” conservative 
and that’s his philosophy. But it doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker, 
you see he’s still . . . even though he, in politics he votes right 
or centre-of-right, he would still believe in those strong 
collective terms and in the strong position that the STF offered 
him in his career. 
 
My point being in all this is that it doesn’t seem to matter what 
the politics of the teacher are, they still believe in the politics of 
the STF. And that’s what makes an organization good and 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

strong. It’s not that it’s political so much in terms of the grander 
scheme, but it really sets out in terms the protection and the 
rights that it grants to the people that it represents, namely the 
teachers of Saskatchewan. 
 
A lot of the teachers that I’ve talked about today, Mr. Speaker, 
their politics are not, are not socialist. They are not New 
Democrat. They may well be Liberal or small “c” conservative. 
And I’ve had the opportunity over the last good number of 
years to become associated with a great many teachers right 
throughout the province. 
 
Our family’s been very active in sports and in school sports in 
particular, Mr. Speaker. And in order to have a good, strong 
school sports program, of course you need to have teachers that 
are willing to offer that coaching, to offer their time and 
dedication and commitment to the students. And they also have 
to have a love for the game. 
 
Don McMillan, as I mentioned before, was a teacher of mine 
who really started school sports in Kenaston, really started a 
strong basketball program that’s become a tradition and 
continues right until this very day. In fact my wife, who has 
become a basketball coach for many years, just took her team to 
Hoopla again two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again the point I’m making here is that was not part of their 
contract. Nobody said to these teachers when they started that 
yes, you have to coach the basketball team or the football team. 
That was extra, but it’s all part of that package that you get. It’s 
all part of the package that you buy into when you become a 
teacher and you become a dedicated, committed teacher. It 
doesn’t happen all the time and you don’t see it from 100 per 
cent of the teachers, but you see it on a good many occasions. 
And that’s what makes this whole organization strong. That’s 
what makes it grow. 
 
Lyle Vinish, as I talked about, Mr. Speaker, who is the director 
of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, I got to know Lyle 
through basketball about 30 years ago, 30-plus years ago, and 
that’s how I got to know him. He was a teacher in Delisle at the 
time. And I didn’t have any idea that Lyle was a strong believer 
or supporter in the STF. I didn’t have anything to make me 
think that he wasn’t. It just wasn’t a factor. All I knew Lyle to 
be was a good teacher, committed and dedicated to the people 
he serves — the taxpayers but first and foremost to the students. 
And then he went on to become of course the director of the 
STF, obviously involved in some internal politics there, but a 
strong, strong supporter of the same values and beliefs that I 
talked about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many others. And we all could 
stand here today in this legislature and talk about members of 
the STF who have been really significant in our education. We 
can talk about teachers that taught us at any time, whether we 
were a small, small child many years ago or when we were in 
post-secondary, so on and so forth. 
 
A couple of others that have really been solidly important and 
have been factors in our education or the education of our 
children. You know I talk about . . . We had a principal. His 
name was Denis Rolheiser — again, Mr. Speaker, the same 
kind of values — believed strongly in the STF and their values, 

represented them well, was a strong supporter of and believer in 
what they were doing and became a very successful person. He 
went on to be a teacher in North Battleford for many years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, as I say, you can’t have this 
organization that’s strong without individuals that make it 
strong. It’s sort of like this legislature, Mr. Speaker. We’re all 
individuals here, and yet we can’t act as individuals because 
without each other — matters little what side of the House 
we’re on — it’s still similar. The NDP members, I’m sure, or 
government members would say the same as we do. We are all 
individual. We all represent some constituency. And yet we 
come together in this Chamber as two groups, right now, Mr. 
Speaker — the Saskatchewan Party, the opposition, and the 
government, the NDP — and without each other, we can’t be 
very effective. 
 
It’s the same when you talk about teachers. Teachers right from 
across the province may be in teaching in different areas under 
different conditions. They certainly are different. I mean if 
you’re a teacher in Ile-a-la-Crosse, you will have a different 
view of the world as it sits compared to teaching in some place 
like let’s say Shaunavon or Maple Creek or Estevan or 
Weyburn because the demographics are different, Mr. Speaker. 
The factors are different. The conditions upon which you work 
are certainly different. 
 
And that’s why it’s important that you have a group, an 
all-encompassing group, that looks after the greater good of the 
group. And, you know, whether you teach in a small rural 
school that maybe has 50 people or you teach in the biggest 
high school in Saskatchewan — P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton 
which has in the neighbourhood of 2,000 students — they’re all 
individuals, and they all fit differently into the big puzzle. But 
the key being, is that they all still get paid the same for the years 
of experience and the education that they have regardless of 
whether they’re in a small rural school or a big city school. And 
they all are subject to the same collective bargaining. They’re 
all subject to discipline. They’re all subject to membership rules 
in that organization. And that’s why it’s so critical to have a 
group, the STF, that looks after the group’s greater needs. 
 
I’ve been to the STF building in Saskatoon on many occasions 
with my wife, Melanie, when she’s had to go in for whatever 
the issue might be at the time. 
 
[15:30] 
 
In fact we were there just a year ago talking about what happens 
when a teacher reaches retirement age because as I said just like 
every other teacher she’s getting private counselling from a 
counsellor there as to how she should retire, when she should 
retire, and all the issues and the mechanics that you have to 
have in order to do that. 
 
As my colleague says, where are you going to retire? It’s a huge 
issue because whether you . . . You may not have enough 
money to be able to retire in Palm Springs for instance, but you 
might be able to retire in Bladworth, Saskatchewan for instance, 
Mr. Speaker, which would certainly cost you less money. So 
you have to look at all these things. 
 
And that’s what they provide for you. They’ll provide a 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

counsellor for each of you as a teacher that allows you to make 
those decisions easier. They talk about things like whether 
you’re going to want to buy extra medical care, extra dental 
care. Apparently you can do that after you retire. 
 
But without that organization to guide you and to give you 
those options, then many people who don’t spend a great deal 
of time thinking about these things or studying them, it really 
helps them decide as to how and when and how you’re going to 
live after you do retire. 
 
So to sort of bring this all together, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
important that we look at this Bill. And even though it’s sort of 
a restructuring, it’s a brand new, you know, Act. We’re getting 
rid of the old Act; we’re bringing in a complete new Act and 
it’s very similar to the old Act. 
 
I’m still wondering about whether we could have done more as 
the government of the day. And I’m not talking about us being 
opposition or the government being government. I’m talking 
about us as MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in 
this Chamber, all of us contributing more to the greater good of 
the people of this province. 
 
And it’s not so much what I see in this Bill that concerns me. 
Nothing in this Bill really concerns me, Mr. Speaker. I don’t see 
anything. I’ll just go briefly through some of the sections of the 
Bill. And, you know, the title and interpretation, I mean, who 
could argue with that, Mr. Speaker? That’s just pretty 
straightforward, nothing to argue about. 
 
What we talk about though, we talk about collective bargaining 
in subsection 5. And then we talk about subsection 5. This is 
part of the new part of the Bill. It’s a provision that provides the 
authority for the federation “to establish and maintain standards 
of professional ethics and professional competency . . . in 
accordance with Part VI of the Act.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s another area that I just want to, as a quick 
aside in this, in my remarks here, talk about the professional 
governance and the competency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course you’ll be well aware that not every 
teacher in this province unfortunately is completely competent. 
We’ve all been subject to probably teachers or heard of or 
listened to news stories or media stories where a teacher maybe 
kind of fell through the cracks and wasn’t completely ready to 
teach our young people or wasn’t completely competent. 
 
There is something in that Act of course, Mr. Speaker, you’d be 
aware of — it’s called tenure — that allows teachers . . . After 
they’ve served two years in any particular school it becomes 
much more difficult to have them removed unless you have a 
very, very serious just cause. 
 
It’s a good rule in the fact, in the sense that you can’t have 
helter-skelter school boards running amok firing teachers for no 
reason. So of course one could not argue that it’s important 
because it protects good teachers from perhaps a school board 
or a local community that, for cultural reasons or other reasons, 
do not accept any particular teacher. And again we’ve all heard 
stories like that. 
 

So the tenure rule is a pretty good rule. But it also protects — 
sometimes wrongly or incorrectly, Mr. Speaker — it could, it 
has the potential to protect a teacher who’s not fully competent. 
And once they serve, once they teach in that particular school 
for two years and get tenure, then it becomes very, very difficult 
for a school board or a hiring agency, the director or others, to 
ask a particular teacher to move on. And that causes sometimes 
— and I’ve seen it personally in our school and others — it has 
the potential to cause some tremendous rifts between the 
teachers, between parents, between the schools, so on and so 
forth. So that’s an issue that I just wanted to bring up because it 
is one that I have seen more than once. 
 
Part IV of the Act, Mr. Speaker, talks about the regulatory parts 
and it actually sets the criteria for membership in the federation. 
And actually section 18 sets the process for the deduction of 
membership dues. That’s another area that, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to speak about at some length here because I think it’s . . . 
this is truly . . . I’m going to get a little political here, Mr. 
Speaker, because this directly relates to where membership dues 
of teachers end up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that some portions 
thereof, of teachers’ actual STF membership fees, go to support 
certain political parties — speaking mainly of the socialist, 
NDP government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some teachers, there are many 
teachers in this province who say that’s good. And of course, 
Mr. Speaker, that ought to be their right. That ought to be their 
right to give any portion of their STF dues or any monies that 
they see fit to any party that they see fit to give it to. The 
problem is, Mr. Speaker — and this is where the problem lies 
and this where I have the issue with this part of the Act — is 
that sometimes those people don’t want their memberships, 
their membership fees or any part thereof to go to the NDP 
government or to the NDP Party to campaign. 
 
In fact I tell my wife all . . . It’s sort of a standing joke, Mr. 
Speaker, in our house — and I’ll say this here today in front of 
the public of Saskatchewan — that my wife spends part of her 
STF membership dues to campaign against me, Mr. Speaker. So 
in essence, in essence, Mr. Speaker, a portion of those fees go 
to fight against me in a campaign. So I have to raise extra 
money from my supporters and I actually put the hit on her to 
give me some money to support the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, my point being here, my point being here, 
Mr. Speaker, is that it’s not whether people give money to any 
particular party. I don’t have a problem with that. It’s when they 
give it without being asked. So that’s one of the things that I 
wanted to talk about and that’s hugely important. Of teachers 
that I’ve talked to who may support the Liberal Party or may 
support the Saskatchewan Party — and I’ve talked to many of 
them — they’re concerned with that part of the Act, where part 
of their dues actually go to campaign against someone they may 
not want to campaign against. Anyway. 
 
And the other thing and the last thing I want to talk about is part 
VI. That’s the discipline section of the new Act, Mr. Speaker. 
And section 30, I wanted to look at it and it’s actually taken 
from section 38 of the existing Act, and it defines professional 
misconduct, Mr. Speaker. And clause 38 is revised by adding 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

additional section as a consequence of a revision of the 
Criminal Code. 
 
And I didn’t want to read a section of the Bill and just leave it 
lay there, but what I interpret that to mean, what I interpret that 
to mean, Mr. Speaker — and I’m not 100 per cent sure if I’m 
right; I’d like clarification from the government on this — is 
does that mean then that if you as a teacher are charged with a 
criminal act, if you’re charged with a criminal act, Mr. Speaker, 
and you’re found guilty and convicted and sentenced, and 
regardless of what your sentence might be, if you are found 
guilty of a criminal act does that mean you will lose 
membership in the STF? Does that mean that you would no 
longer be eligible to teach school in a Saskatchewan school? Or 
does that mean you would still maintain your teacher’s 
certificate? Does it mean you would continue to become a 
member in the STF? And does that also mean that you would 
also be then eligible to teach in Saskatchewan schools? 
 
Does it mean that it has to be a certain level of conviction? In 
other words, let’s use for an example that a teacher were to be 
found guilty of a property crime where he or she stole an item 
of not very considerable value. And he or she was found guilty 
and perhaps sentenced to no jail time but, you know, time 
served or maybe restitution — any one of those. Would that 
mean that he or she would still be able to become a member of 
the STF? I don’t know the answer to that. That’s my question. 
And that’s a question that I think needs to be answered so that 
we have clarification upon that. 
 
Again, I talked a little about the collective interest of teachers. I 
don’t need to go much into that. That’s part VII of the Act. I 
spoke at length about that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll agree — I do agree 
and I still agree — that what the federation does as far as the 
collective interests of teachers truly is a remarkable job and a 
job that needs to be congratulated. And I think they do a good 
job. 
 
Part VIII of the new Act talks about immunity, the immunity of 
the Act. And it provides immunity to the members of the 
executive committees or administrative boards, the chief 
executive officer, an employee or agent of the federation, if the 
person is acting, if the person is acting pursuant to the authority 
granted in the Act or for anything done in good faith pursuant to 
sections of the Act. And this part is a revision of existing 
provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, the question that comes to my mind about 
this is, who’s going to decide, who decides if it’s something 
that’s done in good faith pursuant to sections of the Act? Who 
makes that decision? Is it the federation itself would be 
disciplining one of its own? Would it be a school board 
association? Would it be the government of the day? It doesn’t 
lay out specifically who would make that decision. Would it be 
a court? And again, would it depend upon what the charge was 
of the person that was found to be in breach? 
 
Those are areas that I . . . they don’t lay them out very well. 
And as I said before, it’s maybe not what’s in this Act so much, 
Mr. Speaker, as perhaps something that might be in it that’s not 
in it. 
 
When I talked about, at the very, very outset, Mr. Speaker, 

about this new Act replacing the old one and I talked about the 
things that have changed over the last 70 years, you know, the 
terminology that we use, the technology that’s used nowadays 
that was not even dreamt about — wildly dreamt about — 70 
years ago. When I talked about, you know, all the collective 
interests, when I talked about immunity, when I talked about 
the obligations, when I talked about membership, when I talked 
about criminal acts . . . 
 
Many of the things that we’ve seen in the media, some of the 
things, you know, we’ve seen cases over the last few years 
where a teacher would be accused of sexual harassment or 
sexual misconduct with students. We’ve seen teachers who 
have lost their jobs, who have lost their standing in the 
community, who’ve been in some cases criminally charged, in 
some cases criminally found guilty of sexual misconduct with 
students. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying that never happened 70 
years ago. I don’t know that it did and I don’t know that it 
didn’t. All I’m saying is that those things are sort of new. 
They’re newer in the big picture, the big scheme of things that 
we see on our media on a far too regular basis. And so having 
this new Act was a good idea because you could allow then 
things to come into this Act, sections that would give you the 
mechanics or the mechanism to deal with those kinds of new 
issues. 
 
So from that perspective those have all been, that’s all good 
stuff. And I think that, as I said, we need to make sure that 
we’ve got things in this Bill that look after this Teachers’ 
Federation and students and parents and taxpayers and school 
boards for many years to come. Because no doubt, no doubt 
there will be huge changes again in technology, in terminology, 
in the short few years to come. 
 
I don’t think that we’re at the end of the technological 
breakthrough that we’ve seen over the past number of years. I 
don’t know what might be next coming down the road. All I 
know is that 15 or 20 years ago my first cellphone was as big as 
a brick and now it fits inside my shirt pocket, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have computers in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, that we 
would never have dreamt of using. I remember being in a 
corporate building 25 years ago, 30 years ago, and they had a 
room that was about the size of this filled with one computer. 
Now we have them in schools — many, many of our students 
have them. So that’s the things that we need to deal with when 
we look at this Bill, this draft Bill, this new STF Act that can 
handle technological changes as well as changes in 
terminology. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve tried to draw all this 
together, I think that the government is sort of on the right track 
with this new Act. I think that the STF has requested a new Act, 
and the STF certainly asked for this new Act. They worked with 
the government on this Act. You know, the government . . . 
 
[15:45] 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, I look at the time on the clock. School 
is out for the afternoon, so I fully expect every teacher in the 
province is tuned in to this broadcast and watching my remarks 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

with close scrutiny. 
 
So let’s move on from this point I’m saying, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m going to congratulate the government a bit for taking the 
initiative to do this. I’m going to condemn the government a bit 
for taking five years, for taking five years to bring this new Act 
to the forefront when the STF asked for it after 2001. Having 
said that though, I’m willing to look at changes in committee 
and changes in further discussion on this Bill and as we move 
down the road through the path to when it becomes the law. 
 
I think that our party and those of us on this side are willing to 
talk to people like Lyle Vinish — have them come before the 
committee perhaps — and talk about this new Act and the 
importance that it has, not only upon the teachers of the 
province but also the taxpayers and the school boards, but most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, the students of the province because 
after all, after all, those of us who are in this Chamber today and 
who come here every day are here for one reason, and that’s the 
future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we came here to try to make things better not only 
for us but certainly better for our children and the generations 
that will come after us. So it’s Acts like this that will, even 
though they might seem insignificant in some areas, become 
critically important when you’re going to talk about changes for 
the future to make students, teachers, and taxpayers fit better 
into the new world, the new way that we’re going to see things 
happen over the next good number of years. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to say I’ve 
enjoyed having the opportunity to give my thoughts on this Bill, 
and I’d like to move to adjourn this Bill at this time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that debate on second reading of Bill No. 44 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 45 — The 
Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 45, an 
amendment to The Local Government Election Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I looked at the Act and listened to the 
minister’s second reading speech, he had indicated that most of 
the amendments in this Bill are of strictly a housekeeping 
nature. And while some of the amendments are, I think some of 
them are perhaps a little bit more substantive than that. As a 
member across the way says, we can also have some 

amendments that deal not only with the house but also be those 
buildings attached to the house. 
 
However I think it’s important to spend some time on 
examining the provisions within this Bill as it affects local 
government. Those governments of course, Mr. Speaker, as I 
think most people know, are city councils, village councils, 
town councils, the urban governments, also RM [rural 
municipality], rural municipal councils. And also, Mr. Speaker, 
another local government that sometimes citizens don’t think of 
and doesn’t come to a person’s mind but play a very important 
role in this province, and those are boards of education. 
 
All those local governments are taxing governments. They raise 
a portion of their funds through taxes on property. And it’s 
important that we have legislation in place to govern how these 
councils are elected, which this Bill does. And because these 
local governments now all get their authority . . . particularly in 
the urban and rural areas I should say, Mr. Speaker, they get 
that from the new municipalities Bill that this . . . Act that this 
legislature dealt with here in the last session. And I understand, 
I believe there are a few amendments to that Act. 
 
One of the sections in the Bill deals with . . . makes some 
changes so that rural municipalities and boards of education can 
have their election day on the same time. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a fairly important change to the local 
government Act. The old provision provided that the rural 
municipalities have their election date near the end of October 
and seven days . . . or there’s a seven-day span when the boards 
of education would have their elections. 
 
So in effect what we had in rural Saskatchewan was election 
day seven days apart. And that was not only an inconvenience; 
it was confusing to the electors. And quite often we would see a 
very low turnout, particularly for those elections dealing with 
the members of the boards of education. And I’m certainly 
pleased to see that that ability is there for the two local 
governments to make their election days coincide on the same 
date which I would think lead to greater voter turnout, greater 
interest in the election of a board member. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, particularly with these mega school divisions 
that we have now in rural Saskatchewan, thanks to the former 
minister of Learning, there seems to be a real disconnect by 
rural residents from the boards of education. Many of these 
boards . . . Well these boards are larger than our constituencies 
that we represent in rural Saskatchewan. One board member 
now, it’s not uncommon for one board member to represent an 
area that is larger than the previous school divisions that were in 
place only two, three, or four years ago. 
 
And one of the complaints that I’m hearing from rural residents, 
they really feel that the local towns and communities in which 
our schools are located really have very little input as to what is 
happening in education today. And they are very concerned 
about that. So this Bill in a very small way would at least 
address at least a very small portion of that disconnect then, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the other amended sections deals with the voters lists, 
and it prescribes how the returning officer, whether it be in the 
. . . Well it deals with a returning officer in a municipality, how 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

the rural municipality . . . as to where the voters list is to be 
posted. And there’s some provisions as far as revisions to the 
voters list. 
 
And this again, on first blush, you may think is fairly of a 
housekeeping nature. But the reality in rural Saskatchewan 
today is that many of the people entitled to vote in an RM 
election live outside the municipality. In fact some of them live 
a great distance away because if you look at a RM map now, 
you will see landowners who may live in various parts of this 
province and in fact outside the boundaries of this province. 
And we need to have that clarified as to who is an eligible voter 
because, Mr. Speaker, sometimes elections at the municipal 
level in rural Saskatchewan become very important and are very 
contentious elections. Issues arise in local government that the 
voters feel very strongly about. 
 
And although I did serve on RM council, I have to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I never was involved in a contested election, but I 
certainly have family members . . . My father was an RM 
councillor for a number of years, ran in a couple of elections. 
And as I said, sometimes they are very contentious and people 
are brought in to vote. And so we need to have a clear definition 
of who is eligible to vote and who isn’t. And I believe that these 
amendments help to clarify that. 
 
In dealing with those people who are eligible to vote in a rural 
municipal election, one of the amendments deals with 
individuals who conduct businesses within the municipality. 
And this amendment specifies that those individuals who are 
required to have a business licence are now eligible to be a 
voter. 
 
There are some sections to the Bill that deal with terms of 
offices and clarify if a councillor or a reeve wants to run for 
another position and currently their term does not expire, some 
of the Bill does outline the procedures. And the amendments 
strengthen and clear up some areas of confusion that deal with 
those issues. 
 
Also sometimes we have council members resigning right near 
the end of their term prior to the election. And so then councils 
and administrators are left with the decision and the question, 
well what do we do? Do we have an election and have someone 
elected to finish the small portion of the term that was 
unfulfilled by the previous person, or do we just leave it vacant 
and then elect a person for the whole term? And this Bill does 
clarify some of that. It makes for better representation by voters 
in the municipality. And that is certainly I think a step in the 
right direction. 
 
Unlike city elections, if I understand the process correctly, a 
rural municipality’s elections to council are done on a division 
basis. And a division is the area that each councillor represents 
in a normal municipality. You have six divisions. The odd 
numbered divisions, the councillors in those divisions will stand 
to re-election every two years, and then the even numbered 
councillors stand in the following year. And the reeve, I believe 
it’s . . . well I’m not exactly sure but I believe the reeve is 
elected at the same time as the odd numbered divisions, or 
perhaps it could be reversed, but nonetheless the reeve’s term is 
two years, the same as the councillors. 
 

So as I said, councillors are elected by defined areas — physical 
areas — and sometimes . . . And it’s not uncommon for people 
to live in one division, own a good part of their property in 
another division. And sometimes there was confusion as to 
whether they should be voting for the councillor in division 
three or five or division four, and some of the amendments now 
address some of those things. 
 
And the important part that I see in section 160.12 talks about 
voters only voting once. And of course that is the basis of our 
democratic system where individuals are entitled to only one 
vote, regardless of the property they own, the wealth they have 
or may not have. And this is certainly . . . A local government is 
not a corporation where the weight of your ballot is determined 
by the number of shares you own. It’s based on the accepted 
democratic principle of one person, one vote. 
 
Something new in this Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker, is an area 
again dealing with rural municipal elections. And it talks about 
candidates having an agent to represent them at the polling 
station which was something that wasn’t available to candidates 
in rural elections in the past. 
 
And one might wonder, well why would a candidate need an 
agent? Well at one time there probably wasn’t a need for that. 
But in today’s world, where we have many people who are 
living in rural Saskatchewan and operating a farm or a ranch, a 
business, but they also require to supplement that income with 
some additional income in another occupation and without . . . 
And these people have a vested interest in their communities, in 
their municipalities, and would like to get involved in the 
election process. But sometimes they were prevented from 
doing so, or felt that they were prevented from doing so, 
because they were . . . could not be present at the polling station 
on election day. Well, and they had no one there to represent 
them. And this amendment does give the candidates the ability 
to have a representative, an agent — or a scrutineer as we 
would call them perhaps — at the polling station. 
 
[16:00] 
 
There’s a number of other amendments to this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. A new section I see is entitled notice to the minister, 
and it directs the returning officer to notify the Minister of 
Government Relations as to who the winning candidate is 
within a specified time. I don’t think that’s an unreasonable 
request, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is important that members 
— voters within a municipal area — know who the winning 
candidates were, but it’s also important for those agencies that 
deal with local councils to know who their representatives on 
council are. 
 
I know in our own office in our work as members of this 
Legislative Assembly representing a constituency, it’s often 
very helpful to know — if you’re going to a part of your 
constituency and perhaps meeting with the council — to know 
who the representatives on that council are. And so at least 
when you’re introduced to them, you’ll remember their names 
and identify with them more readily. 
 
One other section, Madam Deputy Speaker, talks about 
canvassing at the polls and what distance it’s allowed as far as 
campaigning on behalf of your candidate. And there’s mention 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

of campaigning or soliciting votes from voters within 50 metres 
of the polling station is not allowed. And I think that’s a 
reasonable request also. 
 
The minister stated in his second reading speech that all the . . . 
that SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 
and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association were 
consulted when these amendments were being developed and 
brought forward. I think it would be only . . . It’s our duty as the 
official opposition to check with these groups to see if these 
amendments are of the nature that they had requested and put 
forward, that the Bill covers and addresses their concerns, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. So until we are able to fully consult 
with these groups, we would have to hold onto the Bill, and 
therefore I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
45, The Local Government Election Amendment Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 28 — The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This Bill 
before us this afternoon, The Veterinarians Act, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I think is a Bill that we’ve been getting a number of 
concerns brought to our attention from individuals across the 
province — certainly from the veterinarians association, from 
individuals within the association, and as well agricultural 
groups that have received wind of this piece of legislation and 
are quite concerned with what the intentions of The 
Veterinarians Act are before us and what it may entail down the 
road. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m just going to quote . . . take a 
couple of comments from one letter we’ve just received to our 
office, and it comes from an individual who is a veterinarian. 
And this is how he opens out his letter. He says: 
 

It used to be fun being a Veterinarian. It is not much fun 
any more. The work is still the same, it is still most 
enjoyable to see and treat the wide array of animals and 
for the most part, to deal with the people [with whom or] 
who own these animals. But there’s an ominous cloud over 
the horizon that is taking the pleasure out of it. It is 
becoming too risky. The consequence of action against the 
Veterinarian, is simply too harsh. The risk has not really 
changed that much over the thirty years I have been . . . a 
practising veterinarian. But to the poor wretched soul that 
has had the misfortune of having something go wrong, the 

consequences have reached proportions beyond the 
ridiculous. 

 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I could go on. But what the 
gentleman is pointing out here is when this individual entered 
the school of veterinary medicine and became a veterinarian, 
some I believe it was around 30 years ago, this person, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, entered the college, entered veterinary 
medicine, really looking forward to working in the field of 
veterinary medicine. And I’m not exactly sure where this 
individual happens to work or whether he’s been with large 
animal practice or small animal practice. 
 
But as he’s indicated from the time that he entered the college, 
from the time he became a licensed veterinarian and over the 
years, the enjoyment that he found in providing veterinary 
medicine to animals and working with people as they tried to 
diagnose the different illnesses that individuals may be facing 
with animals that they were raising — whether it’s a small 
animal, dogs or cats, or whether it’s large animal, horses or 
livestock — this individual indicates that there was a time when 
he truly enjoyed his job. But he’s getting to the point where he 
finds it somewhat frustrating and the enjoyment has totally been 
taken out of it. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that this 
piece of legislation before us today is a piece of legislation that 
is certainly going to . . . not diffuse the concern that has been 
brought to our attention by this individual as he has practised 
veterinary medicine. In fact it’s raising more questions than it’s 
addressing the answers. 
 
Now if I understand it correctly the intention of the Bill is to 
give the veterinary association a method whereby if a member 
doesn’t comply with rules of the association or a complaint is 
raised against a member, that the association has the tools 
necessary to address the concerns and to indeed determine 
whether or not a person has complied or not, and to apply 
penalties if need be, Madam Deputy Speaker — penalties which 
may even include, Madam Deputy Speaker, not being allowed 
to practise. 
 
Now as I indicated earlier the amendments have major concern 
across the province of Saskatchewan. While the veterinary 
association has been asking for legislation allowing them to 
deal with delinquent members, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s . . . 
When you look at the legislation it actually goes beyond what 
we understand the veterinary association has been asking for. 
 
And that’s why, Madam Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me 
from the concerns that we’ve had raised with us — and no 
doubt the minister I’d be surprised has not as well been 
receiving these concerns — that the government would not have 
done what they did a year and a half ago with the municipal Act 
and decided well maybe this Bill No. 28 doesn’t exactly do 
what we had intended it to. And maybe what we need to do is 
pull this piece of legislation, review it, reassess it, and 
reintroduce it in another format that in indeed addresses the 
issues that have been brought to us by the veterinary 
association, while at the same time alleviating the concerns of 
men and women in the agriculture community. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you even get young people 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

involved in for example the Moose Mountain Trailblazers 
Association which is a 4-H group of young people involved in 
riding horses and showing their horses, when they’re raising 
concerns, Madam Deputy Speaker, you have to ask yourself, 
exactly what has the government done? What kind of research 
has the government entered into? What discussions and what 
debate has taken place in regards to coming forward with this 
piece of legislation? 
 
The fact that all across this province we have, whether it’s farm 
families, farmers, individuals, or even young people involved in 
the 4-H industry raising questions about this piece of 
legislation, Madam Deputy Speaker, it should be raising a flag 
to the government that there are some majors issues that need to 
be dealt with. 
 
And the easiest and the quickest way would be just to remove 
the Bill. I don’t believe it’s anything that’s . . . It’s not a piece 
of legislation that the world’s going to come to a stop at simply 
because it’s removed. But by removing it would give the 
government the opportunity — as they did with the municipal 
Act — to address some of the areas that are of major concern. 
Reintroduce the legislation, say, in the fall session, give us an 
opportunity to consult. 
 
And I would be surprised, Madam Deputy Speaker, if through 
further consultation and a reintroduction of this piece of 
legislation addressing those concerns, that we would have 
everybody onside. And so it’s surprising that as of today the 
government continues to forge ahead with this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we find while the association has been 
calling for legislation, they also have had problems . . . calling 
for legislation to deal with delinquent members, they’ve also 
had problems with individuals who are not qualified — as they 
would say qualified — as veterinary technologists or 
veterinarians performing veterinary procedures. And they use 
the term, out of their basement. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I can think over the years of many 
individuals. I think about an elderly gentleman actually who’s 
passed on now, but a self-taught individual who used to go 
around the country and address the health needs of the farming 
community for years. And Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
gentleman . . . And maybe the association wouldn’t be looking 
very kindly on the services that a gentleman like this would 
provide today for the simple reason that a lot of times . . . And 
this gentleman would arrive at a farmyard to deal with whether 
it’s a calving situation or whether it’s an animal that’s down, 
and the farmer was unable to diagnose why the animal was 
down. 
 
This gentleman would come on the scene. He’d deal with the 
situation. He’d assess the situation. He’d either give medication 
or whatever was needed. And then the farmer would ask, well 
what do I owe you? And, Madam Deputy Speaker, what 
amazed most people is that this gentleman understood the 
difficulties that farmers were facing, and he wasn’t . . . And 
that’s maybe the major concern the veterinarians have, is that 
this individual would not be charging at the same level that a 
veterinarian would be charging, and therefore more farmers 
would be calling this person than they would call the local 

veterinarian. 
 
However, I might add that the veterinarian we had at the time 
was an individual that everyone really appreciated and did an 
excellent job. He did a superb job despite the fact that this 
gentleman who practised in our community for years had a very 
. . . he actually had a seeing problem. He was somewhat limited 
in his vision but, Madam Deputy Speaker, he did his job; he did 
it well. His wife used to drive him around, even at . . . You 
could call him at 2 o’clock in the morning with a calving 
problem. It might be 30 below with the wind blowing and the 
snow moving, and yet he’d show up at the door and assist you 
with the problem you were facing. 
 
And there again, Madam Deputy Speaker, what was interesting, 
as a veterinarian he also understood the difficulties of the farm 
and, I would suggest, was fairly moderate in how he charged 
the agriculture community for his services. He was more than 
fair, Madam Deputy Speaker, and certainly built a reputation as 
someone that you could count on; that it didn’t matter where 
you lived, whether a person travelled . . . whether you had to 
travel an hour to go to provide or answer or do a house call, if 
you want, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when we look at this piece of 
legislation, and a number of the concerns that are being raised 
with regards to the legislation, one has to ask themselves, what 
will it take for us to address these concerns? Now the 
government argue . . . well, we may have it. I’m not exactly 
sure if we’ve had any . . . the government come forward with 
any suggested amendments to this piece of legislation. I know 
that my colleague and my colleagues are working on 
amendments to deal with a number of the concerns that have 
been brought to our attention. 
 
And I know, Madam Deputy Speaker, that as we move forward 
with the piece of legislation — if the government continues and 
feels that they must move forward with it — we’ll certainly be 
raising questions in regards to a number of the areas of specific 
intention. And we want to know before we even move forward 
from adjourned debates whether or not the government will 
give any consideration to the amendments that we would like to 
propose. 
 
One of the things that this piece of legislation does is 
strengthens the fines that may be levied against individuals as 
some of the fines had not been increased in a number of years. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now maybe it’s fine, Madam Deputy Speaker, if an association 
wants tools and opportunities to discipline its membership. It’s 
also appropriate that there be the appropriate fines, or the ability 
to fine or levy a fine against an individual if the individual 
doesn’t comply. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think one of the major areas of 
contention in this piece of legislation is the area of dentistry 
when it comes to veterinary medicine. And this is an area that 
has been brought to my attention both locally by many, 
specifically equine producers or horse owners. As, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we find that what’s been brought to our 
attention, that there are specific individuals who . . . As we have 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

in the medical practice, we have general practice physicians 
who deal with the general anatomy of individuals, and then 
there are dentists. A doctor doesn’t . . . You don’t go to a doctor 
if you’ve got a toothache. You go to a dentist. 
 
And the same thing in the area of veterinary medicine. We have 
what they are termed, called equine dentists, who have done a 
fair amount of training. And while the training, most of the 
training is done in the US [United States], the training 
unfortunately is not recognized or currently recognized in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now a lot of the horse owners have been asking us, well if 
someone’s done actual training in equine dentistry, don’t you 
think that that person would be much more qualified than a 
veterinarian who really hasn’t done any training in that area of 
specifically dentistry? Wouldn’t it be more appropriate that we 
allow individuals like this to continue to provide their services 
to the many horse owners in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a valid point. I 
think that . . . We believe that that is a valid argument. That is 
something that the government should be looking at very 
carefully in regards to the piece of legislation before us. And 
the government should take the time to indeed extend its 
consultations, if it hasn’t done so, to address a number of these 
concerns. 
 
Well the other thing when it comes to equine dentistry, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is many veterinarians don’t have the 
equipment or the experience to perform equine dentistry 
procedures. Now I guess one has to ask the question, does the 
minister realize that equine dentists have the equipment? They 
are trained. And has he taken the time to indeed consult 
effectively with these individuals and to address their concerns? 
And has he looked at the piece of legislation before us? And 
have his officials actually sat down with the equine breeders 
and gone through this piece of legislation and looked at areas in 
which they could address those concerns? And I guess those are 
questions, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we will be looking 
forward to asking. We will be looking for answers from the 
minister responsible for the Act that we have before us today. 
 
We’re concerned because it appears, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that the minister did not consult with the people who would be 
most affected by this legislation. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
some of the concerns are raised by individual farmers 
themselves who have done practices for years, just general 
practices on the farm — whether it’s castrations, whether it’s 
delivery of calves, or even just assessing the medical needs of 
an animal they’re dealing with. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as an individual farmer, farmers get to 
know their livestock. Farmers deal with their livestock every 
day. And for an agricultural producer — whether it’s a cattle 
beast, whether it’s a horse, whether it’s a sheep or a goat — 
each and every individual farmer learns to look for signs in an 
animal as to whether that animal is under stress, whether that 
animal is having problems because of the fact that to lose an 
animal is a significant cost to that individual farm family. 
 
And so it’s imperative that farmers have the opportunity to deal 
with situations that they have crop up before them. And, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s also imperative that they also be 
protected from the consequences of this legislation and some of 
the broader aspects of the legislation and how it may affect 
them and how the services of veterinarians may be forced upon 
them. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have moved a great distance in the 
way we deal with calving issues. Years ago veterinarians used 
to do calls right to the ranch. Today, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
we are finding that more and more veterinarians want to operate 
out of clinics and for some producers that isn’t a major 
problem. They do have the trailers. And if a problem arises it’s 
fairly simple to load an animal into a trailer and take it in to the 
clinic and have a veterinarian deal with the issue. In other 
situations, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s really not that 
convenient for individuals to do that. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe this piece of legislation 
certainly needs to be looked at somewhat more thoroughly, a lot 
more carefully. And we need to ensure that the intention of the 
legislation doesn’t take away from the ability of agricultural 
producers to provide for the care and well-being of the livestock 
that they so thoroughly and readily enjoy working with. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it seems . . . And my colleagues 
and I understand that there are a number of issues that we need 
to continue to address. We need to take the time to raise 
concerns and also listen to the concerns that continue to be 
brought to our caucus. And therefore, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
in view of the fact that individuals are still concerned about the 
piece of legislation — we haven’t been getting a lot of answers 
to this point as to how we’re going to address those concerns — 
I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 30 — The Film 
and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to rise on Bill 30, The Film and Video Classification Act. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting with a group of people from the 
LAN [local area network] field in the video side of this just 
recently, and it was very informative and educational to me and 
certainly to my colleagues. 
 
One of the first issues that came out was the fact that they 
wanted to know who was consulted publicly during the process 
prior to this Bill. And they wanted to further review what’s 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

required to consider and address the concerns of the impact of 
all stakeholders of this Bill, because the first time they had 
heard about this Bill was when they found out when CTV 
[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] called them to ask them 
their opinion on the Bill. 
 
As one of the larger stakeholders here in Regina regarding this 
Bill, you would think that the government would have the 
courtesy to call and to find out about their industry. 
 
I’d just like to take a few minutes to tell you a little bit about 
this industry and this company. This company employs 25 
people and has four stores in this province. The shareholders of 
the company made it very clear that should this Bill go through, 
that they will no longer be located in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, to date the business organizations that comprise the 
LAN gaming industry in Saskatchewan have not been consulted 
at all, not even a phone call. Even after they had gone public 
with it in the TV, they had to pursue both the government and 
they came to the opposition with their concerns. 
 
This is a vibrant, young, and growing industry. Twenty-five 
employees employed in this company in the last 18 months, and 
four stores opening, would say that this is an expanding and 
budding industry that can be built on in this province. 
 
Based on the brief review of Bill 30, it is evident that the 
government doesn’t understand the nature of ongoing evolution 
of the video game industry and its distribution channels — the 
futility of this proposed legislation as it relates to restricting 
access to video games. Video games can be downloaded on the 
Internet from sites all over the world at no charge, and cannot 
be monitored and cannot be regulated by government industry. 
 
The LAN industry — especially those that are here — are 
controlled. This company has a process where they have a 
sign-off sheet for the parent and the child to say the age group 
that they can view these particular videos at. They want to 
facilitate a process for constructive dialogue and feedback that 
would enable the industry and the government to work together 
to consider and develop possible solutions that may address the 
concerns of both government and industry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this can only be done through consultation. It 
is always a shame that this consultation becomes a reactive 
process instead of a proactive process. This government never 
consults the true stakeholders of the industry. There’s a vibrant 
expanding company employing 25 people in the province of 
Saskatchewan — one of the leading companies — and they’re 
not even consulted. Stakeholders that weren’t consulted were 
members of the LAN gaming industry, not only the company 
that I had the opportunity to speak to, but other LAN holders. 
Parents that support and patronize the industry here — both in 
Regina and I believe the other centre is in Moose Jaw — were 
not consulted. Youth that support and patronize the LAN 
gaming industry were not consulted. 
 
I understand that these stores are located sometimes in the area 
of our cities where the young people that utilize them are 
probably those least able to have a computer at home. These are 
young people who may not have the opportunity to play on a 

computer or to do a video game. And these outlets are acting as 
releases for them. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, if they’re in these 
LAN stores playing on video games, then they’re not creating 
an issue within the neighbourhood and in the community. I also 
understand that these facilities are used for fundraising events 
for various charities around the cities. So all of these 
opportunities that are here and created by these young men who 
had the ingenuity to see an opportunity in a business, create a 
business environment that opened four stores, employs 25 
people, may now have to go away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the owner said, the penalty is $100,000 and a 
possible six months in jail. Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the 
highest penalties. You know we have a lot less penalties for 
doing almost anything in this province. And here we’re going to 
tax these people with these onerous penalties which far exceed 
. . . I believe in my checking, Manitoba has a $5,000 fine, and 
Saskatchewan wants to implement $100,000 fine. Once again 
we use a sledgehammer, you know, to hit a nail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the government will look at this Bill, 
meet with the stakeholders, understand the terminology that is 
incorporated in this, and change the verbiage so that it doesn’t 
affect these people who are in a specific industry, in a growth 
industry — which are monitoring and regulating themselves — 
who have the support not only of the young people, of the 
parents, of the charity groups that use them, and of this party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time, I move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Saskatoon Northwest has moved adjournment of the Bill. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 31 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 31, An Act to amend certain Statutes and 
regulations with respect to Accounting Professions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that — the way I understand the Bill — 
that it’s to ensure that legislative references to duties to be 
performed by accountants would also include the certified 
general accountants and certified management accountants in 
addition to chartered accountants. It seems that through the 
years the general term chartered accountant has been used. And 
I understand that the Bill is to clarify that to also include the 
other types of accounting professions. 
 
The Bill speaks to six Acts: The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act; The Builders’ Lien Act; The Legal Profession 
Act, 1990; The Municipal Hail Insurance Act; The Mutual 
Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act; and The 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. It also includes the 
four regulations that are being amended are The Helium and 
Associated Gases Regulations, 1964; The Oil Shale 
Regulations, 1964; The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulations, 
1969; and The Subsurface Mineral Regulations, 1960. 
 
[16:30] 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that the minister in his comments stated 
that all the stakeholders have been well notified or discussions 
have taken place with the chartered accountants and the CGA, 
which is the certified general accountants, and also the CMA, 
certified management accountants. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope that that has taken place because 
we’ve noticed the government in the past, in particular with the 
veterinary amendment Act, that they have said that they have 
spoken to all the stakeholders. And we find out much later, even 
months later, that if the discussion had taken place, it certainly 
left those associations vague about the intentions of the Bill if 
the discussions had taken place at all because, in the other Bill, 
it was months later when groups like the stock growers came to 
the official opposition and showed their displeasure with the 
amendments. 
 
So it’s something that we definitely need to look at to see if the 
government has spoken to the CGA and the CMA and the 
chartered accountants. Right now I would . . . The way the Bill, 
the Act is that it is only chartered accountants that can work to 
be a trustee or to do other forms of work, be an arbitrator. 
 
And I guess there’s another question . . . is concerning about 
who can also do audits with these associations as well. I’m not 
sure if that’s part of the Bill or not, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 
something that we definitely, as the official opposition, will be 
talking to the stakeholders to get a handle on exactly what the 
three organizations, the three accounting associations feel about 
this change and if all three of them are actually onside, or if this 
is a Bill that’s going to be put through without the consent or 
the approval of one or more of those associations. 
 
Now my colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford spoke on this Bill 
before, and he raised a point about clause 37(a) of The Mutual 
Medical and Hospital Benefit Associations Act is amended by 
striking out: “member of the Institute of the Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan or any other accountant 
satisfactory to the registrar” and substituting “member in good 
standing of a recognized accounting profession that is regulated 
by an Act”. 
 
There leaves some doubt, Mr. Speaker, exactly who’s being 
taken out, who’s being allowed in. And if an association or a 
member is satisfactory to the registrar, does that mean that’s 
someone that is not part of the chartered accountants, The 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan or the 
Certified General Accountants or the Certified Management 
Accountants? If that particular member is not a member of one 
of those three groups but if they are satisfactory to the registrar, 
are they still included in the Bill as far as doing trustee work 
and arbitrator work? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are a number of questions that we are 
looking at, and we will certainly be in contact with the 

stakeholders, the three chartered accountants groups, because I 
think it’s imperative that we make sure that the government has 
done its homework and see to it that these questions that I have 
raised and other members of the opposition have raised are 
answered before we allow this Bill to go on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until that has taken place, we will continue to 
ask these questions until we get the answers to our questions 
before we allow it to move on. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Biggar has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 31, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment 
Act, 2005. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 32 — The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Kelvington- Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
appreciate the opportunity . . . oh, deputy, Deputy Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to take part in this debate on the 
victims of crime Bill. 
 
It’s not many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I wish I were a 
lawyer. But when I had an opportunity to look at this Bill being 
introduced in the House, I thought that perhaps this is 
something that would address some of the issues that I hear 
about many times in my constituency. So I have . . . when I 
reviewed the Bill, I had a lot of questions on it because, as I 
said, I don’t have training in that profession. And I can tell you 
I was a little frustrated that this Bill wasn’t dealing with the 
crimes of . . . property crimes that I had heard a lot about in my 
constituency. 
 
There are a number of times that people call into the office 
about break-ins and more often vehicle thefts. In fact in the last 
year, I’ve had one gentlemen that called my office. He’s had his 
vehicle stolen three times. So I thought perhaps if this Bill was 
going to be something that would be addressing the issues that 
we hear about often . . . but I learned that this is not a Bill 
dealing with property crimes. It’s violent crimes against 
persons, sexual abuse and abuse where people have had bodily 
damage. 
 
So when we had a chance to review it with my colleague who 
talked about the seven changes that this Bill was actually 
discussing, and I asked him, is this really going to be a 
significant Bill? Is it going to affect a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan? And in his opinion it wasn’t something that was 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

really going to change Saskatchewan very much, in fact 
probably not make an impact on people’s lives to any great deal 
at all. 
 
In fact some of the questions, the obvious ones that I asked him, 
is this Bill actually going to deal with the amount of money that 
victims of crimes will receive? Well it’s not going to specify 
amount. Is it going to decide who gets the money specifically? 
No. Where’s the money going to come from? The Bill doesn’t 
say so. 
 
So then the next question I have to ask myself is then, what are 
we actually doing here? We’re talking about victims of crimes 
in a province where we have the most violent crimes per capital 
in Canada. In fact I believe some of . . . two of our cities have 
titles — Saskatoon and Regina — that we don’t really 
appreciate having, and that is the crime capitals. And that’s not 
something that any of us are proud to wear the title for. 
 
So again then, looking at the Bill, I have to wonder. Is this Bill 
actually going to discuss what the government is going to do 
about crimes? We can make all the rules and regulations we 
want to about paying people that are victims of crimes. And 
until we deal with the issue of crime and understand why we do 
have the large number of crimes that we have in this province, 
we are actually just putting a Band-Aid on a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the work that we’ve been doing in the 
legislature over the last number of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe that one of the things that we’ve all learned and 
understood is that most of the crimes come about because 
people are dealing with addictions of some sort. In fact I believe 
70 to 80 per cent of the people that are incarcerated at this time 
are there because of an addiction. And what I was hoping that 
we would see from this government in this session — in the last 
seven or eight sessions — is something where they’re actually 
going to deal with the problems that we have in this province. 
 
There are two parts to this legislature. We deal with the Bills 
that come out in session, and we deal with the budget. I was 
waiting to see something in the Bills that this government 
brought forward that would deal with the issues that we have in 
this province — talking about the economy, talking about the 
young people that are leaving our province, talking about the 
health care issues, talking about the number of crimes we have 
in this province. 
 
We need something that shows a vision, something that gives 
people an idea of why we should stay in this province. Nothing 
in the legislation that we’ve seen to date does that. And this 
piece of legislation that we’re dealing with, Bill No. 32, 
definitely doesn’t do anything either. We’re talking about what 
we’re going to do when people have had the experience of 
crime. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that talking about how we’re 
going to pay somebody who’s obviously been victimized is 
something that is probably important. But more importantly is, 
how are we going to stop it? And what’s this government doing 
to make sure that we have fewer victims of crime in this 
province? 
 
The older people that we have in this province especially, even 

in rural areas like mine, say — you know what? — I never used 
to lock the door before when I went to bed at night, and now I 
do. People aren’t feeling safe whether they live in rural areas or 
in urban areas. And I think many of us have seen and heard 
about cases where people have a right to be scared. The number 
of people that have had dealings with people who either abused 
them bodily or their property is increasing. And in a province 
where we’re trying to be . . . where we need reasons to have 
pride, where we need reasons to be proud of our province, and 
something to brag about, this isn’t one of them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill that we’re talking about has made 
seven changes to the Act, and none of them have . . . there’s 
nothing that’s a problem with any of these, although the 
affected groups that are looking at the Bill for us haven’t all 
gotten back to us. But the question is, when are we going to 
deal with the big issue? When are we going to see a Bill in this 
legislature that tells us what this government has for vision of 
this province? There’s nothing in any of these Bills that I’ve 
seen to date, or that any of us has seen to date, that’s making a 
difference. 
 
So in the meantime, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since the government 
has all of a sudden decided they have a vision — since they’re 
hollering from their seats — but we obviously haven’t seen it, 
haven’t seen it in any of the legislation that they put forward, 
perhaps then we will see it in the budget. And then in the 
meantime, I will just, I move to adjourn debate till we get word 
back from the affected groups. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
32. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Shellbrook-Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased today to stand and make a few comments on Bill 33, 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And the reason I’m happy 
to speak to this Bill is for one simple reason, that the First 
Nations that’s involved with regarding this Bill is Mistawasis, 
and Mistawasis is in my constituency. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mistawasis First Nations is about 
40, 45 miles just south and east of my hometown of Spiritwood. 
And for many years, I’ve had the privilege and opportunity to 
play a lot of sports with people from Mistawasis First Nation 
along with hockey, ball, and whatever you have. And I’ve had a 
lot of friends from that First Nations that I’ve grown 
accustomed to talking to and chatting to. 
 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2006 

I was also very interested this year that I was invited to the 
Mistawasis First Nation powwow and that happened in July. 
And I think everybody should have the opportunity to attending 
a powwow in whatever area it is in Saskatchewan. And the 
Mistawasis First Nation put on an excellent powwow, and I was 
glad to be there as their representative, as their MLA, and also 
to chat with the people from Mistawasis First Nation. 
 
A couple that come to mind that I got the privilege of talking to 
was Art and Phillip Ledoux. And Art Ledoux was a chief from 
the Mistawasis First Nation and did a lot for that community. 
So I talked to him about a lot of things regarding problems on 
the reserve, problems with First Nations people, and I offered 
my assistance to help in any which way I could. 
 
I also had the opportunity when talking to Art to mention about 
the Bill, Bill 33, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act from last 
year, because this Bill was introduced last year or a Bill similar 
to it regarding an enormous amount of land that was being 
taken out of Crown land at the time and would be turned in 
through TLE [treaty land entitlement] to that First Nations. And 
in talking to Mr. Ledoux, Mr. Ledoux said that this land would 
be welcome to the First Nations; it would help them in many 
ways. And I agree with it. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The problem I have with the Bill back then and the problem I 
have with this Bill now is the fact that in regards to this land 
being turned over to TLE — which we don’t have a problem 
with — is some of that land is under The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act, I remember when that came about because I was 
the president of the Witchekan Wildlife Federation out of 
Spiritwood at the time. And when this habitat wildlife land was 
put under protection, there was millions and millions of acres. 
 
At that time, there was biologists, there was environmentalists. 
there was a member from government that sat down and looked 
at . . . in the province of Saskatchewan we need some protected 
land for environment and also for wildlife habitat. And many 
people, most people in the province of Saskatchewan at the time 
agreed with this issue that there should be land set aside. Well it 
so happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that over the time from then 
till now, a lot of this land is being taken out of the critical 
habitat protection land and utilized to satisfy TLE agreements. 
 
When you look at the land that is the most environmentally . . . 
land in the province that need protection, why is it being 
utilized, to be given out? And that is the question I have for the 
government — why they’re doing it, and why does it keep on 
going. I know there’s an issue down in the southwest part of the 
province where there’s land — Crown land — that was going to 
be taken out for satisfying TLE agreements. And I remember 
the minister at that time, the member from Yorkton, put a 
moratorium on that land. Well for whatever reason he did, but 
he did. 
 
We also have the same issue in regards to wildlife federation or 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act — the land that’s regarding 
that. Why shouldn’t there be a moratorium on that type of land? 

Sure the government will say, well they’re replacing that land 
with other lands. That’s all well and good, but the thing of it is 
the land that they are utilizing now to satisfy and put back into 
habitat wildlife land is not the same quality of land. It is not. 
And therefore you’re taking the best land out to be utilized and 
you’re replacing it with second-grade land, as far as habitat and 
wildlife. And I ask the question, why are they doing it? 
 
In regards to this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this 
Bill changes just a portion of land to go back into the 
Mistawasis First Nation allotment, and I think it was just an 
error made last year in regards to the land that was put in, which 
shouldn’t have been, and therefore they’ve got to juggle these 
land locations to bring it back to what it should be. But in 
regards to the Minister of Environment now in his report on The 
Habitat Protection Land Amendment Act, 2006 he says, and he 
quotes: 
 

We must also recognize the value of participating in a 
process that allows for our commitment to provide 
assistance where feasible for the transfer of lands . . . [and 
First Nations] reserve status. 

 
And I agree with that. Mistawasis First Nations met all the 
conditions related to the sale of these Crown lands. And if the 
amendment is approved, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Ag and 
Food will sell these Crown lands at fair market value. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the land in question cannot be sold unless this 
Bill takes place, and it will be sold under specific land claim. It 
says it will be sold for fair market value. My question to the 
government: why cannot this land be sold to anybody? 
Shouldn’t anybody in the province have the opportunity to buy 
this land if it’s fair market value? I believe there’s many other 
people that would like to take and purchase critical habitat 
wildlife land, but some are not allowed to do that, even if they 
want to pay fair market value. And I ask the question, why not? 
 
This land here, and I believe it’s something like 700 acres that’s 
going to be changed in regards to this Bill, and it’ll go to the 
Mistawasis First Nation under the treaty land entitlement 
process. The minister also stated in his report on regarding the 
Act that: 
 

These lands are currently designated as protected under 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act . . . the Act does not 
allow for removal by regulation on Crown land from The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act schedule for the purpose 
of specific [land] claims. 
 

So right there, Mr. Speaker, the member’s saying that has to 
have a Bill in order for the land to come out and be sold under 
specific land claims. 
 
I remember last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was talking 
about this Act that was there last year, that some of the 
problems were that many people around the area also wanted a 
chance at some of that Crown land to purchase for farm land, 
ranchland, or whatever. And that land was sitting as Crown 
land. 
 
Now it comes back to my previous comment as why can’t 
anybody have the opportunity to purchase land even if it’s at a 
fair market value? Well many of the farmers and ranchers in 



April 3, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

that area didn’t have that opportunity. They were not allowed to 
take possession of that land. This land was just Crown land, and 
it wasn’t under the protection of the critical habitat wildlife 
land. But at the same token, a lot of that land’s bordering the 
amount of land going to the Mistawasis First Nation would 
have been also land that a lot of the farmers and ranchers could 
have operated and done a very good job at looking after that 
land. 
 
I also want to make remarks to the previous minister of 
Environment at the time that when this Act came to be, there 
was only something like two weeks left in the session. And the 
minister at that time wanted the Bill pushed through in a very 
timely fashion. In other words, just a couple of speakers and 
that was it. Well part of the job of the opposition is to find out 
what’s in the Bill, to discuss it with the local stakeholders in 
regards to it, and then present their case. And that’s what I did, 
and of course many of my colleagues in the legislature did the 
same thing. 
 
And I remember talking to the member from Mistawasis as 
saying that well, excuse me, the reason that this Bill is being 
held up is because of me. And I remember the minister 
earmarking that there is problems with the opposition allowing 
this to go through. That wasn’t the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The problem with this Bill was the fact that it did not come in a 
timely fashion, and we needed time to find out the details of it, 
so we held it up. We knew that after it was all said and done, it 
would pass, but we wanted to find out the details. And I 
explained that to the members from the Mistawasis First Nation 
when I went out there to the powwow that the job of the 
opposition is to find out the details. And they agreed with me. 
They understood it. 
 
And I think in regards to this Bill, that it’s just an amended Bill 
to change some land over, that there won’t be a problem with it. 
But in all regards to the Bill that was happened last year, I just 
would like to say that to change that land over is all well and 
good. But when it comes down to critical habitat wildlife land 
— I know many members from the wildlife federation would 
agree with me — that there comes a time when you have to say 
no; why isn’t it the same for everybody else? And that’s the 
same with all critical habitat wildlife land that’s in our province 
— that you can take the land out and replace it, but you’re not 
replacing that land with the same quality of what it should be, 
and that’s why it was put into critical habitat wildlife land in the 
first place. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to this Bill here, 
I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It has been moved by 
the hon. member for Rosthern-Shellbrook that debate be 
adjourned on Bill No. 33. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
House stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................936 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................937 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................937 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Morgan ..............................................................................................................................................................................938, 939 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Belanger .............................................................................................................................................................................938, 939 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................939 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Question Period Relevancy and Personal Charge 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................939 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................939 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Cancer Awareness Month 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association Tournament 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Recognition of Addiction Treatment Graduate 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Congratulations to Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 Staff 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Remembering Founder of Soul’s Harbour Mission 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................941 
 Results of Survey on Smoking in Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................941 
 Government Attitude Towards Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................941 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Overcrowding in Foster Homes and Recruiting Foster Families 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................942 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................942 
 Waiting Lists for Training 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................944 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................944 
 Timetable for Changes to Corporate Taxation 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 The Police Amendment Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................947 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................948 



 

 Internationally Educated Nurses Program 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................948 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................949 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................949 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................949 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................950 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................950 
 Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................951 
 Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................958 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................960 
 Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................962 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................963 
 Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................964 
 Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................965 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


