






















































Hansard: May 02, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 51B  TUESDAY, MAY 2, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1477 
 May 2, 2006 
 
[The committee resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, we’ll come 
to order. We’re doing estimates for the Department of Health, 
vote no. 32, and I would like to invite the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services to introduce his officials. 
 
I recognize the Hon. Minister for Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like 
to introduce the officials from the Department of Health and 
then make a few brief opening remarks. To my left is deputy 
minister John Wright. To my right is Roger Carriere, executive 
director of the community care branch. Seating behind John is 
George Peters, executive director, population health branch. 
Next to George is Lauren Donnelly, assistant deputy minister. 
And to her right is Ted Warawa, executive director, finance and 
administration. Seated at the back of the room is Rod Wiley, 
executive director, regional policy branch, Patrick Cooper, 
assistant to the deputy minister, and June Schultz, director of 
the medical services branch. 
 
I do have some brief opening remarks to provide before we get 
into answering questions from the members opposite. I’ve had 
the pleasure to serve as Healthy Living Services for about six 
months after previously serving as Legislative Secretary to the 
Premier on substance abuse treatment and prevention. When my 
report was released, the Premier announced Project Hope to 
equip communities and families to combat substance abuse. It’s 
a multi-year project to develop strategies and resources locally 
and provincially to deal with an affliction that is all the more 
tragic because it is preventable. 
 
The Premier also wanted to raise the profile of a wide range of 
issues that have had long-term effect on the health of people of 
Saskatchewan. Addictions was just one of those issues. 
Diabetes, obesity, smoking-related diseases, fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder, and a number of other preventable 
conditions threaten the future health of our people and our 
communities. 
 
In October he appointed me to cabinet with a mandate to raise 
awareness, work across jurisdictions and government 
departments, and equip communities to address these threats. 
I’m also responsible for mental health, health promotion, and 
dealing with issues related to seniors in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a number of issues we need to focus on in changing 
attitudes towards healthy living and providing the support that’s 
needed to do that. Ten years ago, the idea that we could 
denormalize smoking and create smoke-free environments for 
people seemed unachievable. Today we’re well on our way to 

making Saskatchewan a smoke-free province. Saskatchewan 
physicians, regional health authorities, municipal councils, 
advocacy groups, and health officials are giving a gift to the 
next generation of young people who will be better protected 
from the harmful effects of smoking and second-hand smoke. 
And people across the province have acknowledged their 
appreciation for this measure. 
 
Recently I challenged all Saskatchewan grade 12 students to 
graduate tobacco free and as grad approaches I hope we’ll see 
many of those youth that have risen to meet that challenge. 
 
With Project Hope we’re making similar progress to 
denormalize alcohol abuse, support people and their families to 
overcome addictions, and to tighten access to illicit substances. 
We’ve provided funding to allow health authorities to hire 
coordinators, expand awareness campaigns, and adopt best 
practices and treatment. We’re increasing in-patient beds for 
detox and treatment, tripling youth stabilization and treatment, 
and gathering better data and research to guide policy 
development. 
 
We’ve also implemented groundbreaking legislation to provide 
secure care for youth who are at risk because of serious 
substance abuse problems. We’ve improved availability of 
information and facilitated off-hours addictions referral services 
through the 24-hour, toll-free telephone HealthLine. 
 
We’ve held a sold-out national clinical conference on best 
practices on addictions and substance abuse and we’ve 
introduced restrictions on the sale of cold remedies that contain 
ingredients used to make crystal meth. 
 
While that’s a lot, there’s still a lot more work to do. Obesity 
and fitness are issues that, if dealt with in youth, can pay 
dividends for life. The consequences of allowing current trends 
to continue is frightening. We already are dealing with increases 
in diabetes and other health conditions that have huge long-term 
costs for the health care system, for individuals and for their 
families, and for reduced productivity in the provincial 
economy. 
 
I intend to continue to talk about these trends in society, the 
implications for Saskatchewan people, and the initiatives being 
undertaken by a wide range of organizations to improve the 
health of our people and our communities. 
 
We should never underestimate our ability to make the same 
kind of changes in public attitudes and public behaviour that 
we’ve accomplished on the smoking front. This is the first 
Saskatchewan government budget that has included the Healthy 
Living Services portfolio and through this budget we hope to 
move the agenda forward. 
 
This focus on promoting good health in the province, 
preventing harm, and enabling recovery from addictions shows 
the Premier’s and the government’s willingness to follow 
through on commitments. In my role as Healthy Living 
Services minister I am committed to supporting the research, 
the community connections, and the continued adoption of 
proven methods to achieve the goals of healthy people in 
healthy communities. 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

Healthy Living Services funding has three main components in 
the Department of Health budget: funding to regional health 
authorities, programs directly funded by the department, and 
seniors issues. I’m pleased and excited to be given the 
opportunity to serve as Healthy Living Services. I look forward 
to the discussions tonight and I hope I can answer the 
opposition’s questions. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members, we have the estimates before 
us starting with central management and services. And is that 
item agreed? I recognize the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials I’m looking forward to an evening of 
exchange of ideas and perhaps a lot of answers. I’m going to 
start by thanking you first of all for giving us an idea of what 
your department is doing because when I looked through the 
budget book there isn’t a line for the department that you’re 
working with. We have surmised that it goes through the whole 
Health department and from some of the other estimates we 
understand that there’s work done by your department within 
other departments as well. So I’m going to ask you first of all to 
break down the amount of money that your department has to 
spend and tell me the number of workers, both front line and 
administrative, that are working within the Department of 
Healthy Living. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Healthy Living Services, but please just feel free to dialogue 
back and forwards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you to the member for the 
question and thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Chair. The 
member is quite right that the information that’s within the 
budget is quite confusing. And I know that a lot of hours and 
time by Department of Health officials and Department of 
Finance officials to actually try to break it out and have a line 
item for Healthy Living Services was expended. 
 
The challenge is that the individuals that will be delivering 
these services for example will be in a lot of cases in regional 
health authorities. And so when you break down a percentage in 
each one it gets very challenging to know that. 
 
But we’ve come up with some numbers that are historical and 
also some estimates from moving forward. Historically from 
’04-05, the amount of money that was spent in mental health is 
91 million approximately; addictions was approximately 18 
million; administration was approximately 5 million — for 114 
million. Now in this budget those numbers would instead of 
$114 million would be approximately $133 million. And that’s 
what would be spent in regional health authorities. 
 
Within the department this year on Healthy Living Services 
would be $27.576 million for a grand total this year’s budget on 
Healthy Living Services for $160 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The other question 
was the number of direct staff that you have, both front line and 
administrative. 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much. We have within 
Saskatchewan approximately 250 addiction workers, within 
mental health approximately 500 in-patient individuals, and 
approximately 400 outpatient individuals. So there’s over 1,000 
individuals that would be classified under Healthy Living 
Services. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me, 
since this new department has been created how many 
administrative staff have been hired to deal with your 
department, compared to last year’s number of administration 
staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you to the member. There have 
been six individuals within the ministerial office including 
myself — or not including myself, sorry — and 11 FTEs 
[full-time equivalent] for implementing Project Hope. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And just to get the 
numbers in my mind now, can you tell me how much money is 
spent on the seniors department. I believe . . . Unless you’ve 
told me. Maybe I missed the number but . . . I have the other 
ones but not seniors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I’m not sure I quite caught all of the 
member’s question. So if I don’t answer the question fully, 
please ask again and I’ll give more information. 
 
But I can break it down in two ways. One is the administration, 
and again I guess just to preface it, it’s . . . This is allocated in 
the sense that there’s an assumption that a half an individual is 
working on the issue and so they’ve taken half of that salary in 
communications. So the administration would be $56,000 and 
then the grants to different organizations would total $131,000. 
And that’s for the ’06-07 budget. Does that answer the 
member’s question? Okay. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will definitely 
re-ask the question if I don’t get the answer. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when the money was sent out to the regional 
health authorities was it earmarked for . . . the Department of 
Healthy Living, was it earmarked specifically for mental 
health? Or was it lumped into their budget so that they had an 
opportunity of determining their needs in their own area when it 
came to spending the money that they received from the 
government for health? 
 
[19:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you to the member for the 
question. The whole idea of the portfolio — why the Premier 
created the position — was to shine a light on areas within 
health that were not getting the prominence that he felt they 
deserved. Within the funding within the RHAs [regional health 
authority], some of the money is delivered directly to them in a 
global package so that they can within their own region priorize 
which issues are important in that aspect. 
 
However there is funding, for example through Project Hope, 
that is targeted and directed and funded by the Department of 
Health. And so while the RHA would be delivering that service, 
they wouldn’t have as much leeway to deliver that service. It 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

would be directed by Health saying, this is what we would 
expect to see and here’s the money and this is what we want 
you to do with that. 
 
The global budget to RHAs, it’s more of a, here’s the packet of 
information; here’s the responsibilities for delivering that. And 
within their region they can determine which has greater 
prominence. The role of the new minister is to raise the profile, 
have some separate thought put into that and some strategies so 
that that issue gets greater prominence than under a single 
Health minister. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’ve mentioned 
the word globals. And I know within the estimates we’ve asked 
for globals from the different departments, and we haven’t 
received them yet. And I know it’s going to be difficult for your 
department to answer the global questions, but I’m hoping we 
can start on this, this year so we know where we’re going to and 
we can compare them in future years. 
 
One of the issues that we always have when we have a new 
department is understanding not only what their job is but how 
you’re going to measure the outcomes and determine if this is 
beneficial to the people, if it’s a good use of money. And 
specifically in areas like mental health and addictions, how do 
you measure an outcome? It’s not an easy job, but it’s 
something that has to be done so you can determine if you’ve 
got value for your money. 
 
My concern with the department now is the coordination within 
each department that you’re working with. I understand that 
you’re working with Education. You’re working with Social 
Services. You’re working in Corrections. And there’s bound to 
be an overlap, and maybe not a duplication but at times it could 
be. And when we have limited resources in all areas, which I 
hear about very often, we have to make sure there isn’t. 
 
And my concern is how is the minister’s department 
determining that we don’t have a duplication that’s actually a 
waste and that we don’t have administration costs that are being 
borne by more than one department, just to find out the same 
number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — That’s a very good question, Mr. Chair, 
and hopefully I’ll have a very good answer. The deputies within 
government have what they call a deputies’ forum, and they 
meet quite regularly to compare notes and ensure that the 
service that is being provided to government is appropriate, and 
they are supported by their ADMs [assistant deputy minister]. 
 
And I guess what might be more illustrative an example would 
be something that’s more concrete and one that we’re all 
familiar with, and that’s the delivery of secure care within 
Saskatchewan. While it was the Department of Healthy Living 
Services that brought that forward and piloted that through the 
legislature, it was really a Bill that touched on many different 
departments. For example, Corrections and Public Safety, we’re 
using a portion of their facility and some of their staff is 
involved in planning. The Department of Justice is very 
involved in the process through the courts and giving legal 
advice, Learning as well. 
 
So while the idea is housed within Healthy Living Services, the 

components of that are being delivered in other departments, 
and there’s not a duplication in that sense in that there’s people 
in Healthy Living Services that are delivering . . . [inaudible] 
. . . information. It’s all being done. I wouldn’t say contracted 
but being delivered. The whole responsibility falls within this 
department for those aspects. And that’s very similar to a 
number of initiatives within Healthy Living Serving and I 
suspect through other departments as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I hope you’re right, and I know 
we all have examples. And I can tell you one in my area where I 
have a young person in school who was in foster care and was 
part of the justice system and needed some health as well. And 
he ended up having four different social workers working with 
him, and then one day at school he had visits by four of them. 
And that wasn’t a benefit to the child. It definitely wasn’t a 
benefit to the education system. And it probably wasn’t a 
benefit to the workers themselves. So that’s the type of thing 
that we get calls on and that we will be watching. 
 
My colleague is going to be asking a number of questions about 
Project Hope, so I’m going to be asking about some of the areas 
within your jurisdiction that I have a lot of interest in. One of 
them is fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. One of them is 
diabetes, smoking. And I’m not sure whether the sexual 
exploitation of children on the streets is something that your 
department is working with, but it is something that I would 
think that when it comes to healthy living, that would be 
something that probably should be under your care. And then 
also seniors. So I’m going to start tonight, and I guess we 
probably have the better part of an hour and a half to ask some 
of the questions. 
 
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is something that I find so 
terribly depressing, and it’s a disease or it’s a condition that can 
be prevented. And it’s only in the last 10 years that I’ve heard 
people talking about it more often. And it’s only an education 
system that’s going cut down on the number of incidents of it. I 
know that we have a lot more brochures. We have a lot more 
information, but there still is a long way to go, not just under 
our First Nations community. 
 
But I’m sure the minister is aware that if a child is not First 
Nations, they’re more apt to be looked at having ADHD 
[attention deficit hyperactivity disorder] or ADD [attention 
deficit disorder] than they are FAS [fetal alcohol syndrome] 
because this has this idea that it doesn’t happen to somebody 
that doesn’t have an economic problem or a social problem of 
some sort. 
 
So I would like to know what your goal is, your measurable 
goal is for the FAS area and what your department is working 
on right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I thank the member for the question. I 
know this is an issue that she’s been speaking about in the five 
years, six years that I’ve been . . . six and a half years now that 
I’ve been a member. Time goes by so quickly — doesn’t it? — 
unless you’re in Committee of Finance. But anyway I guess 
there’s two points I want to make to the member. 
 
One is the cognitive disability strategy which, over the last three 
years, has increased from approximately 1 million to over $4 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

million, and that covers a number of areas of flexible funding 
for parents; assessments and diagnosis and prevention 
initiatives; areas in the KidsFirst which is delivered through 
Learning which works with at-risk parents, because the 
member’s quite right that this is 100 per cent preventable. 
 
One comment — and I’m sure she wasn’t meaning it this way, 
but I’ll probably corroborate what the point she was trying to 
make — is that it’s not just about pamphlets, that pamphlets 
really aren’t as effective as actually working with families and 
ensuring that they make different choices and don’t consume 
alcohol while pregnant. 
 
And last year when I was doing my tour of the province to 
develop Project Hope, I met with a group of people within 
Regina. And they found that by working with these parents, 
they were actually able to quantify that if they worked with the 
family, the subsequent child that was born and subsequent 
children either had no FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] 
or had significantly reduced FASD. And they were able to 
compare that with other statistical families that showed that if 
they hadn’t worked with them, that not only were future 
children born with FASD, that the severity of the FASD was 
increased with additional children. So the member is quite right; 
it is an important initiative to be involved in. 
 
And I guess the last point, I’m not sure the member is aware of 
this, but the four Western provinces and the territories, there’s a 
network of ministers that meet quite regularly. We’ve already 
met once face to face and once by conference call to deal with 
the FASD issue. And there’s a number of research initiatives, 
sort of a direction that we can go en masse as Western 
Canadians, that I’m very excited about. There’s some beneficial 
research being done, and that will be rolled out in the months 
and years to come. So I thank the member for the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of the issues with FASD is 
the fact that diagnosis is so very difficult and really is just . . . 
There’s the one centre in Saskatoon that’s noted for it, and 
there’s some work done in Regina. There’s been a number of 
years now I’ve been . . . the Regina Community Clinic has been 
asking for funding so they can have a diagnostic centre. Can 
you tell me if that is something that your department is working 
on at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I thank the member for the question. We 
were just debating or discussing what the titles of the people 
that were delivering this . . . and I hope this one’s right. Regina 
Qu’Appelle was provided some additional resources to do what 
the member is talking about. What they chose to do was to hire 
a developmental pediatrician. 
 
[19:30] 
 
As well in Saskatoon at the Alvin Buckwold centre, the College 
of Medicine is in the process of recruiting a developmental 
pediatrician. And so far that person hasn’t been hired, but the 
funds are set there and are available for them to do the 
diagnosis that the member is talking about. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When I’ve spoken to 
a number of doctors and the people at the various FAS 
conferences that I’ve been to, I know it takes the assessment 

team, and that requires I believe three different doctors. So are 
there . . . Those doctors are not available in Regina at this time, 
is that what the minister has said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — That team that the member is talking 
about is in place in Saskatoon and Regina. The person that 
they’re recruiting is an additional developmental pediatrician in 
Saskatoon. So that’s the one big position. Health authorities 
have the option of hiring individuals within their own shop or 
contracting services, and in this case they’ve decided to hire the 
individual and have them work within the regional health 
authority. 
 
To answer the question, the only one that’s not hired and not 
working within that team is the developmental pediatrician in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Draude: — When did the diagnostic team become 
available in Regina? When did the diagnostic team for FAS 
become available in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The developmental pediatrician within 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region was hired in the summer 
of last year ’05. We believe it was August, but I think that’s 
specific enough for the member. 
 
As well last year a full-time senior psychologist was hired and a 
full-time social worker at Regina child and youth services. The 
additional funding within the cognitive disability strategy, that’s 
now $4.15 million in different departments. Those are still in 
the planning stages of where the funding will go and how it will 
be rolled out in the next year. So there will be enhancements to 
a number of initiatives, and we suspect in this area as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A number of the 
conferences I went to had speakers from the provincial justice 
system. And one of the judges or a couple of the judges, 
specifically Judge Mary Ellen Turpel-Lafond, talks about FAS 
and the number of young people that end up in the justice 
system because they have never been diagnosed with FAS and 
too often the jails end up as nothing more than a warehouse for 
young people who have a condition that they have no control 
over. 
 
So are these two teams that are set up, one in Saskatoon and one 
in Regina, are they able to do the work that’s required not only 
for the newborns but also for the people that are within our 
justice system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The member’s quite right that there have 
been needs that haven’t been met in the past which is why the 
cognitive disability strategy was developed in the first place. 
One of the things I did learn last year is that this is an issue that 
most people focus largely on the prevention side, and that’s 
really important to do. But we can’t forget those that are already 
having the difficulties. And what I learned last year is that with 
intervention and work, these people can achieve quite a few 
things. So it’s not something that once you’re born with FASD 
you should be written off in any stretch of the imagination. 
 
With the additional resources that have been put forward, there 
have been some improvements through the regional health 
authorities. This year there will be additional resources which 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

will provide that assistance to those that are either incarcerated 
or those that aren’t incarcerated that are still needing the help 
because the member is quite right, that if nothing’s done, too 
high of a percentage do end up having contact with the justice 
system. 
 
We believe we have the correct numbers that will address this 
issue. But budgeting is a yearly exercise, and as we evaluate the 
programs that we are implementing and as we see what is 
demanded and what is required, then we can make adjustments 
in future budgets. But just in the last three years, it’s gone from 
just over 1 million to over $4 million this year which will 
provide a lot of assistance to a lot of individuals. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I need to ask 
you what your goal is for this area then. We know that and I’ve 
learned that many of the people in charge of the correctional 
facilities think there could be up to 60 per cent of the people 
that are incarcerated would have some degree of FAS. And well 
we know that there’s 80 per cent of the people that are 
incarcerated have an addiction of some sort, but they also can 
be afflicted with FAS. 
 
So if your department is dealing with this area in conjunction 
with the Department of Corrections, do you have any type of 
goal that would mean that you would be treating victims of FAS 
differently when they come into the justice system once they’ve 
been diagnosed than they would if they don’t have FAS? Is that 
a goal of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The member asks a very simple question 
but a very challenging question with a very challenging answer. 
And I’ll try to give a brief answer. 
 
The whole point of the strategy is to ensure that the prevention 
initiatives are there so that we prevent children being born with 
FASD. The next stage is to ensure that we provide the supports 
to parents and families and communities so that they’re able to 
be part of the community in as great a way as they can so that 
they don’t get involved within the justice system. At this point 
as well we’re trying to make sure that those that are within the 
justice system are getting the supports that they do need. 
 
But this is a very challenging diagnosis, and they’re still 
working on what is the best approach in that aspect. That’s one 
of the things that I’m learning meeting with other western 
ministers as well. So the whole point is to try to meet the needs 
wherever the individual is so that they can be as fully 
functioning part of their community wherever they happen to 
be. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know this isn’t 
simple. But at the same time I know that the minister is aware 
that to treat somebody who is afflicted with FAS, the same way 
as you would somebody who doesn’t have it is just doing the 
same thing over and over again and expecting a different result 
doesn’t happen. 
 
The minister also indicated that people who have FAS can often 
function if they are given a structured environment that allows 
them to work within their capabilities. So I guess my question 
is, does your department have the goal of having a facility to 
treat people who are afflicted with FAS differently than 

someone who doesn’t if they are part of the justice system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I thank the member for the question. 
Well I’ll answer the part of the question that I can answer. 
Within the cognitive disabilities strategies, the funding will be 
going to what are called cognitive disability consultants that 
will be working with parents and families to make sure that they 
get the help that they need. 
 
What the member is asking that I probably can’t answer is the 
delivery of this type of service within the justice system. And 
that is straying into the area of Corrections and Public Safety 
because they do hire a lot of individuals that are health 
individuals — nurses, that sort of thing — that don’t work for 
the Department of Health. They actually work for Corrections 
and Public Safety. 
 
I’m not aware of any separate facilities that individuals that 
have been convicted of a crime that also have FASD would be 
serving their time separate from the other prison population. 
That’s an area of expertise that I don’t have that’s actually 
within Corrections and Public Safety so I’m not sure I’m going 
to be able to get too much down that road with the member and 
I hope I’ve answered as much as I could. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I think that you probably did. Because what I 
was really asking is, does your government have a 
philosophical goal on what should be done in this area? And it 
doesn’t sound to me like there is anything that is . . . there’s 
nothing the minister is indicating that . . . There’s really nothing 
definable that your department or your government is working 
on when it comes to this area. 
 
[19:45] 
 
So I just have one more set of questions that I’ll ask all at once 
on FAS, and then I’ll move on to something else. 
 
I’m wondering what your department is doing in the FAS area 
in schools. Is there something that’s set up within the 
curriculum or at different grades to teach young people about 
FAS? And if you are working with First Nations so that this 
same information can be given to young people that are in 
schools on-reserve. And how much money you’re putting into 
this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much to the member. 
And I think I should clarify her restatement of what she thinks I 
said for the last answer. 
 
I’m not aware of any programs that Corrections and Public 
Safety have, but I’m not . . . or goals. But I wouldn’t want to 
agree with the member saying that the government has no goals 
in this area or has no plans to do that, because that’s a question 
that should be asked to the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. He may have that and I wouldn’t want to mislead the 
member by saying that there’s nothing when he may have that 
plan or that goal. So just, I hope that clarifies that for the 
member. 
 
With the other question . . . And there’s two questions in that 
one question so she’s getting efficient. Well three, I guess. Two 
and a half. 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

The first one is schools. That’s the easier one to answer. 
Learning does have some sample curriculum units and it does 
get discussed in the middle years. And the funding for ’05-06, 
the latest numbers I have was approximately $103,000. 
 
The second question — which I guess I answered one and three 
— the second question with regards to First Nations, I think I’d 
go back to the way the member prefaced one of her earlier 
questions, that this isn’t a First Nations issue. This is something 
that can affect all individuals. 
 
And so we haven’t got the program targeted specific based on 
whether you’re First Nations or not. KidsFirst is for at-risk 
parents and many of the at-risk parents are First Nations, but 
it’s not a First Nations program because many of them are not 
First Nations. So that is the answer to question number two. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again I want to 
clarify that I didn’t think, I wasn’t saying that it was First 
Nations people that were all that FAS was involved with. 
 
What I wanted to know was how your department is dealing 
with First Nations. Have you got some kind of an agreement so 
that the same education is in the reserve schools? Is the same 
kind of pamphlets or diagnosis available for people that are 
on-reserve? How are you working with First Nations in 
Saskatchewan to ensure that everyone has the same amount of 
information available to them regarding FAS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you for the question. And I just 
want to make it really clear I wasn’t trying to put words in the 
member’s mouth that it was a First Nations issue. I was 
agreeing with her that it wasn’t just a First Nations issue. So if 
she got the impression that I was saying that it was . . . I think 
we agree on that issue. 
 
The First Nations Inuit health branch of Health Canada has 
jurisdiction and responsibility to deal with these issues for those 
that are living on-reserve. And I’m advised that Health Canada 
and Saskatchewan Health have a very good working 
relationship between the two bureaucracies and that information 
is shared and best practices developed and that those ideas do 
flow back and forth. 
 
I am aware of First Nations that have schools on their reserve 
that are affiliated with different school divisions, and so those 
schools would be part of the numbers and the program that I 
was talking about. Many schools on First Nations are First 
Nations run, and so that jurisdiction is within their purview. As 
well that’s also now becoming more of a Learning question that 
I wouldn’t have as much of a detail as I would. So I hope that 
answers the question to the member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. I know that we’re going to have 
these issues because there’s cross-jurisdictional departmental 
issues here that we’re going to come up against this evening. 
And the reason I asked you is because of the mobility of young 
people, not just First Nations but everybody. But I know there’s 
a lot of First Nations that go from reserve and back again, and I 
don’t want anybody to miss the opportunity to learn about the 
issue. 
 
I’m going to go to the next issue that I know affects a lot of 

people in Saskatchewan, and that’s the issue of diabetes. I read 
an article not too long ago that talked about the number of 
people in Canada who were going to be afflicted with diabetes 
in the next number of years, mostly because of our lifestyles. 
And I — unlike most of my colleagues who only eat salads — I 
find myself maybe eating hamburgers a lot more often than 
some, so I am concerned about this area. And I am wondering 
what specifically your department is doing to deal with the 
potential increase of the number of people who have diabetes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you to the member. And I agree 
with the member and her comment on my last answer that if 
First Nations are off-reserve then they are the jurisdiction 
within the Government of Saskatchewan and that they would be 
able to avail themselves of the programs that are there. 
 
Diabetes is a very important issue. I talked about it in my 
opening remarks and the aspect of diabetes that falls within 
Healthy Living Services is on the prevention side. So the 
healthy eating, the healthy exercise, those sorts of things. The 
reason I’m saying that is that once we’re into the issue of 
diabetes most of that falls within the Department of Health and 
I’m advised by some that Minister . . . the minister, pardon me, 
of Health — I just about said his name and you can’t in this 
purview — would be delighted to answer many and sundry 
detailed questions on diabetes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I guess when you talked about prevention that 
must mean that you have some type of program available, an 
education program. Is it brought out in the schools? Are you 
spending money advertising it? What are you doing? How 
much money are you spending on it? 
 
And the other thing that I must put on record is that one of the 
big issues about diabetes is the cost of the strips for testing your 
blood when you have diabetes. I know I have a son that has 
diabetes and he has to give himself three needles a day and that 
gets to be very expensive. And I do know that when it comes to 
prevention, if you can look after yourself, then you’re not going 
to cost the health system a whole lot more money down the 
road. But the strips are very expensive. 
 
I know again that the First Nations, many of them don’t do the 
testing as often for a number of reasons but there’s always . . . 
the costs are always one of the reasons. So can you please tell 
me what you’re doing with . . . how much money you’re 
spending on the prevention aspect. What specifically are you 
doing? And how you are encouraging your minister to ensure 
that everybody has availability of the strips and the needles and 
everything at cost to ensure that you can keep your diabetes 
under control. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you for the question. I guess I’ll 
answer the easier question, part of the question first. Effective 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. Not only does she ask 
questions, she heckles when she asks them. 
 
Effective October 21, 2005, Saskatchewan Health provided 
funding to each of the health regions for a dedicated health 
promotion position. And that’s not just to deal with diabetes but 
it’s to deal with sort of health promotion on healthy exercise 
and healthy eating, because by doing that we’re not just solving 
or ameliorating the issue of diabetes but it’s also heart disease 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

and depression and a whole host of issues. 
 
Which leads into why it’s challenging to say this is how much 
money we’re spending on diabetes prevention. Because while 
this is a very important initiative that does help that, it also 
helps on a whole number of initiatives and to say that, you 
know, 1 per cent or 20 per cent of that person’s salary is for 
that, for diabetes prevention, is very challenging. But that’s one 
of the major initiatives we’re doing. 
 
And also one of the challenges for saying why it’s not a line 
item in Healthy Living Services’ budget, In Motion is in 
another portfolio — Culture, Youth and Recreation. Department 
of Learning also has some initiatives with . . . I can see the 
member had some questions on that but not any more. As well 
within Learning there’s initiatives on nutritious food, those sorts 
of things. So it’s more of a direction that would be delivered by 
a number of departments around government because it’s 
something that if we can affect the whole community a lot of 
the person’s health is improved. 
 
And I understand the member’s concern on this issue and I also 
have family members that are dealing with the issue and it’s a 
very frightening and very challenging issue that if we can treat 
it early with diet and exercise you can hopefully mitigate some 
of the more serious consequences that can come about with 
diabetes. 
 
Now the member also asked some specific questions on strips 
and on needles. And I don’t like doing this — when I was 
chairing these committees I always felt bad for the member — 
but that’s actually an issue that really should be taken up by the 
Minister of Health. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one more 
question before my colleague will ask for a while. Before you 
hired this personnel, did you develop some type of baseline so 
you could have . . . you could determine some measurables 
about the effectiveness of hiring this person within each region? 
There must be something that you, some way that you can 
determine if this is a good use of public money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I thank the member for the question and I 
see the time is going by so I’ll try to shorten my answers. The 
short answer is no, we don’t have specific targets of numbers 
that we hope that this is what we achieve, partly because these 
kinds of initiatives often takes years to have the positive results 
and it’s across broad spectrums. It’s housing. It’s living 
conditions. It’s poverty rates being improved. It’s working with 
the federal government as well. I know that the whole 
population branch or whole population health issue is one that 
you can do a number of initiatives and the results are the 
numbers improve and you can’t say that it was because of 
initiative one or initiative five, it was by doing all ten at the 
same time consistently that you see some improvement. So 
we’re committed to doing that and we hope to see some positive 
results down the road. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
minister and the people who came tonight to answer the 
questions. Appreciate your time. In the opening discussion to 
try to understand what the minister’s position was he had 
explained as cross-jurisdictional and yet when we get to pointed 
questions they either have to go back to the Department of 
Health or to Corrections. Would it be a fair assessment to say 
that the minister’s department is a public relations department 
facing these facts? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well initially I wanted to give a very 
short answer and just say no and then sit down, but I’m not sure 
that that would satisfy the member, so I’ll give the expanded 
answer as well. 
 
The Premier, when he talked to me about taking on this 
challenge, said that from his perspective he wanted to shine a 
greater light upon a number of initiatives, very important 
initiatives that are extremely important but in some cases may 
not be viewed as urgent in the public eye, or areas that have a 
stigma or discrimination attached to them. 
 
The portfolio that I’m privileged to hold is one that provinces 
across Canada are starting to create. I know Manitoba has a 
similar position. Ontario has one. A number of the Maritime 
provinces do as well. So in fact the current Premier of Nova 
Scotia I believe, just prior to holding the position that he now 
holds, was the same position that I’m holding now. So I 
wouldn’t characterize this as a public relations exercise, nor 
would I expect any of the provinces — probably about six or 
seven of them that have current ministers that hold similar 
portfolios that I have — would view it in that manner as well. 
 
These are extremely important initiatives that need concentrated 
effort upon: addictions, mental health issues, autism, FASD. 
 
The comment that the member made about working 
interjurisdictionally, I think he’s correct in that there are some 
questions that cannot be answered by this portfolio, just as if we 
have someone from Learning can answer their Learning 
portions of the FASD initiatives but would have to defer to 
Justice or Corrections and Public Safety or perhaps Healthy 
Living Services to be able to answer the questions that are 
available to be answered in their portfolio. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, in Project Hope, 
one of the first objectives was to hire a Chair for the university. 
Has that been done? What was the date of that being done, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The member is quite right that one of the 
initiatives in Project Hope was the hiring of a research Chair. 
The funding and the agreement and the legal requirements to set 
up that has been completed. The university has been provided 
$250,000 a year. 
 
I know they are in the process of recruiting and attracting a 
top-tier candidate. And I’m sure the member knows, as other 
members know, that attracting a tier 1, top-flight candidate can 
take time because the type of individual that we’re looking for 
is one that . . . He or she would be someone that’s a pre-eminent 
individual that is well-known around the world in his or her 
field in the area of addictions. Likely that individual would be 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

having many commitments that they would have to extricate 
themselves from before they would be able to take on a new 
initiative. 
 
You know I did have communication with the university 
recently, and they’re working very hard to fill that position. 
And one of the exciting parts about that is that by attracting a 
top-flight candidate within the community, there should be 
additional resources and funding provided. So as people want to 
invest some of their resources or try to benefit the community at 
large, the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] is a very 
well-respected institution. The safeguards of funding would be 
utilized correctly. And we hope that, attracting a top-flight 
candidate, we’ll be able to provide that research and the positive 
benefits down the road. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I believe it’s 
been almost one year. Can you tell me how many candidates 
have been interviewed for this position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well just to correct the member, it’s been 
since December ’05 that the agreement was signed. And we 
were told at that time that it could take up to one year from 
December ’05 to actually attract that candidate. I know that they 
are under way of the recruiting and advertising. I’m not aware 
of any interviews that may have taken place. That is something 
that we’ve provided the $250,000 a year for the university, and 
that’s a responsibility that they’ve taken on. 
 
And one of the things we’ve got to be cautious of is that, while 
the funding is from Department of Health, this is an 
autonomous organization. We don’t want to interfere in the 
research and the type of individual that they decide that they 
need to attract, other than it will a very high qualified 
individual. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We look forward 
to hopefully sometime this year seeing somebody in that 
position. I’d like to switch a little bit. My colleague had asked 
about sexual exploitation of children, if that fall under your 
area. We didn’t get an answer. Could you answer that question, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — No, it does not. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Could the minister answer whose area that 
does fall under, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — This is an issue that crosses a number of 
portfolios. The lead portfolios, depending on the type of 
questions that the member hopes to ask, would either be 
Department of Community Resources or Justice. The 
components that would be within Health is . . . if the individuals 
did require either addiction services, mental health services, or 
other health services, that would be under Department of 
Health. 
 
But the two lead areas, depending on how the member is asking 
the questions, would be Justice and Department of Community 
Resources. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The question is, 
is that we did a all-party committee. We had 50 

recommendations. We’ve implemented four. The question is, 
when do we implement the rest of them? And I just needed to 
know which department to go to that, but we’ll try all of them 
and that way we’ll incorporate it. 
 
I’d like to talk about the methadone program. Could you 
explain the methadone program including the number of people 
that are using it and the number of counsellors that are available 
to that program? Thank you. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The member asks about methadone. I’m 
sure he doesn’t want to know all about what the methadone 
program is. I’m sure he’s aware of it, other than that these are 
for individuals that are addicted to different opiates. This is part 
of the harm reduction model. If he wants more information, I’d 
be more than happy to answer that. 
 
But the three sites within Saskatchewan are in Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, and Regina. And in 2005, there were 1,500 clients 
that utilized the methadone clinic. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The other part of 
the question, if you could break it down by city and the number 
of counsellors that are available to these people on the program, 
as I understand they have to see a counsellor as part of the 
methadone program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The information that the member is 
asking for is quite a level of detail. That 1,500 clients, we don’t 
have that broken down by city. We do know that through 
Project Hope an additional two counsellors were provided to 
Saskatoon, an additional one in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You still haven’t given me the original 
amount of counsellors that were there prior to the hiring of the 
three. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — That’s also part of the level of detail that 
we don’t have here tonight. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — It’s my understanding that the government 
guidelines call for one counsellor for every 50 clients. I 
understand in the city of Saskatoon that that number is 1:500. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I think the member’s incorrect in saying 
that because just the new hires are a total of three . . . two in 
Saskatoon, one in Prince Albert, and there’s 1,500 clients. So 
that’s 1 in 500 just for the new hires. That’s not including those 
that were currently working there or prior to. 
 
But the reason we don’t have that level of detail is that service 
is being delivered through the regional health authorities, and so 
they would have that day-to-day information. But I can assure 
that those statistics would be inaccurate just based on the 
information I provided. You know the 1,500 is for the whole 
province, and we did hire additional three — two for Saskatoon 
and one in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. But obviously I was unaware 
these three had been just hired. Could you tell me the date of 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

the hirings please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — We don’t have the exact hire dates. But 
the funding was provided before the end of the last calendar 
year, and our understanding that all three were hired between 
the region of October and March of this year, so the last six 
months of the calendar year. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — So it could be that my numbers were 
accurate prior to those hires. And I would appreciate if the 
minister could get me those numbers at some point in time in 
the near future. It would be greatly appreciated. 
 
Fifteen hundred people on the methadone program, I’d like to 
hear from the minister what our plans are to move those people 
off of methadone and through some type of addiction treatment 
centre so that they’re cured and no longer need to be required 
on drugs of any kind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The whole concept behind the addictions 
strategy within Saskatchewan is that, as much as possible, we 
treat the individual, so it’s individualized treatment. And we 
meet the individual where they’re at. 
 
As I indicated, the methadone program is a harm reduction 
model, and so as individuals avail themselves of the treatment 
options, they are able to access the outpatient treatment. And if 
they choose and are moving along in the process, they can 
access in-patient programs as well. 
 
But I mean the member’s fully aware of the needle exchange 
programs, the programs that are going on in Vancouver that are 
on the harm reduction model. And the statistics in downtown 
Vancouver for a lot of those clinics that actually provide the 
drugs is that the success rate of getting them from where they 
are to being completely clean and sober and clear of all drugs is 
very low. So if that’s the hopeful outcome, then the numbers 
aren’t very good. 
 
But if the outcome is to make that population healthier so that 
they’re using safe needles, that they’re not sharing needles and 
they’re not spreading communicable diseases and that they’re 
as healthy as they can be in that environment and the 
opportunity to avail themselves of different programs to get out 
of that, then I would say that those numbers are very good. 
 
But to go back to the original question is, what is . . . there is 
the whole continuum of care, continuum of treatment. And the 
counsellors are working with these individuals to hopefully get 
them into outpatient care. If they feel they need in-patient care, 
then that is made available. But this is part of that harm 
reduction model. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I thank the minister for the answer. You 
know, one of the things with 1,500 people is we want to try to 
get them healthy and clean and off drugs. This program is 
enabling peoples to continue on the drug stream versus 
treatment. I’d like to know how many of those 1,500 or a 
number as you quoted statistics out of BC [British Columbia], 
how many have we moved off the methadone program in 
whatever period you want, last 12 months, last 24 months, 
whatever is easiest? 
 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — We don’t have those statistics. But the 
member makes a comment that has a philosophy that the 
methadone program is bad because it’s keeping people utilizing 
a drug and somehow that that must be a bad thing. And I know 
there are individuals that don’t agree with the methadone 
program, but I think the preponderance of best evidence say that 
you try to make the person as healthy as they can be in their 
environment. 
 
Of course the ultimate goal is that they move through that 
continuum and that program. But we also don’t want to make it 
so that the individual is feeling so pressured that they walk out 
and don’t become part of the methadone program, in which case 
they’re back using illicit drugs, likely sharing needles, likely 
spreading different diseases within that community. 
 
And so this is a portion of that harm reduction model. If 
individuals don’t agree with the harm reduction model, then 
they’ll have some criticism and some concerns about that. But I 
think for the most part, it is doing a good service, and the 
people that are providing that are making those people as 
healthy as they can be. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well I thank the minister for the partial 
answer. You know, if we have no measurable goals or 
objectives, if you’re not tracking these, how do we know that 
we are moving them down the continuum? If we continue to 
support 1,500 people on a methadone program without even 
knowing if we’re moving some of them off of drugs 
completely, what is the end? Does this just go on forever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I guess the answer that I would give is if 
you have an individual that is using intravenous drugs and 
wants to improve their life as much as they can and they avail 
themselves of a counsellor and go on the methadone program, 
that’s a major step forward for that individual. Someone’s that 
on a methadone program is able to be as healthy as they can be, 
may be able to hold down a job, may be able to stabilize their 
family. 
 
It’s a major step forward, so within that harm reduction model, 
that’s something that should be applauded, not said that they’ve 
failed because they haven’t achieved 100 per cent success. For 
that individual, that may be 100 per cent success, and that may 
be something that they’re on for the rest of their life, and their 
life will be a lot longer because they are on that program. 
Whereas we know that if they hadn’t been on that program, 
their life expectancy would be very low. They themselves 
wouldn’t be as healthy, and the community wouldn’t be as 
healthy. 
 
Having said that, there is the options and the availability for 
treatment to move along that continuum as much as they’re 
available, as much as they’re able to participate in that. But I 
wouldn’t want to put so much pressure on that group of 
individuals to say, listen you’re here for a year, and then if you 
don’t get off, well then you’re kicked out. That wouldn’t be 
appropriate. 
 
So some of those individuals could be there the rest of their life. 
Some could say you know what, I’m ready to take that next 
step. Removing yourself or getting treated for drug abuse is not 
a straight line and a continuum. They have slips. They have 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

things where they’re doing better. They have fallbacks, and as a 
community we have to have that safety net for them. 
 
If a person doesn’t agree with the harm reduction model, 
they’re not going to agree with my answer. But I think that for 
the most part, it’s the responsible thing to do as a society. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Minister, I understand that it’s a step in 
a continuum, and that is a requirement in order to move people 
from the street to a program. But you failed to answer any of 
the questions. You don’t know how many counsellors you have 
for these 1,500 people. You’ve been unable to say how many 
people you’ve been able to take from the methadone program 
into treatment and off of methadone completely. 
 
So you know, I don’t know what else you would like me to say 
other than there are no measurable goals and objectives in this 
program, and I want to know when you’re going to institute 
some. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well the member’s asking very detailed 
questions, statistical information that it’s not usual to have in 
this type of platform, so that’s the reason we’re not able to 
answer those detailed questions. 
 
But to come back to the goals and . . . The RHAs are working 
very hard. They’re providing a harm reduction model which is 
to accept the individual where they’re at, to provide the help 
that they need, and move them along as much as possible. 
 
It would be great if everybody could move right along just like 
a conveyor belt and have no problems and don’t fall off, but 
that’s just not how addictions work. The goal here is to provide 
a harm reduction model to make these people’s lives as healthy 
as they can be and have an array of services that if they’re in a 
position to be able to accept them and move down that 
continuum that that service menu is there for them. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll switch 
subjects that you don’t have the information, but any project 
that doesn’t have measurable goals and objectives to know 
where you’re moving down the continuum is a project doomed 
to fail because there’s no way of knowing whether you’re being 
successful or unsuccessful. 
 
New question, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me how many calls 
you are getting per month on the drug addiction helpline, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I thank the member for the question. And 
just to clarify, we believe that he’s asking questions on the 
enhancements of the HealthLine and how many of them were of 
a drug-related nature. Is that what the member is asking? . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member is asking if there is 
a special number for drugs. And actually what it was, was this 
was one of my interim recommendations from last April — a 
year ago — that the HealthLine, the toll-free HealthLine that is 
providing health information to families, that they’ve actually 
hired individuals so that individuals can, parents and families 
can phone 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and call 
HealthLine and actually speak to a live addiction counsellor. 

I believe that’s what the member is asking about. It’s not a 
separate toll-free number. It’s the regular HealthLine number 
which is 1-866-800-0002. If that’s incorrect just check the front 
of your phone book, for all the viewers, and it’s in there. 
 
We did issue a press release. I believe it was in the first number 
of months that HealthLine had been expanded. And I believe 
the number was 300, but it’s available on the government 
website from a number of months ago. If the member is 
wanting to know what the global number is, we can send that 
information over in the not-too-distant future. But we just don’t 
have that statistical information here tonight. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I’m sorry; I didn’t understand the answer at 
the end there. What I was asking was how many calls are going 
through to the addiction counsellor, either on per month or per 
year, whatever he can give me. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — We can send that information over, get 
that fairly quickly to the member. We don’t have that here this 
evening though. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, we’re a little disappointed on all 
this statistical information that we’re asking. We don’t seem to 
have any of the information here. I hope that we can get this 
information quickly so that when we’re back asking more 
estimates in this department, we have the information we need. 
 
We understand that in the prisons that — the ones we visited in 
the last 60 days — that the wardens had told us that 70 per cent 
of the people within the prison system are there for 
addiction-related . . . or have addictions. And in working with 
the estimates last night from Corrections, I understood that 
there are 15 spaces open for five-week addiction program. 
Would those numbers be correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Through Project Hope, $550,000 for 
’06-07 is provided to Corrections and Public Safety to provide 
addiction services within that community. How they decide to 
allocate that money and whether it’s 15 spaces, that’s 
something that if you’ve received that answer last night, I 
wouldn’t have better information than they would have because 
that’s within their jurisdiction. But 550,000 has gone from 
Health to Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you have Project 
Hope, which is to do with addictions, you give $560,000 to 
Corrections and you have no idea what they’re doing with it, I’d 
like to understand why not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The amount was 550,000 to Corrections 
and Public Safety. That is within the jurisdictions of 
Corrections and Public Safety. They have been mandated the 
authority to spend that money. And the answer that the member 
gave last night, I’m sure was accurate, and it’s within his 
jurisdiction to oversee that initiative. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Minister, I understand, but if you are 
trying to overlay a drug strategy across the province, across 
different jurisdictions that you have control of, you need to be 
involved in how those programs are . . . the material of those 
programs, the length of those programs, and all materials 
surrounding those programs. Without your ability to do that, 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

then how do you do your job, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well I think the member’s question is 
sort of a philosophical question. Project Hope provides funding 
to a number of departments, a number of areas. To a certain 
extent, this is through different departments, through different 
community organizations, different RHAs. So the day-to-day 
operations of those programs are really best answered by those 
ministers. 
 
But having said that, the overall strategy of evidence-based best 
practices, ensuring that there’s a continuum of care on the 
prevention and education side in the area of detox stabilization, 
in-patient-outpatient support, transitional housing, ongoing 
support along that continuum of care . . . Once that strategy is 
put forward with Project Hope, then that is being implemented 
by different departments and different regional health 
authorities. So depending on what the member’s asking, that is 
within this portfolio. If he’s asking for very detailed, specific 
questions on the delivery, of course that would be best 
answered in those different departments. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know, you’re in 
charge of Project Hope. You’re not a public relations 
department. You give out $550,000 to another department, and 
you don’t know what their measurable goals and objectives are. 
You don’t know what they’re doing with that funding. Then 
you would be a bank and not doing that. It’s a simple question. 
Do you have measurable goals and objectives that the money 
being spent in prisons for addiction treatment . . . that they are 
part of the program you are running and that you are aware of 
the types of programs that are being put on in that organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well again the member is asking sort of a 
philosophical question. Project Hope provides funding to a 
number of initiatives whether that’s Justice, whether that’s 
Learning, whether that’s Corrections and Public Safety. And 
once that funding is provided to that department . . . For 
example Learning, Learning has good initiatives within their 
department. We have good trust that those dollars are being 
spent appropriately. They work with the experts and the 
professionals within that field to come up with what they 
believe is the best way to provide the information to the young 
people in Saskatchewan, just as within Justice they’ve hired 
additional SCAN [safer communities and neighbourhoods] 
officers. They’ve got a program that they believe, and those 
experts believe, is the best way to approach that. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Same thing for Corrections and Public Safety. They believe that 
they needed some additional resources to assist those 
individuals that are incarcerated to help with their addictions. 
Additional resources were funded to Corrections and Public 
Safety so they could formulate the plan with their experts, with 
those individuals that know that population best and that is what 
they’re doing. 
 
So I’m not attempting to avoid answering questions, but I’m 
trying to make sure that the member knows where to get the 
best answers. And in that case it’s the Minister for Corrections 
and Public Safety — which I understand he did get an answer to 
last night. 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you. Yes, the answer we got, that 
there were 15 spaces in Corrections based on the number of 
people . . . The fact if I asked about SCAN, I’m sure that the 
Minister of Justice could tell me about it, the program, what’s 
going on. But I’m going to switch subjects because I’m not 
getting any answers on these ones. 
 
I’d like to know if there is a dual diagnostic treatment centre 
here in the city of Regina that will take people that have bipolar 
or other issues along with a drug addiction which is really 
unique in the treatment world. Is one of those facilities available 
here in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The member is quite right in the area of 
dual diagnosis because what I learned last year doing the 
analysis is that there’s a lot of individuals that have mental 
health issues that also have an addiction and a lot of people that 
have an addiction that also have mental health issues. And there 
is a lot of debate as to which came first, but there is a huge 
number of overlap. And that’s why one of the recommendations 
was to reconfigure the whole model of recovery so that best 
practices are utilized and that the whole issue of mental health 
and addictions are working more closely together. 
 
And so some of the crosstraining that’s being held for 
addictions and mental health workers is to deal with the issue 
that the member is talking about, also some of the in-patient 
psychiatric units that are very accustomed to dealing with the 
more severe end of individuals that have that dual diagnosis. 
 
So the member is quite right that that is a serious issue. We’re 
addressing it on the front of in-patient but also making sure that 
the outpatient individuals that are providing the service have 
training on both and so that we’re trying to treat the whole 
individual as opposed to treating the symptoms that the 
individual presents so that they’re not sent from a mental health 
issue person to an addiction professional and those individuals 
aren’t talking. 
 
So we’re not there yet. We need to do some more work, but the 
plan is to move them closer together so that they are more part 
of a team as opposed to segregated units. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thanks, Minister, for the explanation. I 
understood that part. The question was, is there a facility or a 
community based organization, a non-government organization 
or a government organization that’s providing that service today 
in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — The in-patient psych unit at the Regina 
General Hospital. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I understand that that treatment program is 
a long-term treatment program. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — It would really be based on what that 
individual requires, but generally it would be of a shorter term 
nature — days and weeks as opposed to months and years. 
However part of that process is that once that individual’s been 
stabilized, then they either avail themselves of the mental health 
and addiction professionals on an outpatient basis, or if required 
then they could move to an in-patient treatment centre. And we 
have a number of those throughout the province. 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

Mr. Merriman: — Last question on this, Mr. Minister. There 
is a centre here in Saskatoon . . . in Regina, a community-based 
organization that offers long-term treatment for dual diagnosis. 
And my question was, to get to the point, that I had a parent in 
Saskatoon who wanted to send their child here but was told that 
basically they would have to be on the waiting list because it 
was run by the Regina Health District and that the people in 
Regina came first. Could you explain why that would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I know our time is running short, and I 
understand the member has a case that he’d like to pursue. If he 
wants to contact my office or we can speak afterwards, we can 
get the information and deal with it in a much more appropriate 
way than this back and forth because we would want to get the 
help to the member’s constituent in an appropriate manner. 
 
To try to answer the member’s question however — and we can 
continue on if he wishes — is that if the facility that the 
member’s talking about is a provincial facility, which it likely 
is, then there may have been a waiting list, and it may have 
been someone from Regina is ahead of that individual. But no, 
it doesn’t matter where it’s located. The person is provided the 
help regardless of their residency. So if there is a waiting list to 
get on, it’s based on the individual’s need and would get the 
help as quickly as possible. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, my 
colleague asked a question about the sexual exploitation of 
children. And I had taken for granted that when this department 
was conceived by your government that this department would 
be looking after this program. 
 
In 2001 when I had the honour of being part of this committee, 
we did develop 49 recommendations. And there are a number of 
them yet to be looked at by government. And I understand that 
you’re saying now that your department isn’t the umbrella over 
the whole program, and I would wonder. 
 
After I’ve listened to you say a number of times tonight that 
your department treats the whole individual, this would be the 
department that should be responsible even if you don’t carry 
out all the recommendations, to make sure that they are. Who in 
your government then is looking after it to ensure that these 
recommendations are being put forward and that they are going 
to be implemented in a timely manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well just to make it very simple for the 
member, the Department of Justice is the lead department on 
that. So that’s the department that you’d want to start for the 
global questions. 
 
And I think the member is quite right as to what should be in 
this department and what shouldn’t be in this department. It’s a 
very arbitrary process. I mean, we’ve had this debate. The 
Minister of Health and I share a department, share a deputy, and 
we often have discussions as to whether it should be in his 
portfolio or in my portfolio. And wherever you draw that line, 
you can debate that it should be more one way or the other. So 
it’s not a clear-cut delineation of duties as the member 
understands. 

But specifically the good work that she and other members have 
participated in for the sexual exploitation of children, those 
questions should go directly to the Department of Justice as the 
lead role. Now some of the delivery of that service, just as 
we’ve said that it’s overseen by this department and is delivered 
in other departments. We’re one of the departments that is also 
touched, but the lead role is Justice. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I have no doubt 
that your department is really concerned about all the different 
issues we’ve talked about. But since 2000 and 2001 when this 
work was undertaken, we still have too many young people out 
on the street, that are being exploited. And even this year in the 
beginning of March 2006, there is yet another group that are 
trying to deal . . . in Saskatoon who had a conference trying to 
deal with the sexual exploitation of children. And I just can’t 
believe that we still are talking about this issue when six years 
ago we understood that if we had an all-party committee, 
something was going to be done with it. 
 
I believe that we are failing our children when we are still trying 
to reinvent the wheel and talking about the very same things. I 
remember talking about it to different departments a number of 
years ago. And Education said they were willing to take credit 
for it. Health was willing to take credit for it. Justice was until it 
asked the very specific question — who’s in charge? — and 
then nobody was going to answer the question. 
 
And it’s easy for us to sit here tonight and talk about which 
department they’re under, but they’re all just one child. One kid 
is being shoved around between different departments because 
nobody is taking the responsibility and making sure something 
is happening. I think that we could all consider ourselves 
failures unless we take the bull by the horn and say that this is 
something we’re going to be dealing with. 
 
You’re saying that it’s the Minister of Justice and then . . . so 
I’m going to take . . . I’m going to ensure that the next time this 
comes up I’m going to ask him about these 49 or 47 
recommendations that have still yet to be implemented. 
 
I’m getting a signal that I’m supposed to be finished, but I guess 
we’ll have an opportunity to discuss this further. I thank the 
officials for coming tonight. And these are important issues. I 
can’t imagine a department that overlaps so many other 
different ones that has an opportunity of making such a 
difference. And I guess like you said earlier tonight, there is still 
things that have to be worked on. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well I just thank the member for that, 
very good comments that she’s made, and just say that we all 
share frustration that we want to get as much done as quickly as 
we can in that area. And if she wants to talk to me outside of 
this area, I’d be more than happy to go over the things that we 
can contribute. 
 
And I do believe that this is an important portfolio. There are 
issues that we can do very quickly. A lot of these issues are 
very solvable. They’re not easy, but they’re very solvable or 
very improvable. So by putting energy and initiatives and 
resources . . . that we can really improve people’s lives for the 
better. 
 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

And I know the member has contributed that on a number of 
fronts. And just to thank the two members for their very good 
questions, and we’ll continue to discuss this further. So thank 
you very much and thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It’s been moved by the Government 
House Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the committee to 
adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. I want to thank the 
Minister of Healthy Living Services and his officials. And the 
committee stands adjourned. 
 
[The Acting Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — I’m instructed by the committee to report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — When shall the 
committee sit again? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Chairman. 
And while I’m on my feet, I’ll move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The Government 
House Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:03.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1478, 1488 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


