


















































Hansard: April 07, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 37A  FRIDAY, APRIL 7, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1017 
 April 7, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills with regard to 
Highway 32. Many of the signatories to this particular petition 
come from outside of the immediate communities. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
As I stated, Mr. Speaker, some of the people who signed this 
petition come from local communities like Prelate and 
Lemberg, but there are signatures from Gravelbourg, 
Lloydminster, Macklin, Medicine Hat, and Mortlach. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people in my constituency who are 
really worried about the shape of Highway No. 310. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
the Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding 
areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, from 
Foam Lake, and from Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you and good morning, Mr. 
Speaker. I have yet another petition to fund Avastin. And this 
petition is signed by people concerned that the government 
made the decision not to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition come from 
two communities, actually three communities — the city of 
Saskatoon, Warman, and Langham. And I’m pleased to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It should come as 
no surprise to anyone here today I have yet several pages of 
citizens concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And again the signatures, Mr. Speaker, cover a vast area of the 
province. The signatures are from Naicam, Spalding, 
Kelvington, Kindersley, Humboldt, Saskatoon, Englefeld, 
Watson, Meacham, Fosston, Wadena, Pelly, Yellow Quill, and 
Rose Valley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues on behalf of citizens concerned about the lack of 
funding for the cancer fighting drug Avastin. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Melfort and Saskatoon. And I’m proud to present 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I present a petition on behalf of those citizens of this 
province who are deeply concerned over the government’s 
refusal to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens who are concerned about the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government not funding Avastin. 
The prayer reads: 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Dalmeny. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I rise to bring 
forward a petition on the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Watrous and Simpson. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to rise in 
the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of Saskatchewan concerned with cancer and the drug Avastin. 
And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker, as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by a number of 
individuals from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of the citizens that could not be here today to present a 
petition on their own behalf for the government to fund the drug 
Avastin. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition today, Mr. Speaker, is from North Battleford and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 
petition regarding autism spectrum disorder. I would just read a 
portion of it. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the 
recommendations made February 2005 by the government 
committee on human services. 
 

And I’ll just read a portion: 
 

That the government support regional autism service 
providers and provide provincial autism organizations that 
are providing support to families and individuals with 
autism spectrum disorder and to ensure that ASD adult 
services and supports are accessible and based on need 
rather than on IQ or physical disability. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. This petition is signed by good 
citizens from Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are concerned with 
the condition of Highway No. 55, and especially those folks 
who live in the communities of Red Earth and Shoal Lake. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 55 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the good folks from Tisdale. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 639 and 644. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 22, The Forestry 
Professions Act, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Before we do that, when shall the Bill be 
considered in Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that we waive the consideration in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested that the Assembly 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is the leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 22 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 42 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: what is the 
policy of SaskEnergy with concern to mandatory 
retirement? 

 
In addition I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what is the 
policy of SaskPower with concern to mandatory 
retirement? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: what is the 
policy of SaskTel with concern to mandatory retirement? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: does SaskTel 
engage in the practice of awarding contracts to retirees 
upon retirement? 
 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: does 
SaskEnergy engage in the practice of awarding contracts 
to retirees upon retirement? 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: does 
SaskPower engage in the practice of awarding contracts to 
retirees upon retirement? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a great pleasure today to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Chamber someone who is very special to me in 
my life, both as a member of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister of Health, member for 
The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

was saying, I’m very happy today to introduce to you and all 
members of the Chamber someone who is very special to me — 
my wife and partner and good friend, Cheryl Cook-Taylor. She 
is in your gallery today. Cheryl’s first visit to the Chamber 
while it was in session was yesterday for the delivery of the 
extremely good budget brought down by the Minister of 
Finance, and she’s able to stay today to join us. 
 
Cheryl is a property manager in the city of North Battleford, the 
former president of the Battlefords Chamber of Commerce and, 
Mr. Speaker, a very important volunteer in the community that 
we both reside in. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome 
my spouse, Cheryl, to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It’s my pleasure this morning to 
introduce through you to all members of the legislature the next 
member of the legislature from the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is 
Graham Mickleborough and his wife, Gail. Graham has won the 
New Democratic Party’s nomination for the constituency of 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well known in the Weyburn area, Graham Mickleborough 
has had a long and distinguished career with the credit union 
movement in Saskatchewan. Born on the family farm, raised on 
the family farm, he has worked internationally, Mr. Speaker, 
and is currently serving as the chief executive officer of the 
Southeast Regional College — an educator, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to you and all the 
members of the legislature, the only nominated candidate in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who chooses and actually lives in the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. I want all members to 
welcome Graham Mickleborough and his wife, Gail, to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

2006 Paragon Award Winners 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, last night I and a number of my colleagues, including 
the Leader of the Opposition, had the opportunity to attend the 
Regina and District Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards, 
celebrating business excellence in the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. And there was a very large turnout there. In fact I 
believe that there was more people there than there was at the 
Premier’s leader’s dinner in fact. 

Mr. Speaker, the Young Entrepreneur of the Year was Laura 
Englund from Zazu the Salon here in Regina — a very good 
shop, Mr. Speaker. Community involvement was won by the 
well-known and much beloved in this province, the 
Saskatchewan Roughrider Football Club. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Community alliance, Mr. Speaker, the 
winners of that award were the Regina Food Bank and 94.5 
Jack FM Food for Friends, Mr. Speaker. And that was received 
— that award — by Woody from Bill and Woody morning 
show on Jack FM, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Marketing and Promotional Achievement 
Award was won by Prairie Motorcycle. Now on this particular 
award, Mr. Speaker, there was another finalist that I was 
cheering for, Burger Baron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, export achievement was won by Partners in 
Motion; customer service excellence by Performance Marine; 
new business ventures by Imagination Ink; the Athena Award 
was won by Jeanne Martinson, Mr. Speaker. And the Business 
of the Year was Partners in Motion. Congratulations to them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

World Health Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today is World Health Day. Today, 
the Pan American Health Organization is honouring health 
workers worldwide by proclaiming the next 10 years as the 
decade of health human resources. 
 
They will begin this year by focusing on critical issues around 
distribution, training, and professional development of health 
care workers who they call — quite rightly — our most 
precious resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government also believes that health care 
workers are a very precious resource. And we are committed to 
retaining and recruiting health care professionals to 
Saskatchewan. We make this commitment in our Working 
Together: Saskatchewan’s Health Workforce Action Plan 
released last December. This strategy is a comprehensive, 
detailed plan designed to improve health care in Saskatchewan 
by keeping and attracting health care professionals. And we 
reinforced that commitment in the budget delivered yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, World Health Day is a reason to honour health 
care workers for their invaluable role and contributions. I want 
to thank the thousands of hard-working health care 
professionals in this province for their work and dedication. A 
health care system is only as good as the people who work 
within it — and we do have the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

Davidson Wins Two Provincial Titles 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to talk about two provincial championship sports teams 
from Davidson. The Bantam Huskies hockey team recently 
defeated the Avonlea Thunder for the right to be crowned 
Saskatchewan provincial champs, while the Davidson Raiders 
senior girls basketball team won silver medal at the 2A 
provincials. 
 
Davidson Huskies were well coached by Lindsay Dieno and 
Everett Johnson. They have played well this past winter, but 
knew Avonlea had outscored their previous opponents 50 to 9 
in the past three series. Game one in Davidson saw the Huskies 
defeat the Thunder 5 to 2. Davidson goal scorers were Kiley 
Lang, Preston Lynch, Gil Martens, Ian Johnson, and Bryce 
Prpick. Final game of the two-game set was played in Avonlea 
with the game ending in a 3-3 tie and an 8-5 series provincial 
win for Davidson squad. Goal scorers in the night included 
Garret Dieno, Luke Hundeby, Sheldon Kenney, with Mark 
Zoerb and Ryley Urlacher sharing the goaltending duties for the 
Huskies. 
 
Davidson Raiders have had great success this year with a solid 
basketball team guided by Neil Zoerb. At Moose Jaw on March 
18, the team won silver in a close final against the Kinistino 
Blues. Raider teammates Chelsey Vetter and Chandra Cool led 
the way in scoring throughout the tournament. 
 
I would offer both teams my warmest congratulations and ask 
the members join me in offering them our best wishes today. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas. 
 

First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I 
attended the First Nations University of Canada’s 28th annual 
powwow in Regina. Thousands of First Nations people from 
Regina, across Canada, and from the United States gathered to 
celebrate the powwow. 
 
The theme for this year’s event was, quote, “Healing ourselves 
through prayer, song, and dance.” 
 
Richard Missens, a faculty member at the First Nations 
University, said the theme was appropriate, especially for a 
powwow being held in the spring. Spring, in his words, quote, 
“is a time for new life.” Mr. Speaker, spring is also a time when 
plants, animals, and people that have hunkered down through 
the long, dark winter re-emerge to greet the springtime light. 
 
The powwow was dedicated in part to all the students, staff, and 
faculty who have remained committed to the university in its 
time of troubles and who are looking forward to a bright future 
for the university. 
 
The Brandt Centre was alive at noon Saturday as the event got 
under way with the grand entry. Colourfully dressed dancers 

paraded on the arena floor accompanied by the beating of 
drums. The event was expected to draw about 6,000 visitors to 
Regina, including about 600 dancers. And, Mr. Speaker, there 
was lots of time to renew old friendships and even to make 
some new friends. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Spring Flooding 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
everybody in Saskatchewan is finally happy that spring is 
finally here and the water is running. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 
some parts of Saskatchewan and central and northeast 
Saskatchewan, the water is really running. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my neighbours, Jeff and Marlene Austman had to 
wait countless hours for Department of Highway officials to 
arrive at their farm after a frozen culvert caused water to back 
up and caused some serious flooding in their yard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you didn’t have to be a rocket scientist to figure 
out that with the snow load that we had this spring that there 
was going to be flooding. And the department should have been 
there much sooner than they were. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on the idea of highways, I noticed 
yesterday the Minister of Finance in his budget speech talked 
about the continuation of the twinning of Highway No. 11. Mr. 
Speaker, the last time I checked, in order for a project to 
continue, it would have to start before it would be able to 
continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also finally the last thing that farm families need this 
spring — after being insulted by the Minister of Agriculture and 
used and kicked with his steel-toed boots — is to have major 
flooding problems that are not their fault, should not be their 
concern, and should have been dealt with prior to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has really no plan for 
Saskatchewan. It reminds me of a pop-up gopher game at the 
fair where you bang the gopher down when he pops out of the 
hole. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, I can tell you that people in 
Saskatchewan are tired of being hammered . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

2006 Paragon Award Winners 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, last night I, along with the 
Minister of Industry and Resources and a capacity crowd, 
attended the Regina and District Chamber of Commerce 
seventh annual Paragon Awards celebrating business 
excellence. The minister and I appreciated very much the very 
positive and warm reception we received from the members of 
the chamber in the wake of yesterday’s budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Yates: — There were nine awards given in 
categories, Mr. Speaker. The Young Entrepreneur Award went 
to Laura Englund and the Community Involvement Award to 
the Saskatchewan Roughriders Football Club. The marketing 
and promotional achievement went to Prairie Motorcycle; 
customer service excellence to Performance Marine; new 
business venture to Imagination Ink. The Athena Award went to 
Jeanne Martinson. And, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to present 
94.5 Jack FM with the SaskEnergy Community Alliance 
Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Partners in Motion took home two awards, export 
achievement and Business of the Year. I just want to thank 
Partners in Motion for acknowledging the provincial film tax 
credit, JobStart/Future Skills, SCN [Saskatchewan 
Communications Network], and SaskFILM for contributing to 
their success in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating all the finalists and winners of the seventh 
annual Paragon Awards on their achievements and in wishing 
them the very best in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Government Policies for Economic Growth 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Well well well, Mr. Speaker. They said they 
would never do it. They said that business tax relief would not 
grow the economy. And now in a desperate attempt when 
population is declining during a boom, they finally — finally — 
agree to implement the recommendations of a committee that 
they put together to review the unfair business taxes in this 
province. 
 
The government couldn’t figure it out so they struck a 
committee to tell them what to do. And here’s what the 
committee had to say, and I quote: 
 

We believe that Saskatchewan’s business tax structure is 
outdated and poorly suited to deal with the competitive 
challenges of today and the future . . . Our heavy reliance 
on the taxation of business capital and income sends the 
wrong message to prospective investors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has said for a long time 
that unless you have economic growth, social programs are 
unsustainable. Well after 15 years, the government finally got 
the message. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government constantly accuses the Sask 
Party of not having any ideas. Well this government has 
co-opted many of our ideas including our position on business 
taxation. And it appears the NDP are now becoming Sask Party 
lite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will give credit where credit is due, and I know 
it must have been very difficult for members on that side of the 
House to come to grips with the fact that they’ve been wrong all 
these years. Now if they’d just finish the job and implement an 

agenda for innovation, maybe our young people would come 
back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Plans for Job Creation and Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately for 
Saskatchewan for the seventh straight month our province, 
under this NDP government’s economic leadership or lack 
thereof, has lost jobs in the middle of a boom — 5,200 jobs that 
were lost, Mr. Speaker. Every other province in western Canada 
was creating jobs, Mr. Speaker, in this same time frame, over 
the last year — every other western province creating jobs, 
NDP Saskatchewan losing jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday, yesterday the government proved they 
could be Sask Party lite. They implemented one element, one 
element of a growth agenda. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s not a 
complete plan there. The question to the minister, to the 
Premier, anyone over there that might want to answer is, will 
they implement a complete growth agenda so the province, this 
province, cannot trail the country in job creation but so that we 
can lead Canada in job creation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, anyone can 
complain. Anyone can point out a problem. But what we really 
need is for people to point out solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday my colleague, the Minister of Finance, presented a 
plan. And what we have on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
is a plan to create growth and opportunities for young people in 
this province. That plan is endorsed by the chamber of 
commerce, the chartered accountants, the Regina REDA 
[regional economic development authority] and people all 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. The only people offside with 
the plan for growth and opportunity and jobs are those people 
sitting over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is right. The 
answer for Saskatchewan to turn around the woeful economic 
performance under this NDP’s economic plan, the answer is the 
proposal of solutions. And that’s what we’ve been doing for, 
well, about 7 years, Mr. Speaker, especially with respect to the 
corporate tax. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? One of those solutions, one 
of them was adopted today. But we’re still missing, we’re still 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

missing a complete growth agenda for the province. Let me 
repeat; the job numbers out today show that our province — in 
the middle of a boom, under the NDP — lost 5,200 while every 
other western Canadian province was creating jobs. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP job creation performance in the country, in 
the country — dead last. 
 
When will they implement a complete growth agenda for the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
is right when he says that the Saskatchewan Party is always 
seeking solutions. The problem is they’ve never found one, Mr. 
Speaker. And then the additional problem is, it’s a different 
solution every week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One day the Leader of the Opposition says that his plan is to 
appoint a committee, if he was premier, to advise him what to 
do. That’s his number one plank, Mr. Speaker. What’s his 
number two plank, Mr. Speaker? His number two plank is, he 
says, well I don’t have to have a policy because I’m a different 
brand. We’re still trying to figure out what the brand is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition this. We have 
presented a plan, Mr. Speaker, that is supported by the working 
people and the business people of this province. It is a plan that 
is positive, and I say it’s about time they supported a positive 
plan because they have no credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — But you see, Mr. Speaker, the problem with the 
NDP being the party that would cut business taxes, the problem 
with the NDP cutting business taxes is that it’s a little like 
getting vitamins from Dr. Kevorkian, Mr. Speaker. You’re 
happy to get them, but you’re worried about his long-term plan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — What hasn’t changed today is that unfortunately 
our economy is still hooked up to the NDP suicide machine, 
Mr. Speaker. And the evidence is in this morning — 5,200 jobs 
lost over the last year, the worst job creation record in the 
country. Out-migration, we’re losing our most precious 
resource — young people. 
 
And they’ve only made one check on the Saskatchewan Party 
list of a growth agenda. Will they make the other checks, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members to refrain 
from name-calling across the floor. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, most people understand that 
when all that you can do is call somebody names, you don’t 
have any valid arguments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members are not to reflect on the 
ruling of the Speaker. The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, are we the only people that find it strange that the 
Leader of the Opposition had no problem supporting the Grant 
Devine Conservatives in the 1991 election, when the loss of 
people that year, Mr. Speaker, was in the 14,000 to 16,000 
range, Mr. Speaker? And yet when we’d started to turn that 
around, Mr. Speaker, so that we’re losing fewer people . . . and 
the Leader of the Opposition was mocking me the other day for 
saying we’re going in the right direction when we’re losing 
fewer people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t it a bit strange . . . but you know he said last 
week he didn’t remember, Mr. Speaker, where the free liquor 
came from when he worked for the Devine Conservatives. He 
didn’t remember, even though he worked in the office of the 
minister of Economic Development, how the Meadow Lake 
pulp mill came about. He didn’t remember that. And 
apparently, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t remember what happened 
to the population under the government that he associated 
himself with in the 1990s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Can you believe, can you believe, Mr. Speaker? 
Can you believe this? They should be all thrilled about a 
wonderful budget today, Mr. Speaker. They’re still clapping. 
They’re still patting themselves on the back, and yet they get 
into these non sequiturs from 20 years ago. This minister who is 
supposedly very pleased with this budget can’t respond to the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder, I wonder would the 
minister answer the question, or better yet the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, because yesterday, yesterday the Premier was talking 
about how this budget signals growth and this budget is his plan 
to keep young people, even though he cut his own job forecast 
in the budget that was all about job creation. And today we 
know why as the statistics are out, and we’ve lost under his 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

government 5,200 jobs. 
 
What about BC [British Columbia]? They created 84,000 jobs. 
What about Alberta? They created 68,000 jobs. Manitoba — the 
province of Manitoba with fewer natural resources than we 
have by a country mile — created 4,600 new jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
The people of this province are sick and tired of a government 
whose economic plan actually has us losing to Manitoba, 
posting the worst job creation record in Canada. When will he 
adopt the rest of the agenda for the Sask Party, a growth agenda 
that will fulfill the potential of this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that the 
Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to talk about his past 
career with the Devine Conservatives because in fact he has 
removed that aspect of his career from his website, Mr. 
Speaker. We know he doesn’t want to talk about it. 
 
But I say this to the Leader of the Opposition. It’s one thing to 
get up and complain and harp day after day, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
another thing to present a positive plan for growth opportunities 
and jobs for young people, Mr. Speaker. And we recognize that 
there is work to be done in this province. The difference 
between our side and their side, Mr. Speaker, is with the budget 
delivered by the Minister of Finance, we’re prepared to roll up 
our sleeves and do that work, not just harp and complain like 
the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Consequences of Budgetary Policies 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, instead of speaking about 
20 years ago, let’s speak about yesterday. Let’s speak about 
today, and let’s speak about tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the government 
spent a $1 billion surplus, but ordinary working people in 
Saskatchewan are left wondering why they aren’t better off. 
There was no PST [provincial sales tax] decrease, Mr. Speaker. 
In fact there was not one dime in personal tax relief for working 
people in this province, Mr. Speaker. This minister had $1 
billion to spend — $1,000 for every man, woman, and child in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, why did this minister use his 
steel-toed boots to kick Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, nobody’s accused the 

opposition of being very good at math, and they certainly aren’t 
again today. Look at the budget number. It’s $700 million more. 
And you know what happened to that 700 million that we had? 
Seven hundred million — 300 million to health, 150 million to 
tax relief, $100 million to debt reduction, more money for 
immigration, more money for education, and more money to 
support our social programs. If the members opposite want to 
start making changes to that, tell me today what you want to do, 
and tell me today where you’re going to take it from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that minister will have the 
opportunity to play the role of the opposition Finance critic very 
quickly, very soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families 
have a big question on their minds this morning. Not only did 
this minister spend $1 billion; he also managed to increase the 
debt. How is his math on this one, Mr. Speaker? How did this 
budget squander a huge opportunity to improve the bottom line 
for working people, and yet this minister put taxpayers $288 
million in the ditch? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did this minister use phony math in telling 
people that he paid down the debt when actually it’s going up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know the 
members opposite think that a quarter billion dollars is a 
rounding error. They seem to not quite get this into their mind 
that the budget went up by $727 million. Let’s just get that 
straight in the members’ mind. It’s 700 million — 300 million 
more to health, 100 million to debt reduction, 150 million to tax 
reduction, more money for immigration, more money for 
education, more money to support our social programs. 
 
This budget is good for students. It’s good for seniors. It’s good 
for working people. It is good for our families. It is good for our 
communities. It is good for the people of Saskatchewan. I’m 
sorry if it’s not very good for the Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s not very 
good for that minister and his leadership aspirations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 288, $288 million extra . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, $288 million, $288 more 
on the credit card on every man, woman, and child in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this reminds me of an ’80s type of 
budget — more spending, no plan and no targets, more money 
for government, nothing in tax relief for ordinary people, and an 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, an increase of $288 million 
in the debt. What was the Finance minister thinking? Did he 
think he could throw money at the problem with no plan? 
$1,000 for every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan and 
not one dime for tax relief for them. Not only that but now they 
have $288 on their credit card each. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did this minister bring down an ’80s type of 
style budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, when 
it comes to what was going on the ’80s, I’ve got to take some 
advice from the member opposite because he was awfully close 
to that, even if the Leader of the Opposition can’t remember 
what he was doing in the ’80s. 
 
I will tell you this, what I was thinking as I was putting together 
this budget. I was thinking what a shame that we are still having 
to call on taxpayers to commit $560 a person — $560 a person 
— in this province just to pay down the excesses of that 
administration that those members supported. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That’s what I was thinking, Mr. 
Speaker. And I was thinking about what it was that we could do 
to make the lives of Saskatchewan people better, what it is we 
could do to support businesses, what it is we could do to make 
this a better place for young people. And what we came up with 
is a great budget for Saskatchewan people. I’m sorry if it’s not 
great for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government is now pouring more money into health care than 
ever before. It’s eating almost 50 per cent of the budget. And 
yet there is no comprehensive plan for recruitment or retention 
of nurses. 
 
The auditor is saying that many health authorities have no 
performance targets whatsoever. The Provincial Auditor is also 
saying this kind of spending on health care is unsustainable. 
The government is putting $3.2 billion into health care without 

a plan to hire a single nurse, Mr. Speaker, or without a target on 
how many nurses this province needs. 
 
How can the province be spending so much on health care with 
so little of a plan for the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
thought I might be spared a question or two for a few days, Mr. 
Speaker. With $300 million worth of new money into health 
care, I thought the member opposite would be crying uncle on 
this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, on the matter of nurses 
shortage, Mr. Speaker, we have indicated to the members 
opposite and to the public in general that in fact the shortage 
does exist. Dollars in this provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, are 
dedicated to the people of Saskatchewan and to the human 
resources of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it goes a 
long way to dealing with that. 
 
The shortage needs had to be started. We had to address those 
issues a couple of years ago. The plan is in place, and it’s 
working today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well after two weeks I’m glad he finally 
came up with one line that he could refer to that situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday he stood during his scrum and said the 
province’s recruitment and retention plan was working based on 
anecdotal evidence, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not what the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses had to say. This is what the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses had to say after hearing their 
budget. And they quote: 
 

We have to wonder if the government truly is interested in 
recruiting and retaining RNs and RPNs in this province. 
They say [that] they are [no, they say that they are], but the 
. . . budget tells us, [a different story] our members, and 
the public that they are not. 
 

That’s what the budget tells the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 
that there is no plan for recruitment and retention of nurses in 
this province. He’s scared to set a target because he admits that 
he can’t meet it. That is no type of leadership when you’re 
putting $3.2 billion into health care. When will he come up with 
a human resources plan? When will he work with SUN and 
come up with numbers that he will be held accountable to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
know the member opposite has no credibility when it comes to 
quoting media or letters in this place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The plan was released in December, and I would encourage the 
member opposite to read the plan and have a look at what it 
means to recruitment and retention, not only of nurses, Mr. 
Speaker, but of health care professionals for the entire province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care field is a very competitive field 
across this country — across North America. Mr. Speaker, half 
of the increase in the health care budget is dedicated to human 
resource issues, Mr. Speaker. Health regions, Saskatchewan 
Health are dealing with recruitment and retention of health 
professionals including nurses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is in direct 
contradiction with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. They 
continually say there is no recruitment and retention plan. This 
minister fails to work with them. He has meeting after meeting 
but won’t release any of the numbers that their department has. 
Marilyn Brown, first vice president for Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses, says a vague plan will bring vague results, and that’s 
what this government is doing. She goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

There’s targeted funding to the RHAs but what does that 
mean when you don’t have . . . [any sort] of organized 
plan. 
 

That’s what the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses continually 
says. Will the minister stand in his spot and today commit to 
working with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, releasing the 
numbers that this government has compared with Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses so we can get some sort of plan going forward 
so we know when we hit a certain number, that’s where we 
need to be. His plan has no numbers, and so we don’t have any 
clue whether he’ll ever reach it because he has no plan. When 
will he start working with them to create some realistic 
numbers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Indeed we do have to go to the member’s credibility and to 
what sort of holistic view he has of nursing in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday not just the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses but others spoke, including the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association who said nurses in this province 
will be pleased by the budget brought down by this government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan that was brought down in December 
addresses recruitment and retention issues across the 
professionals who work within the health care field. Mr. 

Speaker, we are committed to working with Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses and others in the field, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that we are dealing with vacancies and further needs for nurses 
in the system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about numbers. Currently in 
the training program in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, there are 
1,500 people that will soon be ready to work in this province as 
nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s budget is an 
admission that farm families don’t count much with this NDP 
Government of Saskatchewan. Not only did they not give farm 
families any relief; they actually cut more from agricultural 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what kind of heart does that NDP government 
have when they take away from those who need it most? In the 
midst of a crisis, they steal bread from the mouths of farm 
families. Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s budget does not fully fund 
CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization]. It cuts 
money from crop insurance. Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP cut 
money from agriculture and farm families when they need it 
most? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the opposition is long on rhetoric on this but short on facts. Mr. 
Speaker, very clearly in funding agriculture this year, as we 
travelled the province, as we spoke with farmers, the highest 
priority in many, many situations was relief on the education 
portion of property tax, Mr. Speaker. $52.8 million, Mr. 
Speaker, a total of almost $67 million relief — that, Mr. 
Speaker, is not nothing. It’s something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they care, why aren’t they travelling with farm 
leaders and myself to Ottawa on Monday? They were invited, 
but they’re not going, Mr. Speaker. Tall on hope-you-do-well, 
but where are they when the work comes? Where are they when 
it comes to standing up for farm families? Nothing but rhetoric, 
Mr. Speaker, no credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this Agriculture minister has no 
credibility. We learned yesterday, we learned yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, that he recently got a scolding from the federal 
Minister of Agriculture. He cuts money from his own farm 
families, and now he’s going to go to the federal government 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

and ask for more emergency aid when all he does is antagonize 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, order. Order. The 
member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And now he’s going 
to the federal government to ask for more emergency aid when 
all he does is antagonize the federal Minister of Agriculture 
when he’s here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And now on top of it all, he’s not keeping his promise on 
property tax relief either for farm families. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget is a complete failure to farm families — no money for 
CAIS, less money for crop insurance, and a broken promise on 
property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can this NDP government explain how, with a 
billion extra dollars, it actually takes money away from rural 
Saskatchewan? What does that minister have against farm 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members opposite need to stop being apologists for the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is well acknowledged by farm leaders in this 
province — farm leaders who I meet with regularly and who I 
am working with and who I am travelling to Ottawa with — 
that the federal government must come to the table. Mr. Strahl, 
in our discussions, acknowledges that we need more support 
here, Mr. Speaker. We’re going there to try and point out how 
that can be done most effectively for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all we get from members opposite is rhetoric. All 
we get is politics. When it comes down to the work, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes down to meeting with and working 
with farm leaders, when it comes down to working with the 
federal government, nothing but apologies for the federal 
government — nothing, nothing but rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no credibility in that at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Website of the Saskatchewan Association of  
Chiefs of Police 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I attended an 
event to launch the website of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Chiefs of Police. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police is dedicated 
to improving the safety of Saskatchewan residents. Members 
include all the chiefs of police and the commanding officer of 

the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an important part of the new website is a 
comprehensive listing of long-term missing persons in this 
province. Long-term missing persons are those missing for 
more than six months. In very rare cases a person may be 
placed on the list earlier. In the province today there are 81 
long-term missing persons cases dating back to 1940. Each one 
is a heartbreaking story for the families and the friends of those 
involved as they wait and wonder what happened to their loved 
one. 
 
Police efforts are important but the police need information 
from the public. Mr. Speaker, the website has names, photos, 
and descriptions. Having this information available to the public 
will increase the likelihood that information investigators need 
will come forward. 
 
This fall, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 
provided police services with increased resources to investigate 
historical cases. That funding, along with initiatives such as this 
one, are important to help the police provide answers to families 
who have lived with the concern of a missing loved one or an 
unsolved homicide. These cases are never closed by a police 
service. They continue to work on them until they are solved, 
no matter how long that takes. And some Saskatchewan cases 
go back more than 60 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s police agencies are committed to 
doing everything that can be done to resolve these cases, and 
the launch of this website is one more step. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
all members of the Assembly to join me in congratulating the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police on the launch of 
its website. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition would like to join 
with the government in congratulating the chiefs of police on 
this initiative. The chiefs and the RCMP should be commended 
to be working together for this initiative. 
 
Nothing can be more profoundly devastating for a family than 
losing a child or a loved one. Mr. Speaker, this type of situation 
is far worse than losing a family member to death. In the case of 
death of a child or a family member, healing can start 
immediately following, and with time there can be some form 
of closure. In the case of a missing child or a missing family 
member, it can never be closed and can never be put behind 
them. 
 
Recently we saw on television a case in the US [United States] 
of a 14-year-old girl who have been abducted and held as a 
captive for in excess of eight years and was ultimately reunited 
with her family. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is always hope, and this website will 
continue that hope. If successful in reuniting even one family 
with a loved one, it will be well worth the expense and trouble 
for this. I’d like to thank the police chiefs for doing this and on 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

behalf of the opposition, they should be commended and we 
look forward to working with them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 50 — The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment 
Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine (médiation) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 
The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 50, The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government I’ll be tabling 
responses to written questions no. 735 to 769. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 735 through to 769 
have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I resume this debate. Mr. Speaker, yesterday we 
saw first-hand in this legislature this NDP government deliver a 
budget that failed to address the most pressing concern facing 
people in Saskatchewan today — retaining our young people, 
Mr. Speaker, in the province and stemming the flow of 
out-migration from our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sadly the numbers speak for themselves. Last year 
we lost 3,700 people; they left the province. Over the past five 
years, Mr. Speaker, we have seen more than 16,000 young 
people between the ages of 15 and 29 leave the province. And 
yet with 1 billion new dollars in their pocket, what do we see 
from this NDP government in this budget, other than an 
admission that Saskatchewan will continue to be left behind by 
other provinces? 
 
When it comes to job growth and keeping young people in our 
province, Mr. Speaker, what do we get? Lowered expectations, 
a one-third cut in the expected job creation and no plan to 
reverse out-migration. Not even the courage, Mr. Speaker, not 
even the courage by the Premier in question period yesterday to 
set a target to reverse out-migration, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
stunning admission of incompetence on the part of a 
government that has cut its own job creation forecast by a third 
in the middle of an oil boom, Mr. Speaker. And that estimate, if 
the truth be told, is probably optimistic. 
 
[11:00] 
 
After all, this NDP government predicted they would create 
4,200 jobs last year. But what did they do, Mr. Speaker? And 
we just learned the news today — just today, Mr. Speaker, what 
did we hear? — Saskatchewan lost 5,200 jobs in the middle of 
an oil boom, year over year. Mr. Speaker, shame. 
 
Compare that, Mr. Speaker, to our neighbours to the west or to 
the east, for that matter, and it doesn’t look good for this NDP 
government. The BC government expects to create 41,000 new 
jobs this year. Alberta expects to create 39,600 jobs. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sure members opposite will be interested in 
knowing that NDP Manitoba will create 5,800 jobs this year. 
 
The Finance minister likes to talk about the math that’s used in 
this Assembly. I challenge him to do the math: negative 5,200 
for Saskatchewan; positive 5,800 for Manitoba. You do the 
math, Mr. Finance Minister. 
 
And yet, yet Saskatchewan with our incredible natural 
resources, world-class education institutions, and talented 
workforce . . . And I’m sure the member from Moose Jaw 
would agree with me when I say we don’t want to finish dead 
last in Western Canada in job creation again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government talks about leaving no one 
behind. They’re not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I just ask members to wait their 
turn. We will have five days of debate on this motion, and right 
now I invite the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs to resume 
the debate. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well we just want to make sure, Mr. 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

Speaker, that no one on the other side is left behind. They talk 
about leaving no one behind. I don’t know about the credibility 
on that one, Mr. Speaker. Yet yesterday this NDP government 
demonstrated that we’re being left behind by those from the 
east, by those from the west. 
 
This government, they talk a good story. They talk about a 
better future for young people in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, they produced a budget brochure. I would have 
brought that with me today, Mr. Speaker, but I know that that’s 
not allowed in the rules of the House, and I wouldn’t want to 
break one of the rules of the House, Mr. Speaker. But just to be 
clear, the young woman sitting on a bench in the brochure, and 
the slogan next to her says, “Building [your] . . . future — Right 
here.” 
 
Well what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? The reality is that this 
government does nothing to deliver on yet another promise, 
another broken promise, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard about the 
broken promise of the PST increase when it should have been a 
cut in this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year since this Premier took office his 
government, those members opposite — largely the same 
members, Mr. Speaker — they’ve made promises to the people 
of Saskatchewan to keep our young people here. Year after 
year, budget after budget, we hear the same promise. But they 
don’t deliver, Mr. Speaker. Every budget has the same line and 
every year it’s the same result, Mr. Speaker — more people are 
leaving Saskatchewan and that’s sad. 
 
More families are watching their children head to Alberta, to 
British Columbia, and yes, Mr. Speaker, even to Manitoba. 
More young people are choosing to pursue opportunity and 
build their future somewhere other than NDP Saskatchewan. 
And that has to change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is it any wonder, given the failure of this budget to deliver real 
benefits for families in Saskatchewan . . . While the Finance 
minister, members opposite, the cabinet over there, sit on a 
mountain of money doling out higher salaries to 
communications staff in the Premier’s office — no money for 
families across Saskatchewan. They spent $1,000 of every man, 
woman, and child’s money in this province. Not one dime for 
tax relief for working families in this province, but yes, lots of 
money for the Premier’s communications staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How does that add up? How does the Finance minister do the 
math on that one? Low-income individuals in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker: has anything changed for them? Unfortunately 
not. They continue to pay amongst the highest income taxes in 
the country. Yes, that from an NDP government. That is very 
sad, Mr. Speaker. Despite racking up another $150 million last 
year to the stash of money, that PST increase that they’ve 
hoarded from Saskatchewan taxpayers after breaking their 
promise and increasing the PST, they said no tax relief for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Let’s take a look at that PST promise. No new tax increases, 
that’s what the Premier said in the last election — no new taxes, 
none whatsoever. What did he do? Well he broke his promise to 
the tune of a half a billion dollars, $500 million that this 
government has received from a PST that they promised 

wouldn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year’s $1 billion surplus translates into a 
$1,000 dividend for every man, woman, and child in 
Saskatchewan — a dividend that young workers rightly 
expected would be invested back into tax relief, a dividend that 
seniors were hoping would mean more nursing positions, a 
dividend that farm families would hope would be invested back 
into agriculture to reduce the devastation, Mr. Speaker, of rural 
Saskatchewan that has occurred under the watch of this NDP 
government. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, what have they done? Have they just held the 
line on agriculture? No they haven’t. They’ve actually cut the 
budget of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, cut the budget 
substantially, $12 million cut to crop insurance just for an 
example. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did they say to nurses across 
Saskatchewan? What did they say to them? No more seats. No 
more. 
 
Despite their mountain of money, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government chose to leave, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan behind. And, Mr. Speaker, nowhere in this 
budget did we see money put back into the hands of property 
tax owners — property tax owners in Weyburn, Yorkton, 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Swift Current, and thousands 
of communities across this great province, Mr. Speaker. Not 
one dime in property tax relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget of failure. Cutting job projections 
is an admission that this government lacks confidence and 
certainly doesn’t have a plan for the future. Why would the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have the confidence in a 
government that doesn’t have confidence in themselves? That’s 
the question that Saskatchewan people are asking themselves 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why should the people of Saskatchewan have confidence in a 
government that fails to commit a target to reverse 
out-migration? The Premier was challenged in question period 
yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition: give us a target. Tell 
us what your goal is. Do you have a goal? We’ve heard from 
other members that if you have a plan, you have a goal. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to direct all of his 
remarks through the Chair. The member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the 
Saskatchewan Party that has expressed a lack of confidence in 
this government’s budget. What did the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce have to say? It was referenced today partly by the 
members opposite in question period. But let’s see what the 
chamber of commerce have to say. I quote, “This budget does 
not yet fully bring Saskatchewan into a position to win the 
competition for investment at the level needed to arrest and 
reverse our youth exodus.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, and the member from Saskatoon Nutana, I’m glad 
that she’s listening very intently. I expect her to take some of 
this advice back to the cabinet table. The quote is from Kent 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

Smith-Windsor, who is the executive director of the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce. I’m happy to provide the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana with that information. 
 
In fact he goes on to, quote: 
 

The changes announced today will attract business 
investment to drive job creation, but not enough to arrest 
and reverse the youth leaving our province. It’s not good 
enough. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a sentiment echoed certainly by the 
Saskatchewan Party and by people across this province. 
 
While we complimented the government on adopting the tax 
measure that we put forward to the Vicq commission, we give 
credit where credit is due. It’s something that had to be done a 
long time ago, Mr. Speaker, and it proved that the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party were right all along. 
You need to have a competitive tax environment to grow the 
economy. It’s one step in an overall plan. They’ve got one step 
right. What about the others, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Tax reductions for business are only one part of the equation, 
Mr. Speaker. We agree with the chamber who said, and I quote, 
“The Government of Saskatchewan’s tax and labour policies are 
still creating doubt in the minds of investors, and these doubts 
are inhibiting the job-creation potential of our province.” Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a very, very important quote, “The Government 
of Saskatchewan’s tax and labour policies are still creating 
doubt in the minds of investors . . . ” Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
challenge before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t blame the business community in this 
province for their lack of confidence in this NDP government. 
The government itself admits that their measures will cause job 
creation to decrease in our province. 
 
The Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce was not the only group, 
Mr. Speaker, to express a lack of confidence in this budget. The 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, what did they have to say, Mr. 
Speaker? And I know that there’s former ministers of Health in 
the Chamber today. I know they’ll be very interested to hear 
what the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses . . . 
 
They voice their disappointment with the budget and the 
Saskatchewan government’s commitment to health care in this 
province. The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses voiced their 
disappointment to the commitment of health care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. It’s not something that you want to see 
happen, but it certainly happened yesterday. They point out that 
no attention has been paid to the retention and recruitment of 
nurses, registered nurses and registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
And I know my hon. colleague, the Health critic, will be 
speaking more about this when his turn comes to rise in this 
Assembly and talk about the need for a health care plan in 
Saskatchewan. And he says he’s looking forward to it, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m sure that he is. 
 
No one is going to be recruited to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
for temporary work. And the nursing shortage in Saskatchewan 
will intensify — make no mistake about it — if this government 

will not take action today and formulate a strategy to retain and 
recruit RNs [registered nurse] and RPNs [registered psychiatric 
nurse] in Saskatchewan. The first vice-president of SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] said about this budget, and I 
quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We have to wonder if this government truly is interested in 
recruiting and retaining RNs and RPNs in this province. 
They say they are, but the new budget tells us, our 
members and the public, that they are not. 

 
Not my words, Mr. Speaker, the words of SUN in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also question this government’s commitment to health care, 
when they have refused to change the funding formulas for 
hospitals in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s almost 
embarrassing to read the budgets time after time after time, 
sixth or seventh time now that they’ve mentioned certain 
hospitals in Saskatchewan and they still are delaying the actual 
building of those hospitals. They’ve refused to change the 
funding formulas for hospitals in Humboldt, Preeceville, 
Outlook, and other Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if business doesn’t have confidence in this 
government’s ability to create jobs and nurses don’t have 
confidence in this government’s ability to reverse the nursing 
shortage in this province and stem the outflow of nurses from 
Saskatchewan, how can the people of Saskatchewan have any 
confidence at all in this budget that was presented yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, the answer is they don’t. Why 
should they trust the government that’s sitting on a mountain of 
money but refuses to commit to a long-term plan for property 
tax relief in this province? 
 
Let’s go on to hear what other people had to say about this 
budget. SARM president, David Marit said, and I quote, “With 
the increase in the education budget today, not addressing the 
cost of inflation, [Mr. Speaker] increasing mill rates are now a 
concern.” Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan, people in 
urban Saskatchewan, that’s the last thing that they wanted to 
hear. Increased mill rates are now a concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last thing that this province need is another tax 
increase under this NDP government. They’ve had enough. And 
yet that’s exactly what they appear to be facing with this 
budget. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan has suffered for far too long 
under this NDP government. In budget after budget, the NDP 
have sucked the lifeblood out of Saskatchewan’s farm families. 
They stripped away their hope. They stripped away their 
livelihood. With $1 billion in oil and gas revenue, the people of 
rural Saskatchewan, they had high hopes. They had high hopes 
and largely because some of the things that members of the 
government were saying that this budget would deliver — much 
needed assistance to agriculture. Mr. Speaker, this budget 
couldn’t be farther away from delivering anything for 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite this massive surplus, agriculture was ignored in this 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

budget. Highways were ignored. We may be facing schools 
closures in this province, Mr. Speaker. And this, Mr. Speaker, 
in this budget the people of rural Saskatchewan, they feel left 
behind. They are left behind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again according to the president of SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and I quote, “The financial 
crisis is mounting on the farm, and many Saskatchewan farmers 
won’t have the cash flow they need to seed the crop.” Quite a 
damning indictment, Mr. Speaker, of this government and their 
policies toward rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Where’s the growth agenda? Where’s the road map to turn this 
around? They’ve had $1 billion to do it with, and it’s just not 
here, Mr. Speaker. Nowhere in this budget was there new 
funding for the farm crisis. They didn’t even match last year’s 
funding in agriculture. And they cut crop insurance, the very 
insurance that helps some farmers at least survive. 
 
No plan to hire more nurses. No plan, Mr. Speaker, to address 
the negative labour environment in this province. It’s a key 
element in their growth agenda for this province, and this 
government, they totally ignore it. No wonder the people of 
Saskatchewan lack the confidence in this government and, more 
importantly, this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even on the post-secondary front, Mr. Speaker, this government 
decides not to make the hard choices. We have yet to see this 
government make a sustained commitment to long-term stable 
funding, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that the Saskatchewan 
Party talked about in the last election and had the courage to put 
in our election platform: long-term, stable funding for 
post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being the Post-Secondary 
Education critic for the Saskatchewan Party for a period of 
time. And I know my hon. friends will agree with me, the 
present critic, that it was something that we made a priority in 
our party — long-term, stable funding for universities, for 
post-secondary education, for community colleges, for SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 
Give them long-term budgets so they can plan, so students 
won’t be hauled into the legislature every year to sit on the end 
of their seats to see what’s coming for education, Mr. Speaker. 
There has to be a better plan for post-secondary education. And 
that’s not even touching on the lack of an innovation agenda. 
Mr. Speaker, much more could have been done. 
 
While this budget does contain some recognition that new 
training seats are needed at SIAST to deal with backlogs, half 
of the new money directed at our province’s universities will be 
taken up with a two-year tuition freeze for students, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, any time that more money is put 
into post-secondary education, members on this side of the 
House are supportive. 
 
But let’s take a look at that tuition freeze. Let’s take a look at 
what happened on the tuition freeze in other provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, someday when that tuition freeze is lifted, 
it’s not very good for students. Mr. Speaker, there was a better 
way to do it — long-term, stable funding for universities. This 
government chose not to do that and that’s a shame, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know that the Minister of Finance, when he was 

the Minister of Learning, he has said that he agreed with that, 
that tuition freezes are in effect unsustainable. 
 
So what we have in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is yet another ride 
on the NDP roller coaster — their post-secondary roller coaster. 
It goes up and then it comes down. And when the ride stops, 
Mr. Speaker, the students are no further ahead. 
 
For the sake of post-secondary institutions and the students of 
this province, this government would be advised to go to the 
Sask Party playbook once again, Mr. Speaker. They’ve done it 
once yesterday and they can do it again today. And I know the 
Minister of Advanced Education is writing notes to do that and 
I would certainly be willing to help her with that. 
 
Our province should provide post-secondary institutions with 
the long-term funding increases they deserve. Mr. Speaker, I 
think all members of this legislature would agree with that. 
Long-term, stable funding, you know, that’s the way budgets 
operate. That’s the way businesses operate. That’s the way 
universities with hundreds of millions of dollars in their budget 
want to operate. Why is this government not letting it do it that 
way? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can be forgiven for not 
quite understanding the concept of growth and how a growth 
agenda will help Saskatchewan turn around our economy and 
help young people stay here. After all, when potential investors 
to our province go on the NDP website to look for information 
on the investment climate of this province, Mr. Speaker — 
we’ve heard before in this legislature, what will they find on 
that NDP website — they’ll find the Regina Manifesto, the 
Regina Manifesto. 
 
It’s about a government that is apparently . . . You know, I 
throw it out — members opposite, if they don’t agree with it, 
they can stand up in this House and tell us why they can’t take 
it off their website. But it talks about the eradication of 
capitalism. And I’ve yet to hear an argument from any members 
across the way of why they have the 1933 Regina Manifesto 
still on their website. Are they the friends of capitalists or are 
they eradicating capitalism, Mr. Speaker? Which one is it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the young people in this province believe 
this government’s promise of opportunity when the NDP won’t 
even commit to a growth agenda? They won’t set any targets, 
Mr. Speaker. Why would the young people, why would the 
young people stay? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Northeast, who I 
understand had some input into yesterday’s budget . . . You 
know, we will give credit where credit is due. He took a policy 
that was first introduced by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members who are 
having perhaps a good time hollering across the floor . . . But 
members ought to recall that it’s one person at a time in here 
and right now it’s the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And what a 
privilege it is. I was about to pay the member from Regina 
Northeast a compliment, but it’ll have to wait till another time I 
guess. 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

Why would people in Saskatchewan stay, Mr. Speaker, when 
it’s clear that the government believes that their job creation 
record is going to sink? Why would young people choose to 
stay in Saskatchewan when the Premier, Mr. Speaker, of this 
province — the very Premier — refuses to put a number on the 
amount of young people he wants to retain in this province? 
 
How hard can it be, Mr. Speaker, to put a goal out there? But an 
admission that you can’t even come up with a goal to meet, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a very sad scenario for the state of the 
Saskatchewan economy today and the state of our population 
today. 
 
Despite, Mr. Speaker, the usual budget rhetoric from this 
government, we continue to lose jobs and to lose people. Mr. 
Speaker, long after this budget is forgotten about, what people 
will look at would be: did it turn around Saskatchewan’s 
population? Grandparents and parents will be asking 
themselves: did it turn around; were my grandchildren, were my 
children able to stay in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they won’t have to wait very long for that answer. 
They can look in the budget documents of today and see that 
even this government believes that it won’t turn anything 
around. In fact they’ve decreased their target, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the only target that we’ve seen and it’s a decreased target 
from 4,800 last year to 3,200 this year, Mr. Speaker. We are 
moving in the wrong direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our real disposable income per capita is the worst 
in Western Canada, and it’s lower than the Canadian average. 
We continue to fall further and further behind our neighbours, 
whether it’s to the east or to the west, Mr. Speaker, in both 
directions. Under this NDP government, Saskatchewan farm 
families experience — and nobody takes pleasure in saying this 
— the highest farm bankruptcy rates in the country. 
 
And what did they see yesterday? A cut to agriculture funding, 
Mr. Speaker. This NDP government is leaving Colleen 
Whitmore and farm families like her further behind. This 
province has experienced massive population loss of our young 
people. No one likes to see that happen. And yet this budget 
does nothing to bring back the young lady from Gull Lake who 
has moved to Calgary because she wishes to train to become a 
medical radiologist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to sum up, the lack of confidence expressed by the 
NDP in this budget, their acknowledgment that oil production 
will remain flat this year. Mr. Speaker, oil production will 
remain flat this year. Their admission that they’re going 
backwards on the job creation front. They’re not moving 
forward, Mr. Speaker, they’re moving backwards on the job 
creation front. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the recognition that nothing in this budget 
will reverse the out-migration of our youth, the number one 
concern, the number one problem in Saskatchewan right now, 
they failed to address it. Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and 
many, many others, it gives us no choice as the official 
opposition in this province, than to vote non-confidence in this 
NDP government and their budget. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce a non-confidence motion at this time. Mr. Speaker, I 
move: 

That all words after “the Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be added: 
 
disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and the cabinet have not 
fully implemented a growth agenda and Saskatchewan 
continues to fall further behind other provinces, losing 
population during an economic boom; and 
 
because this budget does nothing to help the average 
working family when the government has $1 billion in 
extra revenue; and further, 
 
because there is no comprehensive plan or accountability 
for health care in the province when health care 
expenditures are almost half of the provincial budget; and 
 
this budget reflects an ’80s style of record expenditures 
with a $288.5 million increase in the debt. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — An amendment to the main motion has been 
moved: 
 

That all the words after “the Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be added: 
 
disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and cabinet have not 
fully implemented a growth agenda and Saskatchewan 
continues to fall further behind other provinces, losing 
population during an economic boom; and 
 
because this budget does nothing to help the average 
working family when the government has $1 billion in 
extra revenue; and further, 
 
because there is no comprehensive plan or accountability 
for health care in the province when health care 
expenditures are almost half the provincial budget; and 
 
this budget reflects an ’80s style of record expenditures 
with a $288.5 million increase in debt. 

 
Moved by the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. And the 
amendment is seconded by the member for Humboldt. 
 
Debate resumes on the amendment and the main motion 
concurrently. The Chair recognizes the member for Humboldt. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
able to enter the debate and follow my colleague from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs who very capably outlined a number 
of concerns that we have with this particular budget. 
 
It’s 15 years of this NDP government delivering budgets, and so 
they have a 15-year record that we can look back on and see 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

how successful their budgets are. Even if they don’t want to set 
goals and look back on whether or not what they’re doing is 
successful, I think it speaks for itself on what’s happening 
within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In particular this is six years for this particular Premier’s 
leadership. And so we look at what have these budgets done for 
the working men and women within our province, for the 
seniors, for the young people, for families in general. Are we in 
Saskatchewan, is the average person in Saskatchewan, the 
average family in Saskatchewan better off, and will this budget 
make any difference than the past 15 years have made to the 
province? 
 
We know that, and we’ve repeated a number of times, we’re 
looking at: the longest surgical waiting lists; an increased usage 
of food banks which is appalling in a province that used to be 
and historically has been the food basket of the world; the 
highest taxed low-income earners and one of the highest PST 
rates and the worst job creation and the greatest out-migration, 
especially of our young people. So is this budget going to 
address any of those issues? 
 
[11:30] 
 
It seems as if for the past 15 years nothing’s changed. Nothing’s 
improved. And yet each and every year, we hear again and 
again this is the best budget, this is going to solve all the 
problems. They keep saying that this is going to be green and 
prosperous and we’re going to retain young people. And it just 
doesn’t happen. And you have to wonder why, other than 
obviously they have no plan, no vision. 
 
They don’t set goals. They’ve got nothing to measure whether 
or not something’s working. And so therefore they can just keep 
changing where they throw the money at without ever checking 
to see whether or not it was successful in stopping all of the 
problems within the province. 
 
The first thing of course that I’m going to look for in the budget 
— and did, being the member for Humboldt — is what was 
happening with the funding for the Humboldt hospital. And I 
found it in the Saskatchewan provincial budget highlights. And 
it lists a number of health care facilities in that document, Mr. 
Speaker, all of which have been announced in the past. But 
now, they’re now dedicating some dollars to it. 
 
And I noticed that $4 million were dedicated to the Humboldt 
integrated facility. That’s promising in a way, but it’s kind of 
interesting that the government is taking the entire year to 
supposedly spend this $4 million towards the project. A project, 
Mr. Speaker, that actually began in conception 20 years ago; 
that has been lobbied for by that community for that many 
years; a project that the government has promised time and time 
again. 
 
And a project the government went out, or government 
representatives went out to the community of Humboldt, they 
called in the municipal leaders from the surrounding towns and 
villages and municipalities and told them on February 24 that 
they would have to come up with an extra $5 million. Now the 
government’s dedicating $4 million when they’re sitting on a 
billion dollar gas and oil windfall. And yet the community is 

supposed to come up with $5 million. 
 
And do they have, you know, some time to work on that, Mr. 
Speaker? Do they even have the whole year to see if they can 
plan and budget and alter their, you know, things that they’re 
doing in order to come up with that money? No. Actually, the 
government gave them 40 days — 40 days in which they had to 
say that they would indeed have that money in place — their 
entire amount that the community is responsible. And I just find 
it appalling that the government can drag its heels year after 
year and just put a little bit of money in each year just to 
appease the community, in order to keep going out there and 
keep telling the people within the Humboldt community that 
they’re going to have a new hospital as long as they do things 
right. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there was an editorial in the Humboldt 
Journal on April 6 and I think that it outlines how the people of 
Humboldt are feeling about this latest announcement by this 
NDP government. And I would just like to read some of that 
editorial because I think that this particular writer says it far 
better than even I could. And it’s headlined, “What are we so 
afraid of?”: 
 

As the weeks go by and our local governments are 
scrambling to find the money that’s required to raise the 
local portion of the ballooning costs of the new St. 
Elizabeth’s hospital, more and more questions about this 
project are being raised in my mind and the minds of 
others in the area. 
 
But, it seems, people are afraid to ask some tough 
questions of those in charge, for fear this project won’t 
move forward at all. 
 
We’re all grumbling about this extra cost we’re required to 
pay. After all, if it were up to the populace of Humboldt, 
we’d be celebrating the fifth anniversary of the opening of 
the new St. Elizabeth’s Hospital sometime this year. We’d 
have had it built and opened before the government had 
time to go, “Hey, what are you doing there?” 
 
That is . . . if we didn’t need their money. 
 
The fact is, we do need their money to build it. There’s 
really no way this area can handle the whole cost of the 
project. And we shouldn’t have to. We really — should I 
dare say it — shouldn’t have to . . . [come up with] any 
more [money] at all. After all, we’re not the ones who 
dragged our heels on this until construction costs 
ballooned out of control. We were ready to go. If anyone 
is responsible for this delay, it’s the government. But 
suddenly, it’s not just their problem, it’s ours, too, which 
isn’t fair. 
 

And that’s how people are feeling in the Humboldt community. 
The article goes on to say: 
 

[but] Do we say these things out loud? Do we yell at the 
government, telling them it’s their fault and no way are we 
covering [all] for their mistake? 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members if they 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

have conversation that they really need to carry on that they 
meet behind the bar of the legislature. And the member from 
Humboldt may resume her speech. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will continue: 
 

They’ve got us so scared that we’re not going to get a 
hospital at all that we’ll bend over backwards for them and 
take this kick in the teeth with a smile on our faces. Should 
we have to do that? No way. 
 

And that is what the feelings of the people in the Humboldt and 
surrounding community are towards this NDP government. 
They have been blackmailed. They have been threatened, time 
and time again, either do this or raise this or you won’t get a 
hospital; do this and raise this kind of money or you won’t get a 
hospital. 
 
And you know it was interesting, Mr. Speaker. I asked the 
minister questions over the last three days on the Humboldt 
hospital, and yesterday I specifically asked the Minister of 
Health, what will happen if the community can’t raise the 
money, what if they simply can’t? We all know that the rural 
economy is suffering due to low commodity prices and it 
affects the towns and the villages as well as the municipalities. 
We know that’s happening. So what would happen if the 
community cannot raise the money? 
 
And I pointed out that the minister would probably downsize 
the project, which is a great fear within the Humboldt 
community, or delay it even further. And look at the cost of this 
delay. And the cost, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out, isn’t 
just to the community, it’s also to the government. Like this is 
not exactly great financial planning on their part either, because 
the longer they delay the more and more this project is going to 
cost them as well. 
 
The minister at the time said that I was quoting his words out of 
context, so I would like to actually take the transcript of the 
tapes and read them into record and that way we will know 
whether or not I was quoting him out of context. The question 
that the reporter asked the minister was, question: 
 

Given the delays that have happened, is it fair to expect 
these communities to come up with more money They’ve 
been going into this with a certain number of dollars in 
mind. And then to have that changed — it seems like a 
fundamentally unfair system. 

 
And the minister replied: 
 

“The province is facing increased costs on this too. And 
we have had to pay our share of those increased costs.” 
 
“in other projects where the expectations have been 
greater, the arch. Has been told by the community and the 
planning people that we have to draw down this project to 
a certain extent, to within the resources available.” 
 

The next question by the reporter was: 
 

So if they do that the project will either be scaled back or 
delayed further? 

To which the minister replied, and I quote: 
 

“It could be delayed further if the community share does 
not reach the commitment we have asked for”. 

 
So the minister can hardly deny that he suggested that either the 
community come up with this money within the 40 days or it 
will be drawn down — which has the community quite 
considerably concerned because it’s downsized from their 
present facility already — or they’ll delay it even further, which 
we all know is only going to cost them more, both the 
community and the government. So neither plan is actually very 
appealing to the community. But as long as we keep threatening 
them, if we keep threatening the people of Humboldt, if the 
NDP continue to threaten them that either you do this or you 
won’t have a hospital, then I guess they will get the people to 
continue to jump through the hoops. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second area that was of considerable concern 
to me within the budget of course is agriculture, because the 
Humboldt constituency is largely agriculture or is involved 
around the agriculture industry — not just the actual producers 
themselves but there’s a number of short-line manufacturers 
whose workers live within the Humboldt constituency. There’s 
a number of suppliers and a number of small communities who 
are quite dependent upon the producers being successful for the 
success of their own businesses. 
 
And it was disappointing to see that although the Agriculture 
minister has said time and time again, yes there is a crisis in 
agriculture, he didn’t address it within this budget. The 
government is sitting on a windfall of money of extra billion 
dollars and they have in the past always said that they can’t 
afford to fund the agriculture programs. And yet this year, when 
that excuse seems a little lame, yet again they cut the funding to 
that department by $166 million. 
 
They underfunded CAIS yet again which makes it very difficult 
for the producers within our province. In essence they too are 
held hostage because they wait to see if the government will put 
in their portion to the CAIS program. The announcement’s 
made later in the year so the producers cannot go to the bank 
and arrange for financing based on the dependability that our 
government will step up to the plate because we don’t know 
that. They in essence hold them hostage as well. 
 
They’ve cut money for crop insurance which is now I believe 
the fourth year — I would have to look back in the records for 
sure. But it’s the fourth year where the crop insurance program 
has been cut down, not necessarily in funding but definitely in 
coverage. In this particular year they cut down the funding 
available for it so I’m sure that they’re going to change the 
program somehow, in the future, so that the coverage is poorer 
than it has been in the past. And they’ll up the premiums for the 
producers themselves. 
 
It’s become a program that isn’t working. It is not affordable to 
the producers. And so therefore I would think if they didn’t tie 
it to other programs such as spring cash advance, the uptake of 
the program would almost be nil. The way that the government 
again blackmails and forces the producers into their crop 
insurance program, even though it’s been severely gutted, is to 
tie it to other programs which puts the producers in a bit of a 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

bind and they’re forced to partake. 
 
The appalling thing that I have found over a number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, is that this particular government doesn’t want to 
take any responsibility for this very important industry within 
our province. They have consistently and constantly said that 
it’s the federal government’s responsibility. And to a degree in 
some areas I totally agree with that, but not in all areas. 
However, agriculture is dependent on the national treasury to a 
large degree and as such it would be nice, Mr. Speaker, if we 
had ministers that would try and work with our federal 
Agriculture ministers. And I have not seen that, quite frankly, 
since I’ve been elected. 
 
We can go back through a number of Agriculture ministers that 
we’ve had provincially, and those federally. We had Mr. Eric 
Upshall at one time, and that was when AIDA [agricultural 
income disaster assistance] was being planned. And Mr. 
Upshall went to Mexico when the planning of that program was 
happening and we ended up with an absolute disaster in AIDA. 
Didn’t work for our producers; it wasn’t a program that worked 
here in Saskatchewan at all. 
 
That was followed up by Mr. Lingenfelter, who now has given 
up on Saskatchewan entirely and moved to Alberta. Mr. 
Lingenfelter was in place as the NDP Agriculture minister when 
CFIP [Canadian farm income program] was being designed. 
And he walked out as well of the meetings. Him and the 
Agriculture minister from Manitoba actually walked out of the 
meetings, said this was not going to work for Saskatchewan, but 
didn’t stay and work with the federal government to make the 
changes. They just had a temper tantrum and walked out. And 
the result of CFIP was another disaster for Saskatchewan 
producers. That was a program that this government chose not 
to fully fund the one year as well. So we have some problems 
here at home. 
 
The following Agriculture minister, the Deputy Premier, what 
did he do? Well he went and publicly had an outcry because he 
said the federal government underfunded our agriculture 
programs. We were shorted, I believe at the time it was $20 
million. When the truth actually came out, Mr. Speaker, it 
ended up that our province had borrowed in advance $20 
million, and so therefore they hadn’t underfunded our program. 
But it made this Deputy Premier look good to blame the federal 
government for something that they hadn’t actually done. 
 
And now we have an Agriculture minister that has been 
suggesting that our new federal Agriculture minister is saying 
things that perhaps he didn’t say. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So time and time again, Mr. Speaker, we have Agriculture 
ministers who instead of trying to work with our federal 
counterparts, in essence, just aggravate them. They absolutely 
aggravate them. They sit in the province and they go public and 
they blame the federal government and they accuse them of 
things that perhaps aren’t necessarily true. And then they go to 
Ottawa and say, we need money for Saskatchewan farmers; I 
know we have $1 billion more than we’ve ever had before and I 
know that I just maybe misled the Saskatchewan public as to 
what you’ve done, but we need more. And I don’t think that’s 

been successful in the past, and I don’t perceive it’s going to be 
successful in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that I’m going to talk to you — very 
quickly, because there are a number of other speakers who want 
to speak to this motion — is the job loss and population decline. 
And that is a huge measure of the success of these NDP budgets 
that I’ve been talking about and this budget in particular. We 
have seen, year after year, a decline in jobs and a decline in 
population in our province and in particular we’re losing our 
young people. And that I think is a huge measure of how well a 
government is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an article in The StarPhoenix, I believe 
and it says it very well. And there’s been a number of articles 
on this particular topic — “Economic boom, population bust.” 
And within that article it states: 
 

Every single premier in a generation has left the province 
with more people than he found it. Except now. 
 

Meaning this Premier. 
 
We are seeing an appalling out-migration of people and in 
particular young people. That’s not only important to the 
Humboldt constituency and the constituents I represent, but that 
really hits home, Mr. Speaker, for my own family. I am the 
mother of a 22-year-old, a 20-year-old, and a 17-year-old and I 
hate to see them leaving the province. 
 
So as my colleague said before me, it’s an ’80s style budget. 
There’s a lot of spending with no direction, with no plan, no 
vision. There’s $288 million more in debt than what we’ve had 
in the past year. 
 
So with that, I’m going to support the motion put forward . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The amendment, amendment. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The amendment put forward by my 
colleague from Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after listening to the 
members opposite, I can’t believe that we live in the same 
province. Members of the government were out across the 
province last night visiting with members of the public, and I 
have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, people everywhere said this was 
a really, really, really good budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour 
today to rise in the House to second the motion put forward by 
the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the Minister of Finance about 
our government’s plan to build the economy through business 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

tax reforms, tax credits, and other initiatives to make 
Saskatchewan a more competitive and even a better place to 
live, work, and raise a family. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
economy is booming, and our government’s plan supports 
continued growth and opportunity for our province. And a 
healthier economy means better social circumstances for all of 
our citizens as we all share in the prosperity through positive 
social spending so that, Mr. Speaker, no one is left behind, in 
our province, on the road to prosperity and opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a booming economy provides rich opportunities 
for jobs for our university and technical training graduates and 
for newcomers that we are welcoming into our province. This 
budget builds on our current economic prosperity and provides 
more reasons for our youth and immigrants to choose our 
province as the place to build their future. And this budget 
provides support to employers to help meet their labour market 
needs. Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite — the 
Saskatchewan Party — our government has a plan for growing 
the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Advanced Education and 
Employment will play a critical role in our plan. This sector has 
a very significant role to play in the future of our province, and 
we know that the solutions to the fundamental challenges facing 
Saskatchewan are to be found within this sector. The Premier 
created this new department for a reason. Our new department 
will be there to provide high-quality education and training 
opportunities for our learners, so that they’re positioned to 
participate in our economy, and to support immigrants and their 
families to settle in our communities and find connections to 
employment. 
 
The budget supports our government’s key priorities of 
increasing training system capacity and coordination, improving 
literacy, attracting and settling immigrants, and increasing 
affordability and accessibility for our students. These are all 
initiatives the members opposite seem to oppose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the budget to support the new vision for 
Advanced Education and Employment increases by 8.3 per 
cent, or $46 million, for a total investment by the citizens of our 
province of $604 million in post-secondary education and 
employment. This is a critical investment in Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary education and training institutions to support an 
estimated 66,000 learners in an array of programs. 
 
This budget also provides a strategic investment in immigration 
recruitment and supports. This year we will increase our 
investment in the training sector by 8.6 per cent or $15.5 
million. Mr. Speaker, this is the largest investment in training in 
this decade, Mr. Speaker. And in the last two years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And in the last two years we’ve 
increased the amount of spending in our training system by 17 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, continued growth and prosperity depends on 
meeting our labour market needs. And as part of our 
government’s plan, we’ll enhance the role of our CanSask 
career and employment service centres located in communities 

all across the province. We’ll use the centres to ensure the local 
training system prepares people for skilled jobs and that trainees 
are matched to the labour market requirements of local 
employers. And we’ll work with the sector to promote trades as 
a career option, to support labour market planning, and to work 
as a system to meet the training needs of learners and the labour 
market needs of employers. 
 
This year we’re going to expand our training system capacity 
by 2,759 training and employment opportunities under the 
CareerStart initiative. Mr. Speaker, this includes increases to 
technical training and adult basic education in urban and rural 
centres at SIAST, regional colleges, Dumont Technical 
Institute, and the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission. It also supports increases in the JobStart/Future 
Skills work-based training program and employment 
preparation opportunities. 
 
In 2003, during the election campaign, we committed to expand 
by 5,400 the number of training opportunities in Saskatchewan 
during the term of our mandate. With these increases, we are on 
track to meet this commitment with 3,904 new opportunities 
being created in the last two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we heard, when we did a 
review of accessibility and affordability and also the training 
system review, about the need to ensure more learners, 
particularly Aboriginal learners, gain the skills they need to 
enter into and stay connected to the labour market. 
 
In response our government is expanding the number of adult 
basic education seats by 336. This expansion will help to 
address the wait-lists for our ABE [adult basic education] 
programs at both SIAST and regional colleges and Dumont 
Technical school across the province. 
 
This year’s budget is truly significant as we, in the spirit of the 
Kelowna accord, will take immediate action to invest for the 
first time ever in the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I really want to say 
publicly how important it is that we have the two members from 
northern Saskatchewan sitting in our caucus and at the cabinet 
table because they truly understand the need for First Nations 
people to take their rightful place in our province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they are proud and articulate voices for First Nations 
people when it comes to public policy, particularly in the area 
of training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, given that spirit, we are 
funding for the first time 83 new adult basic education seats at 
SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], and 
we’re providing provincial training allowances for students to 
attend the institute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, jurisdiction is being broken down in the province 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

of Saskatchewan with this funding. We don’t have time to get 
into jurisdictional skirmishes with Ottawa any more, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re making sure that First Nations institutions 
receive provincial funding even though there is federal 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This investment in SIIT and its 
students will help more Aboriginal people participate and 
succeed in post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also heard during the accessibility and 
affordability review that low-income people need more support 
to enrol in ABE bridging and short-term skills programs. So, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re spending $3.8 million more on the 
provincial training allowance to cover basic living costs for 
more people while they pursue academic preparation, and we’re 
increasing the support by $60 per month for each learner in 
those programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for families with children under the age of 
six, we’re not counting the new federal support of $100 per 
month as income, rather we’re flowing this money directly to 
PTA [provincial training allowance] and student loans clients. 
As a further support to these and other learners, we’re 
expanding our child care spaces by 1,200 between 2003 and 
2007, and we’re going to spend $3.6 million to increase the 
subsidy rates and extend the reach of subsidies to include more 
families in our province. Mr. Speaker, this 31 per cent budget 
increase in subsidies will support parents to get the training they 
need to improve their lives and the lives of their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the recent evaluation and reinvestment 
process that the Saskatchewan Labour Force Development 
Board is going through, and the determination of the need for 
fundamental changes to this organization, the Saskatchewan 
Labour Force Development Board is currently in a transitional 
phase. 
 
It is our intention, Mr. Speaker, to work with business and 
labour and other key stakeholders, particularly training 
institutions, to advance in transition the Saskatchewan Labour 
Force Development Board into a new provincial labour 
business market . . . labour market planning council. This will 
bring together major decision makers from industry and the 
training system in order to plan labour market issues for the 
economy. The council will exchange their expertise and ideas 
and advise government of current and future labour market 
issues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are sending a member from labour and 
business to Quebec to look at their model which is working, in 
this country, when it comes to labour market planning, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To help encourage more youth to explore trades in our 
province, we have as a career option . . . This year we’re going 
to support the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission to expand its youth apprenticeship 
program province-wide. So youth apprenticeship will be 
available province-wide as a result of this budget. In addition 
it’s our government’s plan to increase the apprenticeship 

training opportunities in this province by 105 seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all understand the importance of these 
increases as apprenticeship supplies our labour market with 
many of the skilled workers necessary to fuel our expanding 
economy. I’m pleased to say that this budget provides support 
for increased quality of . . . [inaudible] . . . professional 
education and increased capacity. 
 
An additional $3.4 million will support the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Medicine’s accreditation plan, and 
additional resources also fund a previous increase in enrolment 
at the College of Medicine and the nursing education program 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we will invest over $19.4 million in 
nursing training. Today there are over 1,500 students enrolled in 
nursing programs across our province, and that’s a 50 per cent 
increase since 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to recognize that this budget makes a 
historical investment of $6.3 million, up from $1.7 million last 
year, for a comprehensive and a very aggressive immigration 
strategy that will attract more immigrants to our province and 
help them settle in our communities and labour force. 
 
By 2008-09, Mr. Speaker, it’s our goal to nominate 1,500 
individuals each year under our immigrant nominee program. 
And once they’ve settled here approximately one year later, 
including their spouses and dependants, we will have 5,000 
additional immigrants per year in Saskatchewan coming in 
under the immigrant nominee program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:00] 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we want to see 
Saskatchewan communities grow as confident, prosperous, and 
vibrant places where immigrants feel welcomed and included. 
Mr. Speaker, more people living here will mean more people 
doing business and spending money here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear the members opposite chirping from 
their seats which they are prone to do and, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to say to the members opposite and to the public, there are more 
than 6,000 jobs sitting vacant in this province. And with the 
demographic changes that are coming, with a fully integrated 
First Nations population and Métis population in our labour 
force, and with the boomers that are retiring, we will be short 
some 50,000 to 100,000 workers in the years to come. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are going to go and open our doors 
to the world to recruit people to this province to help fill that 
labour market need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the funding will help to 
keep newcomers here by assisting the agencies, those settlement 
agencies in Saskatoon and Regina and Moose Jaw and Prince 
Albert. And other groups are getting together across the 
province to settle newcomers that are coming to rural 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to work with them to help with the 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

settlement and integration of newcomers into our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, universities play a critical role in educating our 
young people to contribute to the economic and cultural success 
of our province. And universities provide opportunities for 
students to pursue higher knowledge and research to support 
society. This is why another key component in our plan for 
growth and opportunity is ensuring that finances are not a 
barrier for university students to obtain post-secondary 
education and training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to 
spend some time with young people yesterday, and contrary to 
what the member from Silver Springs says — and he has 
literally hundreds of university students living in his 
constituency — contrary to what he says, those young people 
welcome, welcome a three-year tuition freeze in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, that tuition freeze 
will save those young people literally thousands and thousands 
and thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker. So the Sask Party, the 
members opposite, are totally out of touch with what young 
people are saying about university tuition in this province. And 
it’s time he went back home to get an education because this 
place obviously has kept him out of touch with his constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why we are going to provide our 
universities with operating funding increase as well as a backfill 
in all of those tuitions of $17.8 million to continue to hold 
university tuitions at the 2004 levels for the next two years. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is a significant amount of money to help 
students and their families. Mr. Speaker, these funds mean a 7 
per cent increase in operating grants to our universities to 
ensure that they continue to provide a high-quality education to 
our young people. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, through the provincial student assistance 
program we’re going to provide an estimated $60 million to 
approximately 15,000 post-secondary students, and 
approximately two-thirds of this funding is forgiven by the 
people of our province. 
 
In the past five years we’ve granted nearly $90 million in 
non-repayable support to students. And we are moving on our 
commitment to quadruple the centennial merit scholarship for 
post-secondary students by providing an additional half million, 
for a total of 287 new scholarships. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In total, Mr. Speaker, in total 934 of 
our brightest and best students will receive these scholarships to 
study in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, the graduate tax credit 
will be increased from $675 to $850 for students graduating in 
2006. And next year the tax credit moves to $1,000 to provide 
further incentive for students to build their careers at home. 
This increase in the tax credit once again meets our election 
commitment in 2003. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also provided the universities with 
unprecedented support for their capital priorities since 2000 in 
the amount of $366 million. The government has recently 
provided $100 million to the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] for the academic health sciences centre, a 
project that will strengthen the province’s ability to recruit and 
retain health professionals, faculty, and students. And the 
Western College of Veterinary Medicine also received 17.5 
million for a construction project providing students with access 
to specialized services of veterinary medicine. 
 
An additional 4.6 million has also been provided for the 
University of Regina for the Lab Building. And $5.5 million in 
capital upgrades and expansion at SIAST, Palliser, and Kelsey 
campuses will support 500 new training opportunities in key 
trades and the technologies over the next two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another key role of the Department of Advanced 
Education and Employment is to support our government-wide 
research agenda, which in turn supports future job creation, 
economic and other spinoffs. This year, the province will 
provide $9.8 million to the Innovation and Science Fund at our 
two universities. This support will fulfill our commitments to 
the biomedical imaging and therapy beamline project, research 
chairs, and the international vaccine centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say that this government 
does not have an innovation agenda. I would challenge them to 
go to the two universities in this province and look at the 
research and innovation that is taking place on those campuses, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget is a plan for 
continued growth and opportunity in our province and by 
focusing on high-quality learning opportunities, labour force 
development, and immigration, our plan provides the most 
comprehensive approach which we will work toward. Our 
common goal is support of a Saskatchewan economy that is 
vibrant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget builds a better future, right here and 
right now. The Saskatchewan Party’s criticism of this budget is 
simply not credible. The Saskatchewan Party is not credible. 
Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely delighted to support the budgetary 
plan for Saskatchewan as we move forward with confidence, 
contrary to the members opposite who are not confident. But we 
are confident in the future of this province and we have a plan 
that is bright in terms of the future of our citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand in this Assembly to 
address this budget speech that was just presented yesterday by 
the Minister of Finance. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
interesting thing about the budget is not as much as what was in 
the budget, but part of it is related to the fact that . . . the 
footwear apparel of the Minister of Finance. And I would 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

suggest to you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the footwear 
apparel of the Minister of Finance spoke very loudly to the 
people of this province. 
 
Because I think at the end of the day, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
for the people in general, they were actually given the boot by 
this budget. A budget, Madam Deputy Speaker, where this 
government had over $1 billion more in revenues to share with 
the people of Saskatchewan and, contrary to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana that we just heard speak, actually put forward 
a plan to build the province of Saskatchewan. And Madam 
Deputy Speaker, there’s no doubt this budget was certainly 
lacking. 
 
Let me begin, Madam Deputy Speaker, by at least giving the 
government a little bit of credit. Madam Deputy Speaker, as my 
colleague the critic for Finance, the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs mentioned, this budget did reflect the fact that 
the government did take some time to review very carefully the 
recommendations made by the Vicq commission. And over a 
period of the last number of months, there was strong 
indications that this government would not move forward with 
those recommendations. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, to their credit they did move 
forward. While it’s going to be implemented down the road, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a step in the right direction. 
However, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is just one step of an 
overall program of planning in order for this province to move 
forward. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, did the budget yesterday actually 
create a competitive labour legislative environment? Did it 
actually limit government intervention in the economy? I beg to 
differ, Madam Deputy Speaker. Did it create a long-term 
strategic plan for improving infrastructure, which includes 
own-source revenue sharing from municipalities? What about 
an innovative agenda, which includes a plan for long-term 
predictable funding increases to advanced education institutions 
and more progressive research and development tax credits to 
enhance commercialization of new technologies and research? 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, did it give greater economic 
co-operation or lead to greater economic co-operation with 
other Western provinces to reduce interprovincial trade 
barriers? Madam Deputy Speaker, when we talk about trade 
barriers it’s an issue that I continue to deal with on an ongoing 
basis, especially with businesses in my communities that are 
along the Manitoba border. 
 
And I know my colleagues along the western side of the 
province, the Alberta border, find that there are hindrances at 
times in relation to trade barriers interprovincially. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget . . . this government had an 
opportunity to begin to address some of those issues, and yet 
they lagged behind. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what we saw yesterday was a 
government with $1 billion more to spend, but at the end of the 
day it was sprinkled here and there without a real plan to grow 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to just read a few comments 

and observations made by others in regards to the budget that 
was presented to the Assembly. One person commented: 
 

. . . [the government] has something meaningful to 
advertise in its efforts to convince the rest of Canada that 
Saskatchewan is still alive and well. 
 

However, the person goes on to say: 
 
. . . [there is still] something about this performance that 
remains unconvincing, something that requires the willing 
suspension of disbelief. 
 
It’s like watching a guy struggling to get into a suit that is 
two sizes too small. He’s got it on all right, but you have 
to think that it’s not all that comfortable. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s very interesting following 
yesterday’s budget that this government is crowing so much 
about, that chatting with individuals at the tourism awards last 
night in Saskatoon or even this morning as I was coming to the 
Legislative Assembly and stopped for a cup of coffee, or last 
night as we were leaving and we stopped for coffee, and you 
talk to people on the street, Madam Deputy Speaker, we didn’t 
run into anyone — my colleague, the member from Maple 
Creek and I — who actually had anything good to say about the 
provincial budget that was laid before us. Even despite the fact 
that there was some $700 million worth of expenditures in this 
budget. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would just want to go on and 
comment on some of the other comments that have been 
brought forward by people. One of the reporters said: 
 

[This government] . . . fell into a billion-dollar resource 
windfall last year, but [it] could only find $100 million to 
put toward permanent debt reduction. 
 
Meanwhile, the government itself continues to expand. By 
the end of the year, there will be another 262.4 “full-time 
equivalent” positions created within government even as 
job creation in the private sector is forecast to shrink. 

 
I find that very interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker — 262 
more positions in government while the private sector continues 
to shrink. In fact the government through its own admission 
admits that with this budget, despite the $700 million, we’re 
actually going to see fewer jobs created in the province of 
Saskatchewan despite what the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower said a few moments ago as well. “In spite of,” 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the writer goes on to say: 
 

. . . in spite of the new . . . [set] of clothes, there are still 
signs of the same old NDP underneath. You can find it in 
things like a $15-million investment in Maple Leaf Foods, 
one of the country’s biggest and most successful 
meatpackers. 
 
You can also find it in things like a new Crown-run 
“entrepreneurial foundation and fund” that will spend $5 
million a year helping budding entrepreneurs draft 
business plans so they can qualify for government 
investments. 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

[12:15] 
 
I ask you, Madam Deputy Speaker, how is that going to build 
the province? How is that going to address the need for job 
creation and business expansion in the province of 
Saskatchewan when you see that most of the expansion, if not 
all of it, is going to come as a result of government 
intervention? And that, Madam Deputy Speaker, is one of the 
major problems in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s the 
message that’s being sent to business that this really is not a 
place to invest in. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government shows no sign of 
reducing its role in the economy, and that’s rather unfortunate. 
And the conclusion is while our Finance minister might look 
good in pinstripes, he’d likely be more comfortable in them if 
the government bought a piece of the suit company. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ve been listening to this 
government. We’ve been listening to members across the way 
tell us how they’re going to build this province. And yet how 
can you believe them? How can you believe these members? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the government and the Minister of 
Finance talks about reducing the debt in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Yet in his own summary financial statements, he 
indicates that the debt is going to grow by $288.5 million. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, how can you talk about reducing the 
debt when your own financial statements indicate it’s growing? 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s just part of the equation. 
We’ve seen, for too many years, we’ve seen this government 
misuse the term of being forthright with the people of 
Saskatchewan in the way they present their figures. 
 
And I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, we just have to go to the 
Provincial Auditor. And the Provincial Auditor, over the past 
number of years, has indicated time and time again that 
government’s figures have not been very accurate. He talks 
about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund being overestimated. He 
talks about transfers to Crown corporations improperly recorded 
as loans, understate expenses by $12 million. He talks about 
pension expenses understated by $120 million. 
 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, it might be interesting to note 
— and this for people across this province and individuals who 
have government pensions, the old pension plan, the unfunded 
pension liability — that since 1991, since 1991, how well has 
this government done in addressing the unfunded pension 
liability? In 1991 it was $2.7 billion behind. And it’ll be 
interesting to see when the auditor’s statements come out in 
November what it is. But as of November ’05 it is now 
underfunded by $4.2 billion. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I ask you, is that a plan of a 
government that knows where it’s going, that knows how to 
manage the fiscal finances and resources of this province? I 
think not. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as I look at this budget and as we’ve 
seen over the last few days . . . We’ve talked about 
out-migration in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve talked 
about job loss. We’ve talked about people leaving this province. 

Is this budget going to draw people to this province? I doubt it. 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was just chatting with a 
couple recently in my area who, as of Good Friday, will be 
moving to Alberta and will be starting work on Tuesday 
following the Easter weekend in the province of Alberta. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is basically saying to them, 
there’s no reason why you should stay in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that is tragic, and it’s unfortunate because it 
takes children out of our school system. It takes people from 
our communities. 
 
And the member from North Battleford chirps from the back of 
this Assembly about how well he’s doing. Well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, maybe he should go around and look and talk to some 
of these people in rural Saskatchewan. Maybe he should talk to 
the people in Moosomin about how well they’re doing when it 
comes to health care, how well they’re doing in regards to their 
hospital, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
People in Moosomin are concerned because they’ve seen 
what’s happening in the community of Humboldt. And they’re 
seeing about a callous government that has delayed the 
construction and going to tender of the Humboldt hospital to the 
point that it has now increased in costs. And now the people of 
Humboldt are being asked to go back to their own community 
to raise additional funds because of the government’s dithering. 
And that’s a concern that people in Moosomin have. They 
would like to see, Madam Deputy Speaker, this minister move 
forward with the commitment by the former minister to get this 
project to tender so that they’re not left with an additional cost 
to their facility because, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a facility 
that’s definitely needed in the community of Moosomin. Not 
just Moosomin, but to a fairly broad area including the western 
side of Manitoba that are looking forward to this hospital. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague from Maple Creek and I 
had the privilege of attending the tourism awards in Saskatoon 
last night. And when I talk about tourism . . . we’ve talked 
about this for years. We’ve talked about the opportunity for 
tourism across the province of Saskatchewan, and certainly the 
southeast of the province is no different. 
 
I look at Moose Mountain Provincial Park, and Moose 
Mountain Provincial Park to my knowledge continues to be the 
most well-attended park in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Unfortunately there are some deterrents to that attendance, and 
part of that is highway construction. Highway 48 — is this 
government committed to working with the southeast 
transportation authority to ensure that Highway 48 from the 
Manitoba border will be completed over the five-year period, 
right through to the community of Kipling? Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that is a concern that the people of the southeast area 
of this province have in regards to commitments that this 
government is making and whether or not it’s going to honour 
its agreements with local ratepayers and local taxpayers. 
 
What about Highway 47 running north and south? Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that’s a fairly important highway in regards to 
trade, north and south, in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
southeast, or Highway No. 8. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are a number of issues that the 
people in the southeast part of the province, in the Moosomin 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

constituency, are concerned about. My colleagues, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, have also noted that there are some very major 
concerns regarding agriculture. And we see an ominous cloud 
beginning to build in the province of Saskatchewan. We saw it 
earlier as the catalogues came out from the sale from the 
auctioning companies and the number of farms that are actually 
up for bid. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that hasn’t slowed 
down. 
 
I’ve run across individuals who’ve decided just in the last week, 
week and a half, that they’re not interested in trying to grow 
another crop. When they sat down with their accountant and 
they looked at what their return was and their net return this 
past year and what it would cost them to put a crop in the 
ground this year, they said enough was enough. There’s no 
sense fighting. There’s no sense fighting, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And they don’t see any leadership from this provincial 
government in regards to addressing the issues of agriculture, 
other than the Minister of Agriculture continued to point his 
finger and accuse the federal government of not taking 
immediate action. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister 
of Agriculture can continue to point his finger. But we would 
suggest rather than what we’ve seen in the past, maybe it’s time 
for this minister to start making overtures to the federal 
government, of working with the federal government to be part 
of building a long-term plan — and a plan, not just a long-term 
plan, but a plan that will address some of the major concerns 
that are impacting people in the province of Saskatchewan 
agriculture community. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when I talk about agriculture 
community, I’m not just talking about farmers themselves, farm 
families. We’re talking about small communities. We’re talking 
about communities that are struggling to survive. We’re talking 
about communities where men and women have resided for 
years to build these communities, and they continue to see the 
outflow of young people from their communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s time that we had an actual plan in 
place that would begin to address those concerns. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about the businesses? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague has also 
mentioned, what about the businesses? Yes, I talk to the 
business community on a daily basis. One business for example 
indicated or said to me that if it wasn’t for the fact that there’s 
actually some oil activity in our area, they may as well of shut 
the doors because the agricultural community which was their 
main . . . where they derive most of their revenue resource, 
certainly hasn’t been there for the last little while. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are so many things in this 
provincial budget, and there were so many opportunities for this 
government to provide some direction, to present a more 
positive view to the investment community of this country to 
look at Saskatchewan as the place to invest in as well as a place 
to come and live in. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we all agree 
there’s a lot of positive aspects in this province. This province 
is indeed a great place to live. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
continue to have a government that really is basically holding 

back the ability of this province to move forward. 
 
Therefore, Madam Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
have to basically conclude by saying, this billion dollar surplus 
that this government had to deal with really has done nothing — 
the expenditures yesterday — to create a more positive view 
and feeling and sense of opportunity that the people of 
Saskatchewan were looking for. And therefore, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I must vote in favour of the amendment and be 
opposed to the motion before the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I just want to say that it’s a real pleasure for me 
today to be able to discuss highlights from the 2006-07 speech. 
I intend today to speak in favour of the budget and against the 
amendment put forward by the opposition. And not to digress 
too much right at the beginning of my remarks, I can’t 
understand why the opposition would be so willing to damage 
their credibility with a vote of non-confidence in the most 
popular budget that has happened in this province probably in 
the last 20 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — So I think I will work a little more on the 
theme of credibility, Madam Deputy Speaker. The 2006-07 
budget is about building a better future right here, and we are 
capitalizing on our economic success while reflecting the values 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Yesterday on my way to Swift Current for an event there, I was 
very pleased to listen to all the dialogue about the budget on the 
radio. And one of the things that was said in some of the panels 
was, in all the provinces of Canada, this budget more strongly 
links social progress to economic progress than any other 
provincial budget that we’ve seen in a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — The other comment was about the 
transformative impact that the tax changes will have on the 
investment climate and the ability for businesses to reinvest in 
the province. So transformation, social and economic progress, 
I think, Madam Speaker, those are the things that I will focus on 
today. 
 
And you know, the previous speaker, the member from 
Moosomin, I have to say if we had had the financial practices of 
the government that he was part of, we would have no financial 
statements to discuss because the Gass Commission made it 
very clear that they often did not table financial reports in the 
Assembly. Reports that were tabled were often three years late. 
And there is absolutely no comparison in accountability 
performance between the government that those members were 
part of and the government that’s before you today. 
 
We have now instituted the practice of six-month reporting in 
virtually every area. And it is such a dramatic change from the 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

practices of the ’80s that if the members opposite want to 
discuss accountability, we can have that conversation any day. 
And I am not at all concerned about how we’ll come out in that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — And while we’re on that subject, recently 
there was an article quoting Todd Hirsch from the Canada West 
Foundation. And he talked again about the unwarranted gloom 
among many Saskatchewanians and the fact that some of this 
comes out of the feeling of neglect that the West has always felt 
and its relationship with the East and Ottawa and the minority 
representation position that we’ve been in. 
 
But the other observation that is made that throughout the world 
there’s been two major migrations taking place: one is from 
poor countries to rich countries, and the other one is from the 
countryside to cities. And so when we’re thinking about what 
that means for our province and the realistic application of our 
resources to a situation that is existing worldwide, I think that 
we do have to look at the fact that — as some of our rural folks 
choose either by necessity of the marketplace, which again the 
members opposite support the free market system that is doing 
so much damage to farmers today — that we do have to look at 
attracting those young rural people to the smaller and larger 
Saskatchewan urban centres rather than having them go to the 
oil patch because of course our young farm people have very 
good skills, very good work attitudes, and are very attractive 
employees for recruiters from other places. 
 
So I challenge the members opposite to talk to those young 
people about staying here instead of working as hard as they 
can to drive them out of the province with their doom and 
gloom and negativity. You know, John Gormley — who’s not 
my best fellow, though we do get along okay — he says it’s 
about the attitude, dude. And I don’t know why the members 
opposite haven’t caught onto that yet. I’m sure they must listen 
to Mr. Gormley, and I’m sure he would not approve of their 
salesmanship when it comes to Saskatchewan. 
 
[12:30] 
 
The other thing I want to talk about in terms of their lack of 
credibility was comments made recently in an article about the 
Sask Party’s penchant for paying fast and loose with the facts. 
And of course we all know about Brad Wall’s missing seven 
years. I know people in Swift Current were certainly interested 
in that last night. They wonder why someone is not proud of 
their past. And of course we know very well that when he 
worked in the inner circle for the minister of Economic 
Development and Tourism, John Gerich, that he would have 
been very apprised of all the discussions and decisions around 
Meadow Lake and would have been there when the 250 million 
was committed to that project. 
 
So to play innocent is disingenuous, Madam Deputy . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I have to remind the member 
that when speaking about another colleague within the 
Assembly, they should use the respectful title of the 
constituency they represent or the Leader of the Opposition. 
Thank you. 
 

Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for that reminder, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I would refer then to the member from Swift Current. 
 
The other thing that has become apparent is that the NDP has 
been following a very steady and progressive plan in its 
financial management. Number one, clean up the mess. Number 
two, when there was surplus money, make sure that 
Saskatchewan families had a tax break, with the largest tax 
break in the history of the province. Next, to look at the 
economic growth foundations and change many of the royalty 
and investment structures for mining, oil, and gas — all of those 
that have produced the strong foundation that we have. 
 
As the member from the Conference Board of Canada said, you 
don’t get eight years of solid financial progress by accident. 
This has been dealing with the fundamentals in Saskatchewan 
and convincing the financial agencies across Canada and the US 
that we are deserving of a AAA credit rating which is also, as 
anyone knows, a very important part of someone making a 
decision to invest. 
 
So we’ve been working on the fundamentals: the people first, 
the resource and development and manufacturing tax breaks, 
now the corporate investment environment. And, Madam 
Speaker, I’m sure that next year we will be very rewarded when 
the Minister of Finance gets up to provide the sequel to this 
year’s budget. And we’ll see again the very solid planning that 
has brought this province forward out of the pit that it existed in 
previously. 
 
You know when I was listening again to the budget discussion, 
there was a business person from, an Aboriginal business 
person from Meadow Lake. There was a disabled person, a 
student. To a person they were very supportive of the budget, 
again talking of transformation, talking of linking social 
progress to the economy. And the two themes they really 
twigged on was economic prosperity and youth. Those were the 
things they had gotten out of the budget presentation. 
 
And one of the very interesting things, when we were having a 
discussion about the budget, is that when you combine the 
information that the studies that have been done about the cost 
of doing business in Saskatchewan and combine that with the 
new tax environment, this is actually a better place to do 
business than Alberta. So I say, come on and we’ll kick a little 
bit of Alberta butt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — I am a little bit shocked when I hear the 
member from Humboldt indulging in revisionist history. If that 
member wants to revisit what happened to GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program] and what happened to many of our 
important programs, they can look back to the foolish spending 
that occurred in the ’80s that ended us up with a 15 billion debt 
which has continued to hamstring us. We could have gotten rid 
of four points on the PST right now if we didn’t have the money 
that’s being expended on interest on that old and tired debt that, 
quite frankly, I’d like to see the end of. 
 
You know we have some real advantages in Saskatchewan. We 
have. If we compare ourselves to Alberta, in Saskatchewan an 
average family in PST in a year would spend 1,074. Well that 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

same family in Alberta would not pay that sales tax but what 
would they pay instead? This is a skill testing question. They 
would pay a health premium of $1,056. Their mortgage would 
be 3,200 more a year. Their heating would be 1,000 more a 
year. Their car insurance would be 1,000 more a year. And I 
have to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the Alberta advantage 
disappears quite quickly when you look at these kind of figures. 
 
Not to mention that . . . I don’t know about my colleagues here, 
but I love this place. I think it’s a terrific place to live. There is 
nothing I enjoy more, Madam Deputy Speaker, myself and my 
husband, than getting in our car and hitting the back roads in 
Saskatchewan to see all the interesting things — the nice homes 
and yards people have created, the farms. It’s just a pleasure 
always. And you always come across something. There’s a lot 
of creativity in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I remember driving, I think in the Avonlea area. I lose 
track because we go down so many little back roads. But in the 
Avonlea area someone had a gigantic Elvis out in their field 
because the desire to engage in creative activity is just part of 
the Saskatchewan psyche and the Saskatchewan spirit. And I 
wish I was a better photographer so that I would be able to 
record some of those things. 
 
Now a couple of highlights I’d just like to bring forward from 
the provincial budget is the very important tax credit for trade 
groups, both the one-time trade entry amount as well as the 
maintenance tax credit. And you know it’s interesting when you 
read who falls into those trade groups. We have hair stylists, 
bricklayer, drywaller, roofer, insulator, glazier, painter, floor 
covering installer, plumber, pipefitter, gas fitter, carpenter, 
electrician, sheet metal worker, boilermaker, iron worker, 
autobody repair, vehicle mechanics, and heavy duty mechanics. 
 
And you know this will be important financially to those folks 
but it’s also a recognition of how important skilled tradespeople 
are to all of us in our everyday lives, especially if you’ve ever 
seen me try to fix something. It doesn’t matter how many times 
I measure a board, it’s still an inch out when I put it on the wall. 
 
So I want to say that I want to thank my colleague from Regina 
Northeast for all the good work that he did on that change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — I would direct people to pages 56, 57 of the 
budget background documents that have the intercity 
comparison of taxes and costs. In every case Saskatchewan 
comes out ahead of every other jurisdiction in Canada. And 
again, just reminding people that we have an ongoing standing 
commitment to the lowest utility rates in Canada. 
 
And you know what, Madam Speaker? In the last boom in 
Swift Current, there was 20.4 million in construction in 1987. 
Well in the boom today there is 70 million in construction. And 
last night I was pleased to share the podium with a First Nations 
person who was there helping to build the relationships as the 
new casino will be going into Swift Current. And it was 
wonderful both to hear the presentation where he started out 
speaking of the respect for the elders in the room — because 
that’s something very important in his community — and how 
pleased he was to be able to speak to the wise group of elders 

gathered there and to the young people in the crowd, the 
messages about the expanding opportunities that would come 
with the new casino in Swift Current. 
 
It was a very good moment and I think is part of what this 
budget is about, is creating those opportunities and those 
relationships that will take advantage of that bit of the 
Saskatchewan advantage, which is the young Aboriginal 
population that is increasingly seeking education, seeking 
employment, and affirming traditions that keep the 
communities strong. 
 
I want to also spend a minute on the changes that benefit 
low-income families. There was in the low-income supports a 
$40 a month increase for most of the 27,000 SAP 
[Saskatchewan Assistance Plan] and TEA [transitional 
employment allowance] clients; a $20 a month increase for SAP 
clients in long-term care; $10 a month in the general living 
allowance plus utility flat rate allowance for TEA. 
 
And for the employment supplement, increases for the 5,300 
existing and 100 new families on that program who are in 
employment now but needing a little bit of support until they 
reach a more sufficient level of employment, and financial 
assistance for 17,000 low-income and moderate-income 
homeowners to defray the costs of draft proofing, heating and 
system upgrades, and window replacements. 
 
For families and children, there was funding increases for foster 
care, therapeutic foster care, private treatment, family supports, 
out-of-home placement prevention and pre-protection, and 
enhanced child care subsidies to 4,300 parents. There was a 
reiteration of the increase for the CBO [community-based 
organization] wages so that the people who serve the most 
vulnerable in our society are not vulnerable themselves. The 
secure care project, the cognitive disability strategy, 500 new 
child care spaces, the CBO child care wage increases to value 
the work that people do in raising healthy and learning-ready 
children. To address the waiting lists for children with 
disabilities who require child care, we’ve eliminated waiting 
lists for disabled children requiring child care. 
 
The enhanced literacy initiatives. I didn’t know this, but a 1 per 
cent increase in literacy in the population has an impact of 2.5 
per cent in the productivity of the community. The new Literacy 
Commission is working on these things for us. And as well, 15 
new pre-kindergarten classes in the province to make sure that 
kids go into kindergarten with the best chance of success and 
completion of their elementary school. 
 
And I just want to again come to the end of my discussion by 
talking about the ceremony that we had in the legislature the 
other day. It was only a few years ago that I heard the phrase 
that we are all treaty people. And it’s true. In order to be in a 
marriage there’s two partners. In order to be in a treaty there are 
two partners. 
 
We benefited hugely from the land divisions that took place. 
Some people in Saskatchewan think that First Nations have too 
much land in the province. Well they have about 10 per cent of 
the cut zone of Weyerhaeuser in terms of actual land base in the 
province. And considering what they gave up in the treaties — 
all the access that we have to farm land, to resources, to the 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

places where our cities exist — this was I think a relationship 
that must be respected. And I was very pleased to see Florence 
Highway’s runner and pillow take its honourable place in the 
legislature. And whenever the camera is focused on either Mr. 
Speaker or Madam Speaker, it’s very much front and centre in 
the picture. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, in closing, when we were elected last time 
we said four things. We said we would make Saskatchewan the 
most affordable place to live and raise a family; provide the best 
public health care in Canada; build a green and prosperous 
economy; build the future here for young people. Well this 
budget is consistent with all of these themes, building a better 
future right here. 
 
And as I said, Madam Deputy Speaker, I look forward to the 
sequel. And I speak today in support of this budget and against 
the amendment proposed by the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s an honour to enter 
this debate. I’ve talked to some of the people in the Arm River 
constituency and they’ve given this budget a failing grade; 
they’re not in support of it. So I won’t be supporting this 
budget, I’ll be supporting the amendment. 
 
I’ll give you some reasons why they’re not supporting. The 
main one is agriculture. There is nothing in this budget that 
addresses the problem out there in agriculture. We’ve discussed 
agriculture here lots in this legislature and the government still 
has did nothing. 
 
We could talk about the crop insurance deadline on March 31. 
That was some of the stuff, a little thing that this government 
could do to back up, to help the farmers. That’s something that 
the Government of Saskatchewan could do to help the province 
. . . or the province could help the farmers of Saskatchewan. But 
did they? No. You know they could have extended that 
deadline. 
 
We can go with the northern farmers. Most of them haven’t 
taken the crop off. And yet you go all through this constituency, 
there is nothing but piles and piles . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Other members of the 
Assembly will have time to enter in the debate. I would ask that 
they respect the colleague on their feet, and we’ll continue with 
debate. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I will 
address some of the concerns from the Minister of Health that 
was yelling from his seat. And that’s one of the reasons that 
they’re not supporting this budget was account of him. We have 
Davidson that has waiting lists in long-term care. Outlook, 
there’s a waiting list. I have a waiting list in Imperial. I have 
one in Wynyard — waiting lists for people to get into long-term 
care. 
 
[12:45] 

There’s a wing in Davidson that this government shut down that 
could be opened with that budget, probably only cost to 
renovate them rooms. Right now they’re trying to price it out. 
There’s a community-based organization that are trying to 
figure out what it would cost. And I’m pretty sure the cost 
would come under a quarter of a million dollars to renovate the 
rooms in the old wing of the hospital, that they could be used so 
the people don’t have to leave. You know that could have been 
addressed very easily in the budget, on the money end, to help 
the people out there in rural Saskatchewan because it’s forecast 
that there’s going to be more of a waiting list in Saskatchewan 
with that. 
 
Watrous is another one. Watrous has been on the list — I can’t 
remember for how long — to build a new facility there. They 
need a new facility in Watrous. The roof leaks. The last time I 
was there, the roof was leaking. The rooms are getting in poor 
condition. They’ve raised their money over the years. They 
raised the money, and every year they raise a little bit more 
because they know the costs are going up. And they’re sitting 
there with their share. You know what the government’s share 
is? Five million dollars. That’s all it would cost to go ahead 
with the plans. Has the government made that announcement? 
No they haven’t. 
 
And they keep hanging on and letting Watrous hang on and 
hang on. These people raised this money at least over a 
five-year period. And they expect to see results. They expect 
our government to step up to the plate and fulfill their 
commitment. When they went to the health district and said, we 
want to build a new facility, the health district said, you bet; 
that’s good. You raise your share; we will be there. Were they 
there? No, they’re not, Madam Deputy Speaker. They haven’t 
stepped to the plate. 
 
Them people went to work and raised them commitments, went 
to the local towns, went to the local RMs [rural municipality]. 
They donated money, put money in there, grew money. I can 
remember fundraisers they had there, different fundraisers. 
They still have a huge . . . What word am I looking for? It’s not 
an auction. It’s a draw that raises money there. They have some 
very good prizes there. They have raffles to raise money for 
that. And they did that for years. The people have donated 
money and come out to help that facility get built, and all 
they’re waiting for is the government to come up with their 
share of the money. But has the government come up with it? 
No they haven’t. 
 
So do you think the people of Watrous are supporting this 
budget? No they’re not. They’re not. And you’ll be hearing 
from them. I’ll be bringing . . . There are concerns with it. 
They’re not happy with it. They expected that they would be 
addressed in this budget. But what did they announce in this 
budget? Some old announcements. 
 
They talked about Outlook. When Outlook was in my 
constituency, Madam Deputy Speaker, they made that 
announcement. I remember going there, in Outlook, and they’d 
been on the waiting list for five or six years. And then finally, 
the last year as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 
they finally made the announcement there. What do they do? 
They make the announcement again in this budget. They’re 
finally maybe going to break ground after how many years of 



April 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

that town actually going and raising the money for that. And 
then they had to raise the extra money. 
 
Now Watrous is in the same situation. They don’t even know 
how much money, when they finally does give the nod, how 
much more is the government going to say, the health district 
say, whoa now things have changed. Your plans have changed. 
Your building has gone up, inflation. We’re going to need 
another $1.3 million from you, and we’re going to need it — if 
they are going to do it like Humboldt — we’re going to need it 
in 40 days. 
 
Do you know how hard it is to try and raise $1 million in 40 
days? You’re basically putting a gun to their head and saying 
that if you don’t raise it, you’re not getting your hospital, you’re 
not getting your long-term care people, that we don’t care. And 
that’s a message that is going out there from this government. 
 
And that’s the same message that they’ve sent to the agriculture 
out there too. The deadline . . . Getting back to crop insurance, 
there is piles of wheat everywhere because there has been a 
very slow movement of grain. Farmers can’t sell their product, 
and right now it isn’t . . . there isn’t much money in it right 
now. 
 
And on top of that, road ban is out. The road bans came out in 
early March, about March 10, March 12, in a lot of RMs. So 
now you can’t move the grain even if you want. So even if you 
have the quota, if the elevator finally has some room, you can’t 
move the grain to meet the March 31 deadline. You’d think that 
the Minister of Agriculture would have said, okay we’ll give 
you at least a month or two, at least until the road bans are off 
or the people can get in their fields, the farmers can get in their 
fields. 
 
You realize how soft it is out there right now, how much water 
is out there. I don’t know if these people watching the news, if 
they watched it last night. The community next to me, Kenaston 
right now is in a flood situation. There’s two highways — no. 
highway 50, no. highway 11 — both water pouring over them 
right now. 
 
Last night at midnight, I was talking to a guy, and they were 
down to one lane on No. 11 by the old picnic grounds by 
Kenaston. No. 15 Highway, they’re running pumps over the 
highway trying to move the water through it. So how do they 
expect farmers to get out in the fields and move grain with that 
much water? That much more . . . They can’t even . . . Some of 
the roads . . . I talked to the RM of . . . in the RM of Rosedale, I 
think there was three or four roads, grids, that are flooded right 
now with water pouring over them. How can you move grain 
now to even make your deadline? 
 
In the wintertime there was so much snow, you couldn’t move 
it. So a lot of the farmers thought, well maybe March if it was a 
good winter, we could move it. But now with the weather 
conditions and the mud and the water . . . And all they ask was 
maybe a month deadline, you know, until we can move our 
grain. All they wanted was a month deadline. Do you think this 
government would give it to them at that end? No. 
 
Oh they fund CAIS did they? No, they say they are throwing in 
98 million. Well that doesn’t fully fund CAIS. So when you go 

to the bank and say, we need the money now in the spring, 
you’re only going to get probably two-thirds of your money 
from the province when you can use it right now. Now is when 
they can use the money for CAIS, probably to pay their crop 
insurance deadline. 
 
And what’s the government do? They’re holding back a third of 
the CAIS. You know, why are they . . . And then they wonder 
why they have no support in rural Saskatchewan, where people 
won’t support this particular budget. Those are some of the 
reasons on there. 
 
Another one is job loss. You know, the member from Regina 
Rosemont gets up, says well it’s an attitude problem; that’s why 
people don’t stay here, it’s an attitude problem. Well what do 
you think? People are going to sit around and . . . If she thinks 
that they’re going to sit around and sing “Kumbaya” and 
everything’s going to be happy, well things aren’t in rural 
Saskatchewan because there is no jobs in Saskatchewan right 
now. 
 
There is no jobs out there. There’s no businesses in rural 
Saskatchewan. Agriculture is suffering. Every ag dealer is 
having to lay off a person or two. All the farmers are cutting 
back on help there. And then they wonder why there’s no 
support there. 
 
And is this budget going to get more people in Saskatchewan? 
They already forecast it’s not. They expect, by their own 
admission, that it’s not going to put more people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. They wonder why there’s no support. 
 
And there isn’t. I was listening to Gormley this morning coming 
up. A lot of people phoned in — no support for this budget. 
And when they realize . . . they start actually looking at it, there 
was no support. There’s no support for the average person out 
there. There’s no tax relief for the average person out there. 
There is no jobs, going to be no jobs. There’s absolutely no 
future there. And they wonder why people are moving. 
 
You think they want to move? Do you think they want to go 
leave this province? Madam Deputy Speaker, no they don’t. 
And I talked to them. They don’t want to. 
 
Everyone says, why aren’t we doing more oil and gas here? We 
know it’s here. Why aren’t we? And I say, well you got your 
NDP government. You got a socialist government that basically 
does not work with oil companies. You had the Premier who 
sent out letters — what did he call the corporations? — greedy 
corporate huskers, you know. And then he wonders why the oil 
companies won’t come here. 
 
They talk about debt. Well I remember when Blakeney, when 
Blakeney nationalized the potash. Do you think he paid cash to 
them? That started the debt in this province by huge amounts. 
Nationalize the potash. 
 
And we’re going to nationalize the oil companies. That was 
their next step. That was their next plan. And thank God the 
people of Saskatchewan, they realized that the socialist 
government were going to nationalize the oil companies. They 
booted them out. Thank God. That was one of the best things 
that ever happened to this province, or we wouldn’t even have 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2006 

an oil industry. 
 
Could you imagine? Could you imagine the oil industry being 
run? It would be run like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] is now. That’s how much 
money they would be losing at that end. There probably would 
be no oil in here. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, at that end of it, that is why there 
is no oil development. You know, I get asked that constantly in 
my constituency. Every town has at least 10, 15, 20 kids go 
away to work in the wintertime to the oil patch. They say why 
aren’t we drilling here? You know dinosaurs just didn’t die on 
the Alberta side. You know they did . . . some of them did come 
across and they did cross the border into the Saskatchewan side, 
and some of them did die there. A few of them made it here to 
Regina and some of them I think are still in government, at that 
end of it. But most of them died, and they died on the 
Saskatchewan side. 
 
There is oil, we probably have more natural gas here than 
Alberta. And how many new wells production? We’re just 
barely staying even. Very low new well production here 
compared to Alberta, compared to BC. You know, why is that? 
Why aren’t they drilling here like crazy? In Alberta they’re 
punching rigs in all over the place. You get in the Camrose area 
there, with the new methane gas going in there, there’s wells. 
There’ll be about 10 of them on a quarter section, all spread out. 
And here, you know, we have little pockets of it here. And the 
oil companies say, you know, till this government actually 
really wants to work with us, really wants to work, and isn’t 
going . . . and will give the assurance, and give the assurance 
that we will not nationalize you. And this government won’t. 
 
Do you know why they won’t? Because of the unions. The 
union bosses basically run that NDP government over there, run 
the back bench of it for sure and some of the front bench, 
saying that they don’t want . . . they won’t be working with the 
oil companies here. And then that’s going back to their Regina 
Manifesto, their grassroots. People that say corporations are 
bad, you know. But what is this . . . And left basically rural 
Saskatchewan right out of it. It’s leaving Saskatchewan out. 
Saskatchewan is lagging so far behind the rest of Canada. It’s 
such a shame when you look at this province, the growth 
potential this province. 
 
When I talk to people, whether it’s in the agriculture end, could 
be . . . what it could be in value-added, it could be in tourism, it 
could be in the oil and gas sector, and it could be in 
manufacturing, and we’re not. We have more potash than 
anybody. We’re second biggest producer of oil and natural gas, 
and what are we doing with that? Nothing. There is no 
development in this province at all. There is no growth. What 
did that . . . came out 5,200 job loss again, you know. 
 
We’re in an oil boom. We’re the only place in the world that is 
having supposedly an oil boom that loses jobs. When you have 
an oil boom, I don’t know if you’ve been involved in the oil 
industry, but that attracts people. People should be rolling into 
your province for work like they are in Alberta, BC. When I 
was a kid, I can remember when there was some guys used to 
go to Saudi Arabia to work because that’s when the oil boom 
started there. They left here, and Saudi Arabia boomed; they 

increased their jobs. Any place that there has been oil 
production, when oil is at an all-time high, the provinces or 
countries or states that are having . . . are creating jobs. They’re 
growing in jobs. Why is this province losing jobs at that end of 
it in an oil boom? 
 
And you know I’ll have people ask me, and I say I can’t explain 
it except an NDP government. And they’ll say yes. You know 
we’ve been suffering under these guys for 14 years. And under 
14 years, we’ve lost jobs, and we’ve lost people, and now we’re 
losing young people at an alarming rate. And if that doesn’t 
stop, there’s going to be nothing left in this province at it. 
 
Do you know how many people are leaving this province every 
year? It is alarming amount of numbers, and those are people 
that we need to grow this province. Those are the people that 
we need to pay the taxes in here that will provide the social 
nets, that will provide the health care for this province. 
 
And right now they’re here because they have no faith in it. 
When I talk to people now they just say, you know, they have 
no faith in this province. They have no faith in this government. 
They believe this government can’t grow this province, and this 
government has shown it by having a continual job loss and 
population loss. They haven’t did one thing to change that 
around. Until you change that around, if you change your 
population and your job loss, you are running a losing province. 
And you are going backwards. 
 
And the people are realizing that now. They realized that in 
rural Saskatchewan, and they’re realizing that now in the cities, 
and that is why there has to be change in government. You have 
to make, you have to make this province competitive with it. 
And there’s various ways of doing it. 
 
This government moved a little bit in the tax end of it, but 
there’s more ways you could be moving at it. We have huge 
potential for tourism, and they’re basically not doing nothing 
there. Huge potential for value added in this province, they’re 
not helping one little bit in there. 
 
You know lowering the PST would help, would help this 
province. And did this government do? When they raised the 
PST, they took $500 million so far out of this province, $500 
million out of taxpayers’ pockets left. And now they have some 
extra money, are they returning it back to the citizens? No 
they’re not, Madam Deputy Speaker. They’re not. They had a 
chance to actually help the average guy, but they took the 
money from his pocket. They took that money, and did they go 
back to help him back? They haven’t helped farmers, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They haven’t helped the average person out 
there. They haven’t helped students. They haven’t helped 
nobody, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 1 o’clock, I have 
enjoyed the spirited debate and wish all members a safe and 
happy weekend with friends and family. I adjourn the House 
now until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1019 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1020 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2006 Paragon Award Winners 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1020 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1021 
 World Health Day 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1020 
 Davidson Wins Two Provincial Titles 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1021 
 First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1021 
 Spring Flooding 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1021 
 Government Policies for Economic Growth 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1022 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Job Creation and Economic Growth 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1022 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1022 
 Consequences of Budgetary Policies 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1024 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1024 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1025 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1025 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1026 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1026 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Website of the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1027 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1027 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 50 — The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine (médiation) 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1028 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1028 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1028 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1028 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1032 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1041 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1044 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


