






















































Hansard: April 25, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 46B  TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1359 
 April 25, 2006 
 
[The committee resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — Now that it being 7 o’clock, we will begin the 
estimates for Learning that’s found on page 113, 114 in your 
Estimate books, subvote (LR01), central management and 
services. I would ask the minister if she would be so kind to 
introduce her officials this evening, and we will begin the 
committee deliberations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: —Thank you very much, Madam Chair. To 
my right is Wynne Young, deputy minister of Learning. To my 
left is Larry Steeves, associate deputy minister. Sitting directly 
behind Wynne is Karen Allen, executive director of corporate 
services. Directly behind myself is Gillian McCreary, assistant 
deputy minister. And to Gillian’s left is Naomi Mellor, 
executive director, education finance and legislative services. 
And also sitting to the left of Naomi is Nelson Wagner, 
executive director of facilities. And directly behind Gillian is 
April Barry, executive director, early learning and child care. 
 
The Chair: —I would recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: —Thank you very much and welcome this 
evening, Minister, and to your officials. I understand that we’ll 
have a couple of hours to begin the process of looking at the 
Learning estimates for this year. And there are a good number 
of topics that need to be covered. 
 
And as a preamble, Minister, since we haven’t had the 
opportunity to formally do this, I would like to sort of state that 
some of the questions that I will ask are not only for my 
information or the opposition’s information but I think for the 
public interest, that there are indeed — as surprising as it may 
seem — are people who follow these proceedings and who are 
interested in the progress and the information that’s provided. 
 
So I think we have a two-level responsibility to provide 
information to the House but also to provide information to the 
public that we serve. So some of the questions may seem pretty 
obvious, but I think that there is a benefit in doing that. 
 
Minister, there’s a number of topics over the course of the next 
two or three occasions that we’ll have to meet and discuss them. 
And I would like to try to explore these various topics in some 
depth as we go through them and then move on to other topics. 
 
I think, Minister, that the first topic that I would like to begin on 
is the whole process that is very much engrossing our learning 
system right now, and that is the whole amalgamation process 
and the issues that are surrounding amalgamation across our 
province. And they vary and they’re many and they’re very 
interesting. And I think information and updates would be very 

welcome, particularly as school boards are approaching, I 
believe it’s early May or the first week in May when it’s a 
requirement to have the mill rates set. So all of this process is 
very timely. 
 
Minister, as a beginning I wonder if you would give a general 
overview from your perspective where the amalgamation 
process is at in a general sense. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
First off, I guess, to talk about the restructuring and what has 
happened over the last couple of years and to give people a 
general overview of where we are. 
 
After the Boughen Commission report was released, the 
Boughen Commission in 2003 . . . I think it was May of ’04 we 
began to move into the period of restructuring. And there was 
really three points that come out of the Boughen and were 
announced by the minister after that. 
 
The first and foremost was a restructuring to move to larger 
divisions, to go to regional pooling of resources and address 
many of the issues that were there. The next point was the 
redesign of the foundation operating grant. There’s been a fair 
bit of work that’s been done on that, and I would say we’re 
about halfway through the factors so far. 
 
The new changes have been put in place this year. There is still 
a number of factors that need to be reviewed and work done on 
that, and we’re looking at it being done in two stages. So first 
stage implemented this year with the ’06-07 budget and next 
stage looking at the next budget year. Also to the issue of 
education property tax and equalization which looks at the 
bigger picture of funding for education and the commitment of 
this government and our Premier to work towards a better 
equalization deal with the federal government and to address 
the situation and some of the inequities with education funding 
and the reliance on property tax. So that was the basic premise 
of where we are today. 
 
For many people, the new boards took effect on January of this 
year so they are working. There’s been overlap from the 
previous boards into the new boards so there has been a bit of a 
transition period. For many people, they talk about the 
restructuring being done, but what I would say is that at this 
point in time while the physical boundaries of the new school 
divisions are drawn and the new boards are in place, there is 
still a great deal of work to do. Many of the school divisions are 
working through the programs in the amalgamated divisions, 
what’s available, what services are there, what the needs are 
within the division, and of course the funding and what will 
need to be done within that school division. So on paper, 
boundaries are drawn, new boards are in place, but now I think 
a great deal of the work begins at this point in time getting 
everything settled in and getting the new boards up and running. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Coming out of your 
comments I think there are a number of specific issues that we 
should explore. Minister, do you have a listing of what the old 
boards, or the boards that were prior to the restructuring, do you 
have a list of those boards and what their mill rates were 
leading up to the . . . or at December 31, I guess it would be, 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

prior to the new boards taking responsibility January 1? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What I have is a listing of all of the 
previous school divisions with the mill rates, ’04 and ’05, and 
the variance. Now I would assume though what you’re looking 
for is . . . Do you want just a straight listing or do you want a 
broken down, previous school divisions into the new divisions? 
Is that what you’re looking for? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I was looking for the previous divisions 
because I believe the new boards have not set their mill rates 
until . . . or they may have been started to set their mills rates, 
but I believe it’s May 4 or May 8 or somewhere in there. May 
8, that’s the deadline for setting the new mill rates. So I don’t 
expect that we would have the new mills rates for the combined 
or the new amalgamated or restructured boards at this time. So 
I’m looking more for the former ones, if that will be available. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What I have is a list. It will name the 
new school divisions and what it contains inside in each of the 
blocks is the former school divisions and the mill rates from 
’05. So that’s what you’re looking for? We can get a copy for 
you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One of the comments 
that I’ve received from people on the new boards is that the 
administrations of these new boards have really, I think 
underestimated the magnitude of the work that was going to be 
required to bring the financial statements from all of these 
individual boards, both the operating statement and balance 
sheets, and to reconcile with the appraised assets. And, you 
know, all of this financial information has been more onerous 
than originally anticipated to bring this information together. 
 
With the new mill rates being set on May 8, is it the 
department’s expectation that all of this work is then completed 
so that these new restructured boards are in a position to set 
their mill rate, and so that the work that they have embarked on, 
well officially on January 1, is going to be at a stage where they 
can effectively set mill rates beginning on May 8? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — That’s part of the reason why the 
elections for the new boards was held in July of last year, and 
they didn’t take effect until January ’06, to give a little bit of a 
window to be able to do some of the preparatory work that 
needs to be done. 
 
The member will know that there is a three-year period, a 
three-year window before the school divisions are expected to 
have a common mill rate. So we know that there is going to be a 
couple of years of transition. Now each school division will 
make the decisions that they feel are appropriate for their area, 
but that was the big reason behind the three-year transition. And 
we know that there is going to be probably a couple of years of 
work that will take place in the divisions — in the new 
divisions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister, and I’ve received 
information that you sent over. That’s exactly what I was 
looking for. Thank you. 
 
And without looking at it in detail, but anecdotally, that there is 
some variance and it isn’t the same in every jurisdiction or 

every instance. From this information — and I recognize that 
there’s three years to implement and to get to a unified mill rate 
for each of these divisions — the work that’s been done . . . Is 
the department satisfied to date that the work has been done in 
bringing these financial statements together so that boards, at 
least at this point in time, are solidly kind of confident in the 
financial information that they have — in the combination of 
the individual financial statements into a combined financial 
statement so that they’re getting a very accurate and complete 
picture of what their financial position is prior to beginning the 
process of setting mill rates on May 8? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well here again we can talk about the six 
months of lead time that there was before the new divisions 
came into effect. And also a number of things were done, one 
being that the former secretary-treasurers of the divisions were 
kept on, using transition funding that was provided through the 
department to keep with that continuity and to provide help in 
the transition period. I think right now when you look at the 
information that’s coming out of the new divisions, I know the 
department is quite satisfied with it that we’re . . . you know, 
we’re there. And I don’t think, you know, as there’s been 
comments made, the work that’s been done in the divisions is 
refined to a level that there wasn’t a great many surprises on 
budget day. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The minister says, appropriately perhaps, 
that there weren’t many surprises on budget day. But in this 
budget process, were there surprises that some of these 
restructured boards had when they looked at the balance sheets 
and the financial statements of individual boards that were 
being part of the amalgamated new board? 
 
And what I’m looking at, you know, specifically there’s been 
anecdotal comment around the learning circles, if you like, that 
some boards’ financial position was not quite as what had been 
perceived or was stated; that there might have been booked 
assets sitting on the books in terms of collectible arrears of 
taxes and things of that nature that, in a realistic point of view, 
were fictitious almost or they certainly were, you know, 
optimistically anticipated that these revenues would come in. 
 
Has there been any surprises at all in this process that some 
positions of boards were not as expected? There have been 
anecdotal comments made that some divisions went on . . . you 
know, sort of spent some of the things that they may not 
otherwise have done in order to make sure there weren’t extra 
revenues or assets sitting on the balance sheet, those kinds of 
things. Have there been any unexpected surprises in this whole 
process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well what I will say is that the financial 
statements are audited yearly. And when you look back to ’04, 
the ’05 statements are currently . . . or we’re just kind of in the 
process of receiving those. 
 
The comments that you made, whether it’s something 
questionable, out of the ordinary that may have happened, I’m 
not aware of any of that. I mean a number of things that we’re 
looking at, and part of the big one I think is the redesign of the 
foundation operating grant. And that is to make it more 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

equitable, more transparent, so we can work towards a more 
accountable system in the education field. So not aware of any 
comments. I mean if there’s something specific that you have a 
concern with, we can talk later. That would be fine. But we’re 
not aware of anything. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I won’t offer 
to get into the A minus B equals C discussion that my colleague 
is much more adept at. But certainly the foundation grant and 
restructuring how that foundation grant is applied to individual 
school districts is partly — I think that’s what you said, perhaps 
halfway — in progress of making that whole system reviewed 
and adjusted. 
 
And I think that there are arguments that have always been 
made. My experience on boards of education goes back to the 
mid-’80s when I was involved on the board and the Chair of a 
board, and the debates that used to happen among other things 
at convention used to always be, does it cost more to deliver a 
unit of education in rural settings or does it cost more in urban 
settings? And there were legitimate arguments that could be 
mounted on both sides of that argument and debate. And I think 
it’s gone on for a good number of years and the department is 
reviewing and looking at this. 
 
But I think that there are some things that definitely are true and 
that is that some costs are accelerating disproportionately — the 
cost of living if you like — when you look at the recognized 
costs. And I think of things like transportation costs and fuel 
costs. 
 
The other thing that doesn’t fit into the foundation operating 
grant calculations is capital costs and things of that nature — 
construction costs — because of the economy in Western 
Canada or across Canada perhaps has sort of been way ahead of 
inflation in terms of the increased costs. So some of these things 
have to be looked at and kept in mind when you’re reviewing 
these operating grants to boards. 
 
Madam Minister, a great deal of the time, it seemed, prior to 
January 1 for these new amalgamated boards was doing some 
of the very fundamental things about deciding where the central 
office was going to be, who the administrative staff was going 
to be, what the names of the jurisdiction were going to be. I 
mean the kinds of things that seem to be trivia and minutiae. 
But it is very important because it has to be done and it does 
take time and meetings and things of that nature in order for this 
to happen. 
 
So I’m pleased to hear that the department is satisfied that the 
work that has been done up until now in terms of really getting 
a good handle on what the financial positions of the school 
boards are is in good hands and well along the way. 
 
As you know, Minister, and we’ll talk about the details of the 
Bill on The Education Act in another venue, but part of that Bill 
is going to be to adjust the financial year for school boards from 
the calendar year to the school year. And so I believe boards are 
looking at either-or combinations of an eight-month budget or a 
20-month budget or combinations of an 8 and 12 for a total of a 
20-month and looking forward to that whole period of time. 
What are the expectations of the department for the mill rate 
that’s being set on May 8? Is it a mill rate to apply for the eight 

months leading up until the new fiscal year for school boards, 
or is there an expectation of the department to actually look 
beyond the eight-month period of time into the next fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Within the legislation, the budgets that 
will be required is an eight-month that we’ll do until August 31, 
and then we will go into the 12-month, so it’s an eight-month 
and a 12-month but the mill rate setting process will not change. 
That cycle will remain the same. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The mill rate will then be on the basis of the 
. . . now for the eight months that will apply to the period of 
time in the interim, or will it apply to a different 12-month . . . 
I’m a little confused as to how this adjustment or the transition 
is going to occur. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — This was part of the discussion with 
SASBO [Saskatchewan Association of School Business 
Officials] when we first looked at changing the year. So when it 
is set, it will be for the ’06, and then we will follow the same 
cycle where in April, May of next year it will be the ’07 mill 
rate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So then as I understand it the mill rate that 
is set by May 8 will be for the 12-month period ending at the 
end of April of next year. Is that correct then, that it’s set for the 
12 months? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — No, it will be for the calendar year. So it 
will be from January 1, ’06 to December 31, ’06. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And this has improved things how? When 
we have the budget year following the calendar year, the mill 
rate year following the calendar and then the government year 
that goes March 31 to April 1, this has clarified this whole 
situation how, Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now this could be a little tricky so bear 
with me. Previously when you looked at the budget-setting 
cycle, really six-tenths of your budget was set and you had no 
flexibility left, or very little flexibility left if there was any 
adjustments that needed to be done. So when we look at going 
September to August, it gives a larger control over your 
expenditures and your budgeting. But it also has very little 
effect on the mill rating or the tax setting that the school 
division may do. You have the whole year really, where you 
have more flexibility — whether it’s staffing, whether it’s 
programming, whatever. 
 
Now I have to say also too that STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation], the school boards association, and also LEADS 
[League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents], along with SASBO, were involved in the 
discussions around this, and all felt that the added flexibility 
and it was just a better process for the boards to have through 
their year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I certainly remember 
the six-tenths and the four-tenths and the fact that by the time 
the provincial budget came out and the recognized foundation 
grant and the calculations came out that you were six months 
basically into your school year, and so that you had very little, 
at least on the operations side, that you could do. Your mill rate 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

basically was set. So I see the point. 
 
I would have thought that the maximum benefit to make sure all 
of this went in sync is that the mill rate would also follow the 
school year as the budget-setting year so you could do it all 
together, so your income period and your expense period would 
be exactly the same. But certainly by moving to the budget year 
and being able to adjust the expense side, at least it does make 
more sense to have it as this sort of function. 
 
Minister, moving on as part of this amalgamation process I 
wonder . . . The department maintains regional offices to be 
supportive to school divisions and that were set up I think in 
seven regions from south to north across the province. And I’m 
wondering if because of these new restructured school divisions 
if there is going to be reorganizing of the regional support 
program along the new boundaries and new areas as well. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — In the early discussions that had been 
considered, that there may be . . . may be more appropriate if 
we went to a reduced number of regions. 
 
But after the final discussions and with the addition of early 
learning and child care into the Department of Learning and 
also when you look at the importance of First Nations and Métis 
education, also independent and home-based education, and a 
continuous improvement framework, it was felt that it would be 
more appropriate if we stayed as is to provide the supports that 
are needed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, and I’m not sure if the newly 
restructured boards followed the exact boundaries that the 
regional offices were responsible for. I know they all add up to 
the sum, but there might have been one or two boards that are in 
a different region or that are now part of the restructured 
situation. 
 
Are you looking at a redrawing of the boundaries of the 
regional offices and thereby the services that they provide? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — They’re pretty close to the regional 
boundaries. But what we’re doing is reviewing it to make sure 
that we’ve got the appropriate boundaries for the regions and 
the school divisions. I mean, in my view it just makes sense that 
they would be the same. So it’s something that we’re reviewing. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. I would 
like to turn my attention to . . . Since you mentioned the fact 
that one of the reasons for retaining the regional boards was the 
child care and early learning that’s been added to the 
responsibilities of the department, Minister, from written 
questions or answers to written questions that the department 
provided, I believe that there was only 4.6 million of the 21.7 
million received last year by the province of Saskatchewan 
from the federal government for early learning and child care 
that was actually spent in ’05-06. Despite the fact that 21.7 was 
indeed budgeted for, only 4.6 of it was spent. And in the ’06-07 
budget only 11.5 of the money that has been allocated despite 
the fact that 20 million has been provided for from the federal 
government. 
 

Can the minister outline how much of the federal funding 
received under the early learning and child care agreement in 
principle between the federal and provincial government was 
allocated by the Department of Learning in ’05-06? And how 
much of this money was actually spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Part of the question that the member 
asked is really answered in written question 896. But the 
difference that you will find is that that is contained . . . Oops 
no, wrong year. That’s ours; 896 is ours, right? Question 897. 
You’re also looking at the years and the allocations that were 
done then. Also what you would add to that is 4.6 million that 
was from DCR’s [Department of Community Resources] 
budget. It will be contained in theirs. 
 
One allotment you will see is in our budget, and the previous 
ones will be with Community Resources. And the 4.6 million 
. . . and I’m confusing years; I apologize. DCRE [Department of 
Community Resources and Employment], there will be another 
4.6 million and that’s for the subsidy increases. So while the 
subsidy increases . . . or subsidies are still managed through 
DCR, the responsibility for providing the service is housed now 
within Learning. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So, Minister, in general is all of the money 
that has been received from the federal government been 
allocated and will it be spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member will be quite aware that the 
federal election was held. And with the commitments of the 
previous federal government we had put together a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan for early learning and child care in 
the province of Saskatchewan and had been ready to roll out 
some fairly major increases, some increases in the subsidy rates 
to provide a number of grants for capital start-up costs for child 
care, for home-based care. 
 
And when the federal election, when the new government was 
elected, of course there was some apprehension as to whether 
we should go ahead with the rollout or whether we should wait 
and see what was going to happen with the commitment of 
funding. And from the 146 million that was committed to the 
province of Saskatchewan for early learning and child care, we 
ended up with two years of funding instead of five years of 
funding. So it was just over $40 million that we got. 
 
So while all of the money has not been allocated, we have kind 
of slowed down the process to make sure that we don’t get 
ahead of ourselves because we can’t start up a wonderful 
program and then if we aren’t definite that we have the 
resources within the province to continue the program, it puts us 
in a very difficult position. 
 
So the money is of course set aside. It will be used this year and 
in future years towards early learning and child care. So it still 
goes toward its intended process, but what we need to do is 
build off the resources we have provincially and provide the 
best services that we can for Saskatchewan children and 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Recognizing that the new federal 
government has changed course in this program and that there 
are some monies that at least the two out of the five years 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

monies have been received for, is it the department’s intent to 
build a made-in-Saskatchewan solution, if you like, that would 
plan to use what is available of these reserve money or residual 
monies from the federal government and add some monies from 
Saskatchewan’s own resources in order to move forward at least 
to some extent with an expanded program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — During the whole process of last year 
and a half, two years when there was first the discussion and the 
commitment towards a national child care program, there was a 
great deal of work done in the province of Saskatchewan with 
partners across the province — child care advocates, many 
people who have worked in this field for many years — done a 
lot of research, a lot of work, a lot of planning. There was a 
great deal of work done by the department. 
 
And we put together a plan which we felt was appropriate for 
Saskatchewan and addressed many of the issues that we have 
here, not only just looking to child care in the larger centres but 
also rural Saskatchewan, smaller towns — what are the options 
that work there? — and also in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So being our population, Saskatchewan being what it is — 
we’re spread over a larger distance and we need to be creative, I 
think — we looked at creating part-time spaces. We looked at 
what was needed, whether it was home-based daycare, whether 
it was child care centres. 
 
So we looked at a very comprehensive plan of increasing 
subsidies so that they were deepened and affected more 
families, gave support to families that would still be struggling 
to be able to provide child care and continue to work. Looked at 
a number of issues — capital grants to help with start-up costs. 
That can be pretty restrictive in some areas. And a substantial 
increase in the number of seats in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So when the federal government changed and the commitment 
to the national child care program was changed, we needed to 
kind of reassess where we were, what programs we had, and 
what kind of resources that we had. 
 
One of the things I think is an advantage that has not been a 
waste is all the work that’s been done by the many people right 
across Saskatchewan that have contributed to the overall plan. 
So we have a good plan. We have a good analysis of what’s out 
there in the province of Saskatchewan. We have gathered a 
great deal of information, put together a very good plan. And 
even though the money may not be there, what we will do is 
work with the resources that we have committed so far from the 
federal government and put in place the pieces of the plan as the 
resources are available. So you know it’s not all for naught. 
There’s been some very good work that’s come out of it and I 
think Saskatchewan children will benefit in the long run. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In your answer to the 
previous question, I believe, if I understood it right, that you 
said over the five-year program of the previous federal 
administration that they had committed $146 million to this 
program in Saskatchewan. Can the minister tell me how much 
that the province had committed of their own resources to this 
same program? 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When you look at the ’05-06 budget, 
there would have been 24 million that would have been spent 
on child care. That would have included new space creation, 
subsidies, and also $5 million would have been allocated to 
pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — That’s for that calendar year, not for the 
five-year period? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes, that would have been the ’06-07. 
Sorry. And it was during the last couple of years there’s been a 
major build-out of child care. Now I don’t have five-year 
figures on me. That’s something that we could look at and get 
for you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Just to be clear in the numbers that you just 
quoted me from ’06-07, is that from subvote (LR08), the 
KidsFirst, the early childhood intervention programs and the 
child care facilities? Is that where those numbers came from or 
where are you quoting from, Minister? 
 
[19:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What you will see when you look at 
budgets from the vote (LR03) you will find from the operating 
grant that is where the pre-K money would come from. It would 
be within that vote. 
 
Now we’ve been jumping back and forth, ’05-06 there was 
about $30 million that would have been spent on early learning 
child care and pre-K together — child care and 
pre-kindergarten. You mentioned KidsFirst. That isn’t included 
in any of the numbers I’ve used; that’s separate. It’s been a 
fairly stable number, and it’s Learning vote — what is it? — 08 
would be the KidsFirst. But that’s not included in any of the 
numbers that I’ve been using. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay. Thank you, Minister. So is the 
department then . . . I’m still a little bit unsure as to how close 
to matching the federal commitment that the province was. In 
general terms, was a requirement of this program that the 
province commit similar amounts of money to the 146 million 
over the five years? Was it a 70/30, a 60/40, or was there any 
commitment at all? Was this simply an unconditional grant 
from the federal government to be spent on this project? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well we should only wish that some of 
the money coming from the federal government is 
unconditional. This 146 million was money that was dedicated 
to early learning child care. There was no specific time frame of 
it being spent. It was just designated to that area. 
 
If you look at the . . . You know, if we’re spending an average 
of 30 million a year, over a five-year period, we’re talking 
about 150 million from the province, not including KidsFirst 
and other supports that are out there. So, you know, we’re 
pretty well in the ballpark with matching the grant that the 
federal government had committed. So now what we have is 
just over 40. I think it was 20 and 21 . . . 21.6, something like 
that. So we’re just under $42 million that actually came out of 
the total commitment of 146. 
 
So like I say, what we’ve done is slowed down the rollout of 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

child care and the expansion. And we’ll continue to put it into 
sustainable programs so that there will be a benefit for children 
and families in the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. When we look at 
some of the programs that you talked about, it also leads me on 
to look at some of the SchoolPlus initiatives. And I think that if 
we look at the general concept of SchoolPlus, it’s designed to 
bring various services that children need into one central 
agency, if you like, or one central depository of services so that 
a child gets experiences or services in learning, but they also get 
services potentially from Justice, from Social Services, from 
health care, and things of that nature. Would that be a fair 
description of the SchoolPlus program, or would the minister 
like to add something to the general description of SchoolPlus? 
 
And where I’m leading to this, it seems to me, Minister — 
unless you can point out something differently — that while 
these programs are inter-agency, if you like, in that there are 
dimensions to other agencies being involved in the delivering of 
these programs to children, that basically the budget is coming 
from the Education budget and from the Learning budget, from 
budgets that are part of the foundation operating grant that 
school boards receive. 
 
Is that a fair assessment of who is picking up the financial 
responsibility, or can you direct me to some subvote somewhere 
that would indicate that these other agencies are actually 
contributing to the cost of delivering these very worthwhile 
programs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now while the comments that you made 
. . . And I think your brief explanation of SchoolPlus is 
accurate, and there may be some concern out there that although 
Learning is taking the lead in some of these instances or many 
of the instances, when different departments bring and provide 
the services for the students, they pay for those services. There 
are some shared with the coordination, but in many cases I 
think Learning does take the lead in this. But as I say, other 
departments, when they bring services to that student or to that 
child, they pay for those services whether it would be a social 
worker or a nurse or whatever the situation may be. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: —Minister, I think that’s commendable in 
terms of the programs that are needed. Are these costs part of 
that A minus B equals C formula in terms of the recognized 
costs? I mean part of that formula is that there is a format for 
the recognized costs, and that would include the operational 
costs, the heating costs, the instructional costs, the support staff 
costs, and these sorts of things. Is the actual cost of delivering 
these extra programs under the SchoolPlus program recognized 
so that it becomes a part of that formula that school boards can 
anticipate their grants being based on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Previously when SchoolPlus was first 
developed and initiated, there was a line item that talked about 
SchoolPlus funding. Now what’s happened with the redesign of 
the foundation operating grant is that it has been built in as a 
dollar amount into the basic rate. 
 
Now what I will say to the member is that in many of the 
conversations . . . And this is an area where I’m still learning 
and still getting up to speed on the whole SchoolPlus issue. It’s 

got to be one of the things that I think you hear people comment 
on the most in many forums and in comments when you just 
meet teachers and, you know, school personnel from various 
areas. You know there’s still some uncertainty around 
SchoolPlus. And I know before becoming the Minister of 
Learning and meeting with school boards in our area and in 
others, there was always questions about SchoolPlus and the 
balance that was there. 
 
So I think that’s something that I need to do a bit of work on: 
have a better understanding and make sure that that balance is 
there and that we all understand it better. And the supports that 
are needed to be there for children, whether it’s for an extended 
period or a short period of time, that it’s all something that we 
need to put an effort into and make sure that it works because I 
do believe that the ideal behind it is a very good one. And it is 
something that’s needed. We just have to make sure that it’s 
working well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I share as well the 
point of view that there is a great deal of value in the 
SchoolPlus program, not necessarily universally in every 
setting, but certainly in settings where the community and the 
school environment identifies that these type of programs are 
very important for the children in that school. 
 
But I also . . . One of the concerns there always is, is that you’re 
dealing very often with children who are in some ways broken, 
that need this extra support and the extra help in order to 
succeed and to achieve their objectives in life. But that also 
quite often has to be tied realistically to broken families and 
broken homes that, you know, you just can’t work and fix on 
one part of it without working your way backward, if you like, 
or into more depth into the family environment. And that 
involves and entails a more comprehensive kind of a program 
delivery. 
 
And I guess one of the concerns that I would have is that, are 
we capable of mounting that kind of an initiative, or are we just 
going partway down the way and not really going to succeed 
ultimately because we haven’t dealt with it in enough depth? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well I think you’ve hit a number of 
issues kind of dead on. And not only with the SchoolPlus issue, 
but this was part of the ELCC [early learning and child care] 
program that we had looked at building out when federal money 
was first out there, that there would be family resource centres 
established throughout the province to provide family supports. 
You also have to look . . . and I mean while that’s still in the 
plan, it’s something that is a little bit out in the future, but you 
have to look currently at what there is. 
 
I mean there’s KidsFirst. There’s community schools which 
also involve parents and the community more in the 
development process. There’s also pre-K. In the 
pre-kindergarten classes, there is one day a week that involves 
family and working on the bigger picture instead of with the 
children. So there is a number of things out there. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Is there enough, and is it widespread enough? It’s an area that 
we hope to expand on with the early learning and child care, but 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

it will be slowed down a bit and we’ll continue working with 
the resources we have and through the programs that we 
currently have, whether it’s community schools or KidsFirst or 
SchoolPlus. There’s lots of opportunity out there, and we need 
to expand our capability. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think we all 
philosophically agree with these comments. I guess the question 
is, is who takes the first step and where does the initiative come 
from? Does it come from Learning? Does it then bring in Social 
Services? Does it bring in First Nations? Does it bring in, you 
know, the poverty issues? Does it bring in potential issues 
around drug dependencies and addictions and these sorts of 
things? Because I think everybody agrees that it isn’t a 
single-faceted and a single-dimension challenge and 
opportunity to deal with these things. 
 
So where do you see the Learning component, the Learning 
department and the schools, fitting into this? Are we to be the 
lead in this whole process? And if we are, how does that then 
impact on other departments and commitments from their 
departments and their funding to make this happen? Because it 
can’t continue to be just something that’s somehow put into the 
new operating grants for school boards. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: —Mr. Chair, I think Learning will always 
be involved in this level, whether it’s Learning programs or 
supports to Learning. But I mean, we’ll always be involved in 
one extent or another, whether it’s leading or adding to or 
supporting another community partner that’s taken the lead. 
 
And now maybe I’m being a tad bit idealistic here, but I would 
hope that wherever the need was that there would be someone 
in the community that would step up and that the other partners 
would be there to support. Well maybe that is a little idealistic, 
but you look at other communities. Circumstance arise. It may 
be the local police that have taken the lead in working with 
young people or working with families. It can be other 
community groups. But no matter what the circumstance, 
Learning will be there. I mean, that’s part of our role. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I think it’s clear, Minister, that Learning has 
to be there. And certainly with the commitment on SchoolPlus 
that insofar as the impact on these programs are involving the 
children when they’re in our custody in schools, we have to be 
there. The question is, is if that we acknowledge that these 
conditions for these children are multi-dimensional, 
multi-faceted, and if they don’t reach back to the family or the 
environment outside of school, that they’re highly likely to fail, 
that someone has to take the initiative. 
 
And Learning can say, well we’ll wait until the Social Services 
takes the initiative or until Justice takes the initiative or until 
Health takes the initiative. But clearly someone has to take the 
initiative. 
 
And if we just wait idealistically or not for a community 
volunteer organization of some sort to say something needs to 
be done here . . . how can we draw all these various agencies 
together in order to develop a concrete plan? . . . is a pretty 
inefficient way of delivering programs. 
 
So I’m wondering. Do you see the Department of Learning as 

being the lead in this situation, that there is a responsibility to 
bring these other departments and agencies into the program? 
Or are you just going to let it happen by spontaneous 
combustion? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — If the member will kind of think back a 
couple of years, I mean, it’s been fairly consistently that 
community schools have increased. We’re now at 100 
community schools throughout the province, and that’s 
important. It’s important to draw in families. It’s important for 
the children and for the families to have those schools where 
they’re located. 
 
Also you’ve got to look at SchoolPlus and also the RICs 
[regional intersectoral committee] that coordinate regionally 
many of the programs. We will never stand back, I don’t 
believe . . . I mean that’s Learning. I mean Learning’s a huge 
part of any child’s life. The school system is important, and 
they have contact with children. We will never, I mean, 
discount the support that we get from community partners, but 
learning will always be there, will be one of our roles. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I appreciate you seeing learning in 
a leadership role, if you like, in terms of the issues facing the 
children that we serve. The department has I believe made the 
commitment that they’re going to endeavour to increase the 
ratio of financial support to schools from the provincial 
government. You’ve made the commitment to people in the 
agriculture sector I think pretty clearly, and I believe that there 
is a general commitment to increasing the percentage of 
participation from the provincial government to the funding of 
the cost of delivering programs to schools. 
 
Is that increased level of commitment going to recognize that if 
we’re going to take this leadership role in providing these 
increased services to children and we’re going to take the lead, 
and it might not be that we’re going to have the appropriate 
amount of funding coming from these other agencies, is the 
department envisaging that there will be the increased funding 
that’s required in order for schools to fulfill this mandate of 
greater leadership and initiatives in this area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When you look at the commitment and 
you talk about the different programs, maybe putting a bit more 
of a dollar value to them — when you talk about community 
schools, I mean, we’re talking about just under $13 million that 
went into community schools. We’re talking about 14 million 
that went into SchoolPlus, 5 million that went into pre-K, and 
also fifteen and a half million that went into shared services. 
 
Also the department, when you look at diversity issues, you’re 
just under $50 million, which can include many behavioural 
issues. And I know the other partners put a fair bit into families 
and into family issues that they deal with. So I don’t think it’s 
being ignored by any means by anyone. And it will be an area 
that we will continue to invest money and to invest in services 
for families and children and the bigger picture. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, we talked a 
bit earlier about the regional offices and the fact that you see 
them as supporting the local school programs in their territory. 
Do you see a role for the regional offices in this whole area of 
supporting the schools on these kinds of initiatives? 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — They already are. That’s part of what 
they do. They’re the department’s final eyes and ears in the 
communities and in the regions. They sit on the RICs, they sit 
on community councils and community organizations. That’s 
what part of the reason why they’re there. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Switching back a bit 
to the regional offices, what is the typical component of 
personnel that are in a regional office? And what’s their general 
job descriptions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The average would be about 6 to 12 
people. You would have your regional director, superintendent, 
superintendent of curriculum, ELCC folks. Also First Nations, 
Métis, and admin. Now depending on the nature of the office, 
where it was located, you know, it may not be one of each, may 
be some overlap in the larger offices. But 6 to 12 folks. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Minister, 
that completes the questions I had for this evening. Thank you 
very much for your candour. My colleague, the member from 
Biggar, has some questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and your officials. My question revolves around the 
closure of the Radisson school. As you’re well aware that your 
government brought in the school board amalgamation and 
imposed a two-year moratorium on closure of schools. But 
because the Radisson school was in the process of being closed, 
your moratorium did not apply to it and the old Saskatoon West 
School Division went ahead and closed the school in any case. 
 
Of course the citizens, the parents of Radisson school were very 
upset and still are. And they’ve worked very hard to keep that 
school open. They began busing their students, the majority of 
their students from Radisson at their own expense to the 
Maymont School rather than going to the Borden School. I 
understand now that they have applied to your department, to 
your government, to have the boundary changed. I understand 
Radisson is just a few miles inside Prairie Spirit School 
Division, and they want to apply to go into the Living Sky 
School Division where they would get funding to have their 
children bused from Radisson to Maymont School. 
 
Could you give me an update of the status of that situation and 
any other developments that may have arisen since I spoke to 
the community last. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — One of the things that I will remind the 
member opposite is that, I mean, there’s a reason that boards are 
elected locally, so that they know their community, they know 
the services that they need in their area, and they have that 
autonomy. And I mean, that’s important. It’s important to all of 
the divisions. It’s important to the communities that they’re 
involved in. So it’s a local decision as to how and where 
services will be provided. 
 
So we can go back. I mean the Radisson decision was made by 
the board before the amalgamation. The boundary commission 

drew the boundaries for the new divisions. Now I understand 
that there has been a request made for review. This will be 
something . . . The department has sent back a letter saying that 
this is something that have to be reviewed by the boundary 
commission. I mean it’s not anything that’s done quickly, so we 
will look at having that done. But there’s no guarantees as to 
what the outcome will be. So yes, we’ve received the letter, and 
yes, it’s been responded to. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Could you help me with the process? The 
boundary commission has the authority to change the 
boundaries. What would be the time lag for the decision, and 
those types of issues? How will this be resolved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What the member would do is, if you 
have a look at The Education Act, there is duties and powers of 
the Educational Boundaries Commission. And the commission 
will review anything that the minister refers to it. So that’s what 
would happen. 
 
I would refer to the boundaries commission the request. They 
would go through any research studies, inquiries that they may 
wish to and put forward a recommendation to me. And that 
would be the process. That’s how it’s laid out in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Have you referred this matter to 
the boundary commission? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Sorry. It hasn’t been referred yet, but it 
will be. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — What timetable would it be, or what’s the 
schedule of the boundary commission once they have the 
referral from you and how long before they would come up 
with a recommendation? And would this decision be made 
before the new school year this fall? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well I would say not likely by the end of 
the school year, highly unlikely I would think. What’s happened 
is there has been a letter that has gone back to them giving some 
explanation and we’re waiting for a response. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I believe I said before the 
beginning of the next school year. Would this be resolved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well that’s hard to say. But you’re 
looking at from June which is coming up quite quickly, over the 
summer months where quite often with vacation and other 
things not a lot of these type of processes take place over the 
summer. So I would say it’s not likely. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Minister. I hope you understand, 
these people are very concerned. They have spent literally 
thousands of dollars of their own money busing their students. 
And the community of Radisson also has put in considerable 
amounts of money. And hopefully this will be resolved in an 
equitable way. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I just want to make a comment. I mean, I 
hope you realize also, I mean this was a decision that was made 
by the local board before the amalgamations, before the changes 
to the school divisions. So I know it can cause some difficult 
feelings in communities. 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

And I realize that the boards in many cases are charged with 
making difficult decisions. They really do have an 
accountability to the communities that have elected them, that 
have put them on those boards. And I’m sure that the decisions 
that they make are in the best interest of the communities that 
they serve. So thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And good 
evening, Madam Minister. I have a number of areas that I want 
to explore with you tonight and I believe we have about 30, 35 
minutes left. 
 
The first one, Madam Minister, is a situation that you have not 
been involved with because it occurred in the past. As you are 
aware, the province and the school system has been looking at 
the whole area of bullying and harassment on a provincial basis. 
I was involved in discussions with the Eastland Lakes School 
Division immediately after some unfortunate tragedies that 
occurred in that school division in the community of Canora. 
And I was led to believe that a gentleman by the name of Kevin 
Cameron was going to produce a report for the minister of 
Learning — the former minister of Learning. Could you tell us 
whether or not that report has been received? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — While the Department of Learning hired 
Mr. Cameron, the report was more directed towards the 
community, some of the issues within the community, some . . . 
I mean, which is confidential of course, but the report didn’t 
come back to the minister. The report went to the community 
and was used in that context. 
 
The department has used some of the information, or used the 
report to build and strengthen the policy that we have. And my 
understanding is . . . You’re looking confused. My 
understanding is that there is a new policy being put forward, 
and part of that was built out of the report that was developed 
for Mr. Cameron. Sorry, you’re looking way too confused. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well I want to clarify, Madam Minister, or 
your officials need to clarify. My understanding was that the 
Eastland Lakes School Division contracted Mr. Cameron for an 
internal report. I was present when information was in fact 
given to Mr. Cameron, and Mr. Cameron did present a report to 
the Eastland Lakes School Division. 
 
I also was told by the then minister of Learning that Mr. 
Cameron was contracted on a provincial basis because if you 
recall, Madam Minister, the phone lines lit up on talk shows 
immediately after that tragedy in Canora when there were 
parents from across the province complaining about situations 
in schools right from the Alberta border to Manitoba border. 
 
And it was my understanding that Mr. Cameron was contracted 
to prepare a provincial report and to provide guidelines to the 
minister of Learning so that a strategy could be developed on a 
provincial-wide basis to deal with the issue of harassment and 
bullying. Is that not what was actually intended to have happen? 
 
[20:30] 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now my understanding is, is that there 
wasn’t a separate report that was commissioned by Mr. 
Cameron. We used the portion of the report that was not 
confidential and that was part of the basis that was used for the 
department to put together their provincial strategy. 
 
Of course there’s other resources that are drawn into that. You 
look across borders to see what is available in other provinces. 
Also the former minister made this a topic at the Canadian 
ministers of education meetings. So it’s all been put together 
and has been put into a provincial strategy and will be released 
within the next while — short while. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for clarifying 
this. Well I think you understand that this is a very sensitive 
issue across the entire province, and there are parents who are 
waiting very patiently for a long period of time already for a 
response from the Department of Learning on what is the 
strategy. 
 
And I understand from your comments in your last answer is 
that you’re suggesting that a strategy has been developed by the 
Department of Learning using information from Mr. Cameron 
and others to put forward a strategy on how to deal with 
bullying in the province of Saskatchewan. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — If the member opposite has ever gone on 
to the Department of Learning website, the caring and 
respectful school strategy has been on the website with some 
very good information, some very good resources, not only for 
teachers and schools, but parents also. 
 
But this really has brought a focus to the issue of bullying and 
that will be improved on even further with the release of the 
provincial strategy which, as I said, will be shortly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I have looked at the caring and respectful schools 
website. And in fact there are many initiatives at the 
Canora-Pelly level that are . . . schools are in that very program 
and work on that. And there has been a lot of good work done. 
 
And I understand from the teachers’ federation point of view 
that in fact they have conducted provincial-wide seminars to 
inform administrators and others on how to deal with the things 
that needed to be dealt with at the school level, but there’s still a 
need for the provincial strategy. I think that’s what the former 
minister indicated. I don’t have the press releases with me right 
now. But I’m sure that your officials will concur with me that 
there was indeed going to be a provincial strategy and that 
parents are waiting for that strategy. So, Madam Minister, I 
don’t know that I needed another response from you, but I’m 
pleased to see that you have said that there will be a release of a 
provincial strategy to deal with that topic. Thank you. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, my next series of questions are going to 
deal with capital funding, and I know your official, Mr. 
Wagner, is here, and he’ll be able to probably assist. Madam 
Minister, I noticed with a degree of pain in my heart when I 
looked at the estimates that were presented for the Department 
of Learning, when I look at the Department of Learning 
estimates for capital last year and I see that there was 
$26,665,500 allocated for capital in the regular budget and that 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

indeed our supplementary estimates that were presented to us 
here when the budget was presented include an additional 
$10.851 million. So by putting those two numbers together 
you’re looking at a capital budget that exceeded $37 million last 
year. This year the budget has been reduced to 21.8. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, clearly capital costs have increased. 
I’ve spoken in this Assembly, and you’ve heard me speak about 
hospital funding and the fact that a project seven years ago in 
Preeceville, an estimated cost of 4.5 million is now at an 
estimated cost of $10 million. So capital costs have been going 
up. 
 
Madam Minister, how will you deal with the requests from 
school boards for capital funding when you now are going to be 
working with less than $22 million worth of capital dollars, 
when last year you had in excess of $37 million? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — If the member opposite, when you look 
at this year, what we’re trying to do is to move to a more stable 
predictable method of funding. And to have there an envelope 
of 20 million for major capital projects, and that also excludes 
block funding which is about 10 million a year. But we want to 
have that consistent 20 million a year that is used for major 
capital projects. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And the minister, could you tell me where I 
would find the expenditure of 10 million for block funding in 
capital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — You will find this in school capital 
transfers, and for ’06-07 it will show 21.8. And the reason of 
the difference is because — that it doesn’t show the full 30 — is 
because 8 million was advanced into ’05-06 to meet some 
immediate pressures — over-crowding, other issues at La 
Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, also Warman. There’s a number of 
projects that were moved up when the money was advanced 
early. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So, Madam Minister, if I’m to understand 
your response, then the supplementary estimates that are 
presented for the March 31, ’06 year which just concluded, of 
$10.851 million. You’re saying that 8 million of that was 
something for block funding for this year? Could you explain 
by what you meant by that response? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The number would have been net of an 
increase of 14.1 million, and that would be capital funding. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay, Madam Minister, we’ll just leave that 
alone. We’ll assume that in the Estimates document we are 
working with 21.8 million, which I would think you would 
agree that that’s less than last year in capital funding based on 
the supplementary estimates of 10.8 and the 26.6 that is in the 
document. Those totals are more than the 21 million that is 
currently at disposal for Mr. Wagner to use in allocating 
projects. 
 
Madam Minister, could you indicate to the Assembly and to the 
public how many projects both in school construction and in 
renovation, approximately how many projects? The B1s that are 
sent to the department, to the facilities report, how many B1s 
are there before the facilities department right now? 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When you look at the total list, there is 
75 major projects that they’re probably a little over 150 block. 
But the member will know that last Thursday there were 55 
block projects that were approved. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Yes, I heard that announcement, Madam 
Minister, about the projects that were approved. And I was 
wondering if you have a list or do officials have a list of that 
entire release — not available right now but that can be sent at 
an appropriate time — of what projects were approved in the 
province? I would appreciate that. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the largest projects from the now Good 
Spirit School Division, then the Eastland Lakes School 
Division, was for phase 3 of a project at Norquay, in the 
community of Norquay. Phase 1 and phase 2 have been 
completed, and I know that there was . . . I look at a 
government press release of June 21, 2000, where it talks about 
the approval of a provincial government project in Norquay and 
in Canora as well. And it talked about expenditure of monies 
that would allow the first two phases to go on. 
 
Madam Minister, I have received a number of letters and I 
know you have as well or your department has, former minister, 
from people in the community of Norquay, both the former 
Norquay local school board that’s now going to become a 
Norquay council, very shortly I guess in the fall. But they have 
asked that the department . . . Because this is a key project in 
that school division, it was one of their requests that was 
flagged as high priority for the phase 3, which was going to be 
the demolition of a very old section of the Norquay school. It’s 
a facility built in the 1950s. It’s primarily a lab area for 
chemistry, physics, biology, and the like. And that was to be 
destroyed, and new laboratory and some additional classrooms 
would be constructed. 
 
There’s letters from the Norquay local school board, there’s 
letters from the Norquay Chamber of Commerce, the village 
council asking that the government consider funding this 
project. Could you indicate at what level of rating is the project 
at Norquay? 
 
[20:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — As the member may be well aware, 
there’s a pretty very well-defined . . . well a very well-defined 
criteria for ratings and criteria for defining projects and where 
they fall on the list. And for a priority 1, it’s health, fire, 
structural safety, federal-provincial agreements. Priority 1A 
could be health, fire, and structural state safety. Priority 1B; 
health, fire, structural safety on hold. Priority 1C is a 
federal-provincial funding. 
 
Then, you get into priority 2 which is critical space shortages. 
And you look at . . . Priority 3 is structural repair, building 
systems, and building restoration. And there is a priority 4 
which is non-critical space shortages. 
 
When we look at the list, the Norquay High School falls under 
priority 3. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Now, Madam Minister, I know I saw that 
rating scale a number of years ago for the Norquay school, and 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

then I don’t know whether that is still the same rating that I saw 
about three years ago. 
 
The Norquay school is now a K to 12 facility because of course 
the elementary school was closed, and it was all combined into 
one single structure with some additional classrooms that were 
constructed in the early phases. Now phase 3 is asking for . . . 
and I’d ask you to, you know, send one of your officials to the 
school because I have had an opportunity to be in the school, 
and the 1950s laboratory, I think, would rank that project higher 
than a project 3 or a level 3 as you just indicated. 
 
So I am wondering what procedure then should the local 
community follow to bring to the attention of officials at the 
facilities department that this project should be rated higher 
than what you currently rate it. What are the steps that the 
community can do to encourage the department to look at this 
in a slightly different fashion? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I am informed that the Norquay High 
School has been on the priority 3 list for a couple of years, so 
you could be accurate in your having a recollection of that. The 
project has been reviewed a couple of times, but it would not 
. . . I mean it would be possible to have someone go out again 
— one of our officials — and check the project over again to 
make sure that’s the appropriate priority listing for the high 
school. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Just a final question on this capital 
construction. Could your officials indicate when the last 
inspection occurred. When was there a department of facilities 
representative who actually inspected the Norquay school and 
evaluated it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — It was prior to June of last year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I want to turn to a different area which is the new 
funding manual for 2006-07. Madam Minister, I recall my days 
as a school board member when we used to, I think, complain 
about a 28-page document I think it was. Sometimes maybe it 
was 23 pages, but it was a document that the boards of 
education used to receive about, you know, the most recent 
updating of the foundation grant formula. And now I 
downloaded from the website your new document which I think 
is 125 pages or more, and there are some questions that I have 
with regards to some of the very specific sections in this 
document. 
 
Madam Minister, the first question that I want to raise with you 
is regarding shared services. Now shared services has been a 
concept that has been around for a long time, and school 
divisions have used it to deliver services and program in school 
divisions that could not afford it by themselves but were able to 
work collectively to ensure that certain services were provided 
through the shared services allocation of funds. 
 
Madam Minister, I noticed that you still are allocating $17.1 
million to shared services. And I’m looking at B 15. If Mr. 
Steeves is looking for the manual that I’m referring to, I’m sure 
he has that page already identified. You indicate that 17.1 
million is being used for shared services. 
 

And I look at the size of the newly amalgamated school 
divisions. And I look at Good Spirit, which is the one that I can 
probably associate with the best because that’s part of the 
Canora-Pelly constituency. The school divisions that make up 
the Good Spirit School Division were primarily school 
divisions that used to be part of a shared services agreement. 
 
Now can you tell me how the shared services agreement is 
going to work if the Good Spirit School Division, which 
encompasses all of those divisions, has now a single division 
component? Or are you looking at Good Spirit School Division 
joining with — I guess probably — Prairie Valley? 
 
Is this the kind of situation that you’re seeing in shared 
services? Do you expect these extremely large school divisions 
to now create a shared services plan that would encompass 
almost an entire region? Could you clarify how shared services 
is actually going to work for the school divisions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There was a number of the former school 
divisions that had shared service agreements, and there was 
funding within the foundation operating grant that helped with 
that. What has happened with the move and the amalgamation 
into the larger school divisions is that they have been moved to 
the higher rate so that the shared services funding goes to that 
division. 
 
So you still may have shared services within the division, but 
they’re really counted within that school district itself. So the 
funding is there. All have been moved to the higher rate. And 
the shared services funding is still contained within the 
foundation operating grant. And that will be part of the second 
phase of the review of the grant, which will be this year for 
implementation next year. But the rate has been moved to the 
higher amount for the shared services. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I know we just 
have a few minutes left. As I understand your answer, you’re 
saying that the shared services money does not necessarily 
mean that the Good Spirit School Division has to have a shared 
services agreement with another school division. It is within the 
existing school division. As I see your officials are nodding 
their head, so I won’t even ask for an answer. We’ll just 
conclude that that’s correct. 
 
Madam Minister, my final questions here before 9 o’clock deal 
with the changes in the basic rate, page B 3. And I notice that, 
as you’ve indicated, you’ve had the first review of the 
foundation grant formula and you had some elimination of a 
number of factors. And those factors are summarized on page B 
3, and there’s the elimination of the core actualization factor, 
the career development factor, the rental factor, the SchoolPlus 
implementation factor. All of those translated into some dollars 
per student that the basic rate was increased to compensate for 
eliminating those factors. 
 
But one of the factors that just jumped out from the page, 
Madam Minister, is the fact that the elimination of the 
enrolment decline factor allowed you, or your officials have 
indicated that the base rate has changed by 114 for the 
elimination of the enrolment decline factor. Now as I 
understood the enrolment decline factor, what it used to do was 
to compensate school divisions for a large drop in enrolment 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

and it would lessen the pain over a number of years because it 
would slide, there would be a sliding scale to the enrolment 
decline. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, to add $114 to the basic rate of the 
students that are still left in the school division I don’t think 
addresses the concern of enrolment decline. Or did your 
officials or . . . I know there was a larger group that was 
reviewing the foundation grant formula. How did an enrolment 
decline factor, how did your officials arrive at the conclusion 
that compensating for it would be to add a basic rate to the 
students that were still left in the school division? Because the 
school division that now loses enrolment due to a huge drop or 
a huge decline, they don’t get anything. So could your officials 
comment on what was meant by adding that kind of a factor to 
the basic rate? 
 
[21:00] 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now if we go back to the good old days 
when the member opposite was probably more involved in the 
school system and you think of the six- tenths and the way the 
budget planning was done, in that six-tenths of your year was 
really committed by the time you found out your dollars, your 
available funding for the next year. You had pretty limited 
flexibility. 
 
That’s when the enrolment decline factor was built in to offset 
some of those changes when the majority of your budget was 
already over and done with. So there was a need for the decline 
factor at that time. 
 
With the changes in the fiscal year, there is a great deal of, or 
more flexibility in the ability to plan, and you’re budgeting for 
the year so it’s no longer necessary. With the change to the 
fiscal year there’s really no need for that decline factor, the 
enrolment decline factor, to be built into the budget. And the 
external reference committee — and during all the consultations 
and the work that’s been done on these changes — were 
supportive of this. So it’s made some significant changes with 
the fiscal year being altered in the changes to the year. And it’s 
been supported by partners and there’s been a lot of work done 
on it. And I think, all in all, the divisions will find that it’s much 
more appropriate and fits the system that’s used. Well it makes 
. . . it will make, I think, life better when it comes to budgeting 
and planning for your year. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee 
report progress on the estimates for the Department of 
Learning. In fact if the committee is so inclined, I’d be prepared 
to move that we report extreme progress on the estimates for the 
Department of Learning. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the committee report progress on the estimates for 
the Department of Learning. Is it the pleasure of the committee 
to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. So we will recess for a 
moment while the officials for the next department come in, and 
the next department up will be the Department of Environment. 
Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee will come to 
order. We’re considering the estimates for the Department of 
the Environment and the first item is central management and 
services (ER01). I want to welcome the officials. And I’d ask 
the Minister of Environment to introduce his officials, and if 
he’d like to make an opening statement to proceed with that as 
well. So I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I am pleased to 
introduce the officials with me tonight. I have to my left, Lily 
Stonehouse who’s the deputy minister, and to my right Alan 
Parkinson, the associate deputy minister of the compliance, fire, 
and forest division. And then over further left I have Bob 
Ruggles, who’s the assistant deputy minister of the planning 
and risk analysis division. Behind Lily is Dave Phillips, who’s 
the assistant deputy minister of resource and environmental 
stewardship division. Back over behind Bob Ruggles I have 
Donna Johnson, who’s the director of finance and 
administration branch, and right behind me I have Stuart 
Kramer, who’s president of the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority. And I will take opportunity to make a few remarks 
very briefly. 
 
The ’06-07 Environment budget represents an investment of 
over $202 million to promote and protect the environment and 
its natural resources as part of the government’s commitment to 
a green and prosperous economy. While the green strategy has 
not been fully finalized yet, this budget lays a firm foundation 
for its implementation once it is approved. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment’s vision is of a high-quality 
environment and healthy ecosystems in perpetuity which 
sustain social, health, and economic well-being for 
Saskatchewan citizens. It’s a vision that’s achieved through 
work on four goals: reducing risks to clean and healthy 
ecosystems; protecting people, resources, and property values at 
risk from wildfire; providing fair opportunities for the 
sustainable use and enjoyment of renewable resources; and 
sharing responsibility for environmental stewardship. It’s a 
vision that will be achieved through the continued efforts of the 
many women and men who work in the department. 
 
A number of the key initiatives in the department’s performance 
plan were approved for implementation or ongoing 
development. These key initiatives include the green strategy 
framework development, the parks legacy project, the Great 
Sands Hills regional environmental study completion, and 
expanded recycling opportunities in conjunction with 
SARCAN. 
 
I’m pleased and excited to have been given this opportunity to 
serve as the Minister of Environment. I’ve had numerous 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

opportunities already to see the scope of responsibilities in this 
portfolio, from the launch of the new province-wide waste paint 
recycling program to a ban on alcohol in provincial park 
campgrounds on the May long weekend; from the release of the 
province’s first source water protection plan to the renewal of 
the aerial firefighting fleet. 
 
The programs of Saskatchewan Environment and of the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority have real value in 
protecting and managing this province’s environmental and 
natural resources. 
 
I want to say thank you to all of the staff who are part of these 
two organizations and other community organizations that work 
with them. The commitment that we find in the people that are 
involved in this field is outstanding and I really want to say 
thank you to them for their work. So I look forward to 
answering questions from my colleagues opposite. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recognize 
the hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, welcome here 
this evening on this late evening and particularly to your 
officials. I can well imagine and I’ve witnessed the good work 
that your officials have done in the past and would certainly 
appreciate their assistance with our discussions here tonight. 
 
Before I get into any particular questions I would like also to 
make just a few general comments on . . . When the Leader of 
the Opposition first asked me to take on the role of critic of the 
Environment, I was somewhat hesitant. But of course, as you 
well know, Minister, when your leader asks you to do a job, you 
do the job. But I really come to appreciate the vast array of 
issues that the Environment deals with. 
 
It cuts across the piece. In fact it cuts across probably every 
other department within government because it’s the air we 
breathe, the water we drink, the plants and the animals and the 
flora and the fauna, I guess, and so on. But sometimes we as 
individuals, we sometimes forget and we lose perspective of 
where we are in a sense of time in the evolution of this planet 
Earth that we all live on. 
 
And I made some brief reference to an analogy of the evolution 
of the Earth and mankind and plants and animals and so on in 
my budget remarks, but I would like to go back to that just to 
sort of, I guess, set the scene as far as, you know, the context 
we need to look at when we’re talking about the environment. 
 
The environment is something that is ongoing. It’s been around 
for a long, long time, much longer than any one of us have 
walked on the earth, and it will continue to be here for many, 
many, many decades and centuries ahead. And an analogy that I 
came across in some reading that I’ve done really struck me and 
what it’s done is it’s taken approximately 4.5 billion years and 
compressed them into a week. And you know, mankind really 
has only been around on this earth sort of . . . Well Homo 
sapiens arrived at 11:59 and 54 seconds on the sixth day. I 
mean that’s, if you start on Monday, you know, we’re pretty . . . 
We haven’t been on this earth very long. And yet we think we 
are the masters of the earth and the environment, and we are 
doing things that maybe we need to sort of step back a bit and 

take a longer view . . . term view of it. 
 
And I think I sense in society in Saskatchewan and in Canada 
and throughout the western world at least — and probably 
throughout the whole world although I have a very limited 
perspective on world views — that mankind in general is 
beginning to grasp the idea that we better be very careful with 
this planet Earth that we all inhabit because it is fragile. And we 
need to look at the way we are doing things because in the 
analogy that I referred to, they talk about the great . . . The 
splitting of the atom was within the last two one-hundredths of 
a second. If you’re looking at Monday and 12 o’clock midnight, 
it happened right in the last two hundredths of a second. 
 
Another part of the analogy goes something like this. If the 
timeline of the Earth was a mile, the industrial revolution 
occupies the last three hundred thousandths of an inch, and an 
average person’s lifetime is about one one-thousandth of an 
inch. So we’re pretty insignificant when we look at that. So as I 
said, just to sort of put things in context, you know, we need to I 
guess sometimes step back and realize, you know, where we’re 
living. 
 
And it seems to me one of the issues I guess that has driven that 
point home to me is the whole issue of climate change. And I 
know there are varying views on climate change, and is it a real 
issue, and isn’t it a real issue? And I think the majority of 
people would agree that it’s a real issue to the extent of whether 
the forecasts, for the consequences of some of our actions, will 
they be as severe as what’s being forecasted? Well that nobody 
knows. And there are a whole range of forecasts. But I think, I 
think most, many people at least . . . And of course as with any 
other issue, we have the naysayers, but I think most people 
realize that there is something happening to our climate. 
 
Now is that in conjunction with the cyclical things that have 
happened in the past? Absolutely. I believe it is. But I think 
those cycles are at the very least being exaggerated by the 
increased level of greenhouse gases in our atmosphere and 
those sorts of things. And I sense that there are a great number 
of people within our province and within our country who are 
coming to grasp with this whole issue of climate change. And 
that goes back to what I started earlier with my comments. I 
think people are starting to realize that the time we occupy on 
the face of this earth is very limited. But yet through technology 
and the advances in science and mankind’s ability, we have a 
great potential to affect the environment, and so we need to 
look at the things we do in that context. 
 
[21:15] 
 
So, Minister, having said all of that, as I said I just wanted to 
make a few opening comments and what I would propose to do 
here tonight is to perhaps just touch very briefly on a few 
general topics and then a number of my colleagues have some 
specific issues that they would like to raise with you, and we 
will be doing that very shortly. 
 
I have heard you and your government talk about a green and 
prosperous economy for a number of . . . at least two or three 
years now. And last year the former minister of Environment 
started the whole green strategy consultation progress, and there 
was work done I believe the year before that. 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

Minister, I wonder, there was certainly mention of the green 
strategy in the Speech from the Throne, and you made some 
reference to it in your budget remarks. But really when I look at 
the estimates, I see very little as far as the implementation of the 
green strategy, and I wonder if you could just explain where 
that process is at, perhaps identify some items within this year’s 
budget that go directly towards addressing portions of the green 
strategy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that question. This 
budget has a 7 per cent increase in the budget to $202.5 million, 
and it includes money that allows us to continue working on the 
information that we received in the various strategy sessions 
and discussions that took place over the last year that my 
colleague was very much involved with. 
 
And so what we’re doing in this particular budget is 
consolidating that information and putting together the plan 
which we will bring forward. And then that will allow us to go 
forward into the budget planning for next year around specific 
things that may be part of that plan. 
 
But some of the initiatives that are in this year’s budget that are 
integral to what we’re doing, including the parks legacy project 
which we’re working on right now. And this is the 75th 
anniversary of the park system in Saskatchewan, and there are a 
number of areas where we’ll be working there. It includes the 
Great Sand Hills regional environmental study completion, and 
that is a major task which fits with this overall process. 
 
Plus then the various items that we’re dealing with around 
recycling. We have the waste paint, and there’s some other 
areas that we’re working on. Those are some specific things. 
But at the same time, we have been working right across 
government to identify those things which fit with an overall 
strategy, and we have the resources within this particular budget 
to continue that work. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, you had 
mentioned — I believe it was in your budget remarks — that 
there was $1.35 million from your department that was 
dedicated to the Forestry Secretariat, and you had also indicated 
that Environment would be playing a pivotal role. 
 
Out of what budget vote does that $1.35 million come out of? 
And the second part to the question, could you explain the 
relationship between your department and the Forestry 
Secretariat as to what role your department officials will be 
playing within that Forestry Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific budget amount is on page 57 
of the Estimates, and it’s under the heading called forest 
services. And there’s a specific line for the Forest Secretariat. 
So that’s where the financial information is, and basically the 
question around how this all fits together. 
 
I think that what has happened here is that Minister Lautermilch 
was given the task of looking at some specific issues within 
forestry. The Department of Environment remains responsible 
for forestry, and I continue to be the minister of forests if we 
had that category as it relates to the relationships across the 
country. 
 

The staff people who are involved with the management of the 
forests will continue to be located within the ministry of 
Environment, but they will provide crucial information in the 
work that my colleague, Minister Lautermilch, is doing. I’m 
also working with him very well and senior staff are working 
with him as well. So that’s basically how it works. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Good. Thank you for that. I guess when I was 
going through the estimates, I didn’t look at them as carefully 
as I should have because I should have been able to pick that 
part of it up. I notice, Minister, that there is, I believe, over 44.6 
full-time equivalent increase in this year’s budget. That’s a 
fairly significant increase. I wonder if you could explain where 
the new positions are, why the new positions are required, and 
just very briefly where they are positioned within the 
department and what their responsibilities will be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So thank you for that question. There are 
44.6 FTEs [full-time equivalent] as you’ve indicated that are 
included in this budget. 15.9 of the FTEs will support key 
components of the green strategy and help address operational 
pressures, and those are 4 FTEs to enhance the review process 
for oil and gas exploration and development proposals. Two 
FTEs to support the mining and mineral exploration sectors in 
the North, and these are things that are done by conservation 
officers and so they will . . . those two officers, one will be at 
Pinehouse and one at Stony Rapids. There’ll be 7.9 FTEs in fire 
management, and these are primarily associated with the new 
aerial fleet that we have. And then there’s two FTEs that are 
dedicated to building capacity, to meet the duty to consult 
issues with First Nations and Métis people. 
 
The parks program shows an increase. And there’s a note at the 
back of the Estimates book, I think it’s on page 167. And this 
adjustment essentially reflects the number of staff that are 
actually hired each year based on visitor demand for services. 
So it’s people that have been employed other years, but they 
hadn’t been listed in this FTE complement. And there are 
internal transfer of five staff from revolving funds to 
department programs, and that accounts for the final tally. 
 
So if you have any specific questions about any of those, I’d be 
happy to answer them. But that’s the overall complement. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for the information. I guess 
the only question I would have at this particular time — and 
I’m sure, through the course of our deliberations in the 
upcoming few weeks, we will be perhaps, we’ll be coming back 
to some or all of these — is first of all, I guess, are these 
positions . . . Have you filled these positions? And that would 
be one question. 
 
And secondly, if you could just expand on those 7.9 positions in 
fire management, I just would like a bit more information on 
those, particularly those 7.9 FTEs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The 7.9 FTEs in fire management, that 
relates to the new aerial fleet, and so it would be pilots and 
airplane mechanics. And they’re in the process right now of 
hiring those people. So that’s the status right now. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that information. At this 
time, I have a number of my colleagues that have some 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

questions. And I will be turning them over to the member from 
Rosetown . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Elrose, sorry. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, 
Minister, and your support staff for being here fairly late this 
evening and not watching the hockey game. 
 
I was quite interested in my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood’s illustration of timelines. And I’m not 
sure whether he’s right or wrong or not, but my calculations are 
that if his numbers were anywhere near right, the current 
government has about a zillionth of a millimetre of time left to 
govern, for whatever that’s worth. 
 
Actually my first questions are with regard to chronic wasting 
disease, and rather than get into a lot of details perhaps I could 
just ask you, Mr. Minister, for an update. And if there are 
questions arising out of that update, I will follow with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the update that you are 
interested in is that Saskatchewan’s chronic wasting disease 
control strategy is consistent in part of the national chronic 
wasting disease control strategy. And in the year 2005, 4,534 
deer heads and 48 elk were submitted for testing. Thirty-six 
new positives were detected: 26 mule deer and 10 white-tailed 
deer. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay. Those were some of the numbers. 
In fact you went so quickly, I didn’t get all of them down but I 
will . . . I got the 36 positive test, 26 mule deer and 10 
white-tailed deer. 
 
I’m assuming then that there were no elk that tested positive, 
and then my questions that arise out of that answer would be, 
what does your department consider to be the density of the 
problem now as compared to when it first arose? Do you have 
any idea as, you know, is the disease getting less prevalent but 
spreading over a larger geographic area? Or is it still pretty 
much confined to the regions where it was initially discovered? 
Do you see progress being made? Like, out of 1,000 deer, are 
the numbers of positive cases fewer or greater? And again, if 
you would just comment on the geographic area being covered. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that the situation is that we 
still in the province have a low rate of occurrence with about 
100 cases over the last number of years in 27,000 samples. But 
we have identified more areas. So there are six areas in the 
province as of the records last year. So that does show that it’s 
spreading. But the incidence in the samples taken is about the 
same. So there’s not increasing in that population. But what 
we’re doing is following the advice that we got from the expert 
panel and responding as problems are identified. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Are you able to tell me what areas these 

— you said six areas, six or seven — six areas or seven areas 
are? And perhaps can you categorize them as the most serious 
areas to the least serious areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m happy to try to provide this 
information for you. And basically there are six areas as I’ve 
identified. The worst, if we can put it that way, or the one where 
there’s the largest prevalence, is along the South Saskatchewan 
River near Saskatchewan Landing. And the least is east of 
Kindersley near D’Arcy. And the other places involved are the 
Manitou Sand Hills south of Lloydminster, the Bronson forest 
area near St. Walburg, west of Nipawin near Love, and an area 
right around Empress, Alberta-Saskatchewan . . . I guess it’s 
Empress, Saskatchewan but it’s right there on the 
Alberta-Saskatchewan border. So those are the six areas. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay thank you. That’s very much 
appreciated. Moving to a somewhat different area, you gave me 
some numbers with regards to chronic wasting disease. Can you 
outline for me what your department does with regards to a 
census on wildlife overall? Do you calculate the number . . . I 
guess, what species do you calculate the numbers of so we 
know how many? Obviously I would think you wouldn’t do 
rabbits, but I would imagine you might do moose. And so could 
you just say what you do, how often you do it, and what trends 
you can identify as a result of these census. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question and I will try 
to go carefully here so that you can get this information. 
Basically what happens is the department does sampling in 
selective areas and then extrapolates that to provide a 
province-wide population. And basically the estimate that I 
have of the winter population is as of 2001 in most areas, but 
there hasn’t been that much change, although I do have an 
estimate for whitetail deer as of, I guess, it would be two 
winters ago. 
 
And that number for whitetail deer is 300,000. For mule deer, 
it’s 36,461; for elk, 14,429; moose, 43,244. For barren ground 
caribou, it’s 776,000; woodland caribou, 3,510; pronghorn 
antelope, 13,506; and black bear, 35,000. So I think that’s the 
information you were interested in, but that gives you a bit of a 
sense across the province. I’ve used very definite numbers, but 
those are estimates based on extrapolation of samples of much 
smaller areas. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll hold you 
to those numbers if you can tell how many hair I have on the 
top of my head. I just missed one number. After the caribou, 
you had one species and I missed that. If you’d repeat that, I 
just want to get that in these numbers. The other questions I’d 
asked is, what can you extrapolate from that as to where the 
numbers are growing, where the numbers are being maintained, 
or where perhaps populations are diminishing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. The number that you were 
wondering about was woodland caribou and that’s 3,510. And 
that species is actually not in a position where people are 
allowed to hunt it across Canada because it is one that I think all 
parts of the country are concerned about. 
 
The population of white-tailed deer in the forests are basically, I 
guess, doing fine. There is not a concern there. The pronghorn 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

antelope number, that’s probably about 60 per cent of an 
optimum population. So that is one that people are concerned 
about that we should end up having more pronghorn antelope. 
As far the elk and the moose population, I think it’s the mule 
deer and the moose population down in the southern part of the 
province is increasing. But basically there isn’t a concern I 
don’t think about the populations other than the woodland 
caribou and the pronghorn antelope. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — All right. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Minister, for that information. There are some areas where the 
walleye populations are more sensitive, and I guess I’ve been 
doing some background work here to find out what I should be 
telling my constituents who are concerned about some of these 
specific areas. And the fact that you do your counting . . . You 
know, the last significant count was in 2001 or whatever. And 
they’re concerned that decisions are being made without 
knowledge of where the numbers are at the current time. 
 
Can you tell me what your policy is, say, with regards to the . . . 
You mentioned the Saskatchewan Landing. That’s not an area 
where I did hear a concern, but it has been an area of concern, 
and there’s been some management practices that have been 
undertaken in that area. Would your department, on an annual 
basis or a frequent basis, study population numbers in those 
sensitive areas, whether they deal with chronic wasting disease 
or, in my area, suddenly there’s an elk population where there 
didn’t use to be an elk population? Now I’m hearing of moose 
in places where there didn’t use to be moose. How do you 
handle these changes, and how current are you in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. One of the questions that you 
asked was about the elk and the moose. It is identified based on 
the reports from conservation officers, from local farmers and 
ranchers, from the various conservation groups, and all that 
information is collected and examined. So that’s a general way 
that populations are identified. 
 
In that Saskatchewan Landing area, they have done some 
specific aerial surveys in the wintertime. One of the challenges 
in southwestern Saskatchewan is that you can really only do the 
aerial surveys if there’s a sufficient snow cover. And so some of 
the winters there hasn’t been enough snow to do that. But they 
have done that specifically in that Saskatchewan Landing area. 
 
For moose and elk, there is I think an elk hunt that’s going to be 
allowed this fall along the river, and there’ll be a moose hunt 
available up near Kindersley. And that’s something that’s new 
this year because of the counts and because of the information 
that has been collected and identified in that area. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Minister. I had . . . now I’ll 
get into some of the specifics of the calls I had, and you’ll 
understand why being an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] is challenging . . . because I had one call from a 
constituent east of Rosetown, in the Harris area where there’s a 
forested area, who said the numbers have just gone crazy. There 
were grain piles out. There was huge damage, and he says Sask 
Environment has no idea of how many deer there are. They say 
that they don’t count them; they don’t know. He was giving me 
examples of how many deer had been hit by automobiles and, 
you know, these were provincial statistics. I think it was 11,193 
for the year 2005 and just basically said that the whole situation 

was out of control. 
 
And then I had a call from a constituent on the other side of 
Rosetown, west of Rosetown in the —I think it was — in the 
Fiske area, who said the same thing. Sask Environment has no 
idea how many deer, but they have, you know, they have a 
special hunt, and you can get special tags. And this person 
thought there wasn’t as many deer as perhaps Sask 
Environment thought. 
 
So I guess my confusion is, constituents are concerned, and 
they’re suggesting that Sask Environment doesn’t really have a 
handle on what’s going on. And in some cases, perhaps there 
should be tighter control of deer population, in other areas 
perhaps not. And I, you know, I’m just an observer who doesn’t 
have the facts or the ability to gather the facts, and we’re 
counting on you to enlighten us in that regard. 
 
[21:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate the questions and the specific 
concerns. I think we always need to remember that the overall 
population of animals does relate directly to the winterkill — 
how many have survived the winter — so that we can tell over 
the decades how that works. The other thing that is quite 
interesting is that the hunter success rate, in other words how 
many animals are actually obtained, is kept, and the records go 
back many decades as well so that there are trends that can be 
identified. 
 
Now the specific questions you asked about the Harris area, I 
think it is clear that in that area there is an overabundance of 
animals and so that has been identified. I think the other 
question related to the other question you got, that is an area 
where they actually allowed some extra hunting to deal with the 
chronic wasting disease, and so there probably is a reduction in 
the number of animals in that area. 
 
But part of the goal is to deal with some of these specific issues. 
Obviously the identification of chronic wasting disease changes 
then some of the harvesting practices in a particular area. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one area 
left to cover, but I do have a subsequent question as a result of 
that response. And that is, what efforts is your department 
undertaking to communicate with landowners and residents in 
this area so they understand what’s going on? 
 
You know, I have landowners who are saying, we don’t know if 
we should allow hunters in or not. We don’t know if the 
problem is as serious as Sask Environment says it is. Or we 
wish more hunters would come, but Sask Environment only 
allows so many licenses to be issued in our area, and it’s not 
enough. So what are you doing to communicate, specifically in 
these sensitive areas or troublesome areas, with the people who 
live there and have to deal with problems — the traffic, the 
hunters, the damage, that sort of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it’s nice when I have a specific 
answer to a very specific question. And for the second year in a 
row, last year and now this year in April, there have been public 
meetings in Leader, Lucky Lake, Cabri, Kindersley, D’Arcy, 
and then Love over on the east side to review the 2005 program 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

and what’s happened with wildlife but specifically the ones that 
are affected by chronic wasting disease and then also to get 
local community recommendations about what should happen 
this year. Also I have in my hand the Hunters’ & Trappers’ 
Guide for this year, and it will provide some of that information 
as to what’s new this year, and that’s where some of the 
information about new or increased populations which allow for 
hunting in zones where there hasn’t been hunting before. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Minister, and I might suggest 
for the current year that you have an information meeting in 
Harris because I understand that there is some real concern 
there. 
 
The final area that I want to touch on is I just want to know if 
there’s been any changes in policy. And perhaps you could just 
outline quickly what the department’s policy is in dealing with 
what has been determined environmentally sensitive land or 
critical wildlife habitat areas. Have there been any changes in 
policies? How do you deal with transfer of land, with usage of 
land in areas, and how does that differ between Crown land and 
privately owned land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think there has been a change in 
the overall policy around some of the critical habitat for 
wildlife. There are some things that we have been doing around 
conservation lands, and there was an announcement made at the 
Ducks Unlimited dinner not so long ago that related to how 
conservation groups can participate in dealing with 
conservation land in the southern part of the province. So there 
is some of that. But if you have some specific questions maybe 
I can answer them. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Yes, let’s use a few for instances. If a 
company wanted to set up and work out a deal with SaskPower 
for a wind power generation project, which I know is on the 
agenda of the government, you know, what impact would it 
have if an area that was seen as a suitable site for wind power 
also had some land that was designated as a critical wildlife 
habitat area or environmentally sensitive area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is that that particular 
land where the project might be located would go through an 
assessment process. For example, for some of the land that is 
critical, there is a general rule of thumb that up to four oil wells 
are allowed to be drilled on a quarter for example. And 
probably the impact of a wind project might be less than that 
and so . . . but I’m not totally certain, but I think it would be 
assessed on a case-by-case basis, but it wouldn’t something that 
totally stops a project. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Minister. Further to that, 
could you tell me whether land that has been deemed 
environmentally sensitive land or critical wildlife habitat 
protected land is changing status? 
 
As I mentioned you know, the wildlife numbers have changed 
in my area for instance. There is I think more wildlife now than 
there has been. Some of the status is regarding you know, soil 
quality and that sort of thing. Other has to do with species that 
inhabited those areas. If someone has land that is designated to 
be, you know, an environmentally sensitive area or critical 
wildlife habitat area and it was Crown land or even private land 

in that kind of an area, does that ever change status? Like, are 
you pulling land into those categories that weren’t there 
previously, and are you releasing lands that were in those 
categories given contemporary circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to your question is that 
we do have the RAN program, the representative area network, 
and that increase in habitat in a particular area, if it’s — say — 
the mixed grassland area, the land that we’ve taken out would 
probably only be for treaty land entitlement purposes where we 
have to satisfy some of those particular agreements that have 
been put into place, land that’s being added to representative 
area networks as primarily with third parties whether it’s 
conservation easements that private people have, or some 
purchase and then conservation easements by some of the 
conservation groups. 
 
But as a government or as Saskatchewan Environment, I don’t 
think there’s been a dramatic increase, and there hasn’t been a 
decrease. So it’s kind of pretty well the same, but there may be 
more activity by third parties to increase the habitat as part of a 
recognition of preserving the prairie, for example, in your area. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If land is taken 
out of the RAN, I believe you call it, to go into a treaty land 
entitlement deal, what steps are you able to take to ensure that 
the quality of that environment is sustained? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that question 
is that we have been able to negotiate land management 
agreements with some of the First Nations that take over the 
property, and on a general basis they provided good 
stewardship of the land as it relates to these particular 
properties. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, just have a couple of quick 
questions. I want an update on . . . familiar with the lagoon at 
Blackstrap Provincial Park. Can you give me the status of 
where that’s at right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the update is this, is that the lagoon 
is closed at Blackstrap, and it was located in a inappropriate 
spot for long-term use. The department or the park, the 
Blackstrap Provincial Park there had about 10 percent of the 
usage of that lagoon, and then the resort villages of Thode and 
Shields had the other usage of it. The parks obviously would be 
interested in any new project that might come up, but right now 
that particular lagoon is closed. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With other parks I 
believe you’ve upgraded over the years, have you upgraded 
lagoons at Cypress Hills Provincial Park, Pike Lake, Shell 
Lake? Have you upgraded them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is yes, there are 
upgrades that are happening across the system. And the answer 
also is at Blackstrap that in a cooperative fashion and in a cost 
effective way, if there was a project that would work there, the 
department would be interested. 
 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that they 
were originally going to have a meeting set up with your 
officials in the end of March, and then there was a change with 
ministers, and I’m not sure how that meeting is going. I think 
they were going to contact you later on with that, but I know 
there was a letter sent to the other minister. 
 
And I know they are interested in trying to work something out 
because they feel that that lagoon can be used. And they feel the 
park even uses more than 10 percent. I know you have that 
breakdown, but they’ve talked to the people that are hauling out 
of there, and they say they haul a lot more out of the park than 
probably than 10 percent. So they feel that it would probably 
pay to spend some money on the lagoon. 
 
Also if you’re familiar with Shields and Thode, they are 
growing, quite a bit being close proximity to Saskatoon. At one 
time there wasn’t even hardly any residents there, and it’s 
grown quite substantially, and I think it’s going to keep 
growing. Every year there’s a few more houses going there. So 
I would urge you to reconsider to spend some money there. You 
haven’t spent anything in there since it was built in 19 . . . I 
think it was built in 1970 or ’71. So you got a lot of use out of 
it, but there was never any money spent on it over the years, and 
I think if there would have been some minimal money spent on 
it you probably could be still maintaining it. 
 
So I will urge you to, if you could, meet with the town officials 
to see if you can work it out because right now I think it’s very 
cost prohibitive for them to either haul it to Hanley or the other 
one would be up around Saskatoon, the lagoon. And it’s getting 
pretty cost prohibitive. Especially it may hinder the growing of 
that town. So with that, if you can maybe give me other little 
information . . . it’s not really a question. It’s more of a 
statement, but if you can give me more of an update if you are 
interested in possibly doing some upgrading there or meeting 
with the two townsites on it. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think it is clear that the department is 
willing to meet with the people from those communities to try 
and sort out what would make the most sense in a cost-effective 
way to deal with the sewage in that area. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. For the minister, my question is 
how many FMA [forest management agreement] holders do we 
have in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are four FMAs in the province. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — And of those FMAs, what per cent does 
Weyerhaeuser hold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — 50 per cent. They have two. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — And what per cent of the Saskatchewan forest 
would that engulf? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Somewhere between 60 and 70 per cent of 

the total FMAs. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — What is the lifespan of these FMAs? How 
many years are they over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The normal course is that they are 20 
years long with a renewal at 10 years, in other words an 
evaluation at every 10 years. And then they continue from that 
point and on, but it’s sort of renewed on a 20-year basis. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Okay. Under these FMAs, are there conditions 
under which an FMA holder can forfeit their FMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — And what are these conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think in each FMA there are different 
clauses that relate to the specific forest. Some of them have to 
do with the usage of the forests. Other times it has to do with 
some of the facilities that are there. But you’d have to go into 
each FMA and see what kinds of things. So if there are some 
specific questions, maybe I can answer that. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Okay. The one I’m specifically interested in — 
I hear from the foresters, but I haven’t got any information on 
— is the use-it-or-lose-it clause. And how does that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the question you asked is . . . There 
is a colloquial phrase like you described about use it or lose it. 
But effectively how it works is that if there’s an amount of fibre 
within that FMA that’s not being used by the holder of the 
FMA, it can be assigned to someone else. And in that process I 
suppose ultimately if you didn’t use any of the fibre, it could all 
be assigned somewhere else. But practically it’s that kind of a 
clause that says that the fibre needs to be used. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — You know, I’m wondering in particular to the 
Weyerhaeuser FMA and if the sale doesn’t go through, what’s 
going to take place with these FMAs? And how are we handling 
them? Do they just sit there? Does Weyerhaeuser still have 
control of them? Where do we go with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to your question is that 
the company has the obligation to manage the forest whether 
the mill is operating or not. But if they’re not actually using the 
fibre, then it will be assigned to some other place or to some 
other use. 
 
There is, I think, a specific clause in the Prince Albert FMA, 
which is a 24-month clause, so that if the mill was not operating 
for 24 months, then certain steps are triggered around the FMA. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Now along with these FMAs, they have to 
submit a cut plan and that cut plan is yearly, I believe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. There’s an annual operating plan 
which includes the cut, but it also includes management of other 
parts of the forest. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — If someone was to move into the forest now 
and make an offer, what’s the process to obtain an FMA? 
 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the normal course, if somebody came 
in to take over the Prince Albert FMA, they would assume all of 
the responsibilities under that FMA and continue it forward. It’s 
possible that it would start with a new 20-year period, but the 
responsibilities would be part of that takeover of that whole 
area. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Okay. So if somebody doesn’t buy 
Weyerhaeuser but a logging firm comes in from Ontario or 
wherever and applies for an FMA, how would that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If a logging company came from some 
other place or even from somewhere in Saskatchewan and 
wanted to access the fibre in a particular area, if there was no 
FMA there now, the first step is the creation of a land use plan 
which then identifies which areas can be harvested and which 
areas cannot and also sets out some of the things that need to be 
protected. And once that’s been established, then it’s possible to 
design the FMA to allow for the management and harvesting of 
the forest. And so . . . But that would be in an area where there 
isn’t an existing FMA. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve got a few more 
questions. And I’d like to go to agroforestry. It was a big item 
announced in the Speech from the Throne: 10 per cent in 20 
years. And I’m wondering how and when is this going to be 
implemented, seeing it wasn’t in the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The agroforestry initiative is managed out 
of the Industry and Resources department in government 
because it relates primarily to private agricultural land that is 
used to grow trees. The minister of forests has the responsibility 
primarily for the forests on provincial Crown land, and 
therefore the FMAs and the other things that you’ve been 
asking about. But that agroforestry program is being developed 
in the Industry and Resources department, and it is a long-term 
plan of the government. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — I’m wondering though because it isn’t in the 
budget, where you’re getting the financing from because is this 
not going to cost to implement this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the existing costs now are in 
Industry and Resources in their planning and development area. 
Ultimately if it’s on private property — private agricultural land 
— the costs would be there as part of the business, that people 
are involved in another form of agriculture in a way. And that’s 
where the costs would be. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — I’m wondering where the Department of 
Environment fits in with these trees. Are we going to be careful 
that they don’t get mixed in with general forest because they are 
hybrids or what’s the situation there? What role is the 
Department of Environment playing in this new agroforestry 
industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The research around this particular project 
. . . and obviously with agroforestry the research is very local. 
In other words, it relates to the particular climate and place in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Much of that has been happening through the forestry centre in 
Prince Albert. The department’s foresters and others who are 

involved with silviculture, the growing of trees, are, you know, 
involved in providing advice around that. I don’t think there’s a 
big concern about the species of the trees. Primarily they’ll be 
planted in the areas of Saskatchewan where trees have been 
cleared to farm, and it’s really a mixed forest, and so there 
probably wouldn’t be too much of a problem. We don’t think 
that there’ll be a situation where they can out-compete the local 
trees that are there now. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for those answers and 
thank you to your associates, and I’ll now hand over to Mr. 
Hart. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I must admit that some 
evenings when there’s 157 channels on the satellite dish and 
really nothing on, I do watch some of the other legislatures in 
Canada, particularly Ontario and BC [British Columbia]. And 
in some other provincial legislatures they use . . . members’ 
names is allowed in committees. So perhaps we may need to 
look at some rule changes to allow a bit of more informality in 
our committee structure. But at this point in time we operate 
with the members’ constituencies. 
 
Minister, last year there was an addition of 9 full-time 
equivalents in the Department of Environment, and one of those 
positions was to work on this whole issue of cottage lease fees 
within parks. We have Bill 48 before us, and it’s in adjourned 
debates, and it’s proposing a new structure of lease fees from 
the one that was proposed back in 2004. The one in 2004 was 
based on the fair-value assessment system, and it caused great 
concern to many cottage owners within our parks. And we 
heard reports of some lease fees going up by 300 per cent, and 
so I believe your predecessor undertook to review the whole 
situation, and now we have Bill 48 before us. 
 
I wonder if you could explain the process between back in 2004 
and what we have before the legislature now, what the process 
of your department was as far as consultation, who was 
involved, and — I realize this may be somewhat unorthodox but 
— perhaps explain a bit of what’s proposed in Bill 48 as far as 
the fee structures. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What happened was that a committee was 
created with some of the cottage owners. There were five of 
them that were working together with people within the 
department, and there were at least a dozen meetings and also 
some very thorough review of the fees that are being charged 
now as well as an analysis of the services that were available in 
each park where some of these cottage subdivisions were. And 
it’s that information that is allowing us to go forward. 
 
And the plan is as set out in the Act to look at what are the 
services provided and have a fee developed that’s unique to a 
park and then deal with the land itself in some fashion. And so 
it will be divided up into two parts, and so we’re moving 
forward with that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. You mentioned that there 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2006 

was a dozen meetings. If I recall back in summer of 2004, I 
believe there was meetings with cottage owners in all of the 
parks. Are those the meetings you were referring to? How many 
meetings were held with the committee of five? 
 
You mentioned there was a committee of five struck. How 
many meetings were there over what time frame? And where 
did the meetings take place? Just to get a sense of . . . I guess 
what I’m looking for is a sense of involvement from the cottage 
owner representatives in the process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Meetings took place over 18 months. 
They didn’t include the meetings in the summer of 2004 
because those were the public meetings. But the cottage 
owners’ groups — the 12 different ones — selected five people 
to be part of the meetings. Most of the face-to-face meetings 
took place in Saskatoon. About half of the 12 meetings had an 
element of people who could come in by conference call from 
other locations. But the 12 meetings included that smaller group 
that was selected by the cottage owners’ associations. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, just so I clearly understand the 
process, you said there was approximately 12 meetings with the 
committee of five. And most of these meetings took place in 
Saskatoon, and there was some that took place by video 
conferencing and that sort of thing. Were there other people 
making presentations to the meetings on various aspects of this 
issue, or was it basically the committee of five with department 
staff looking at the issue and working on a resolution to this 
issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the five representatives of the 
12 different subdivisions were the main participants in the 
meetings, and then they would report back to their people 
across the province, and that was the normal procedure. The 
information and expertise, much of that came from people who 
have been running the parks for many years. They would 
provide information as to what services were available, what 
the fees were, that kind of thing. But I think the participation 
from the cottage owners reps was also very valuable in 
attempting to look at all facets of the particular situation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, could you tell me when the last time 
your department officials met with the committee of five. As 
you said there was a series of meetings just to get a sense of . . . 
approximately when did the first meetings take place, and how 
regular were they? And when was the last time your officials 
met with the committee of five? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the last meeting as I described 
would have been in late February of this year, and the final 
report from that committee came at the end of March, so that’s 
only about three weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. Thank you for those 
questions. I see our hour is getting quite late. I have quite a 
number of issues that I would like to discuss with you and your 
officials. But I think we have covered some ground here 
tonight, and I think we’re all about ready to see this day end. 
And we’ll let the House Leader make his appropriate motion, so 
we can all have a good evening. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’d like to thank the colleagues for 

their questions, and I think we’ve answered most of them in an 
interesting enough fashion that people will have stuck with us 
right through the hockey game, although I’m not sure. I’d also 
ask leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Hon. Minister of the Environment 
has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I am very pleased to introduce in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Don Taylor who is with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities. And he is a very faithful 
attender of many meetings related to environmental issues in 
Saskatchewan and provides leadership in SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] as we work 
forward with many of these issues. And so I would ask all 
members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Now moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is the committee in agreement with that 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report progress and ask for leave 
to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — And when shall the committee sit 
again? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next day of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And while I’m on my feet, I’ll move that this House 
do now adjourn. 



April 25, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this House do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House does stand adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:26.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1367 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1370 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................1371, 1377 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1373 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


