


















































Hansard: April 24, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 45A  MONDAY, APRIL 24, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1273 
 April 24, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present to the Assembly today regarding a provincial 
children’s hospital in the community of Saskatoon. I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, you petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of individuals from the city of Saskatoon on 
behalf of their request for a children’s hospital. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding a children’s hospital in Saskatoon. This is not 
the first day that this petition has been heard. It’s been heard for 
a number of weeks. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon. I 

so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present stressing the need for a provincial 
children’s hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are all from the city 
of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition requesting allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the signatures on 
this petition are concerned that children in this province should 
deserve the finest health care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget — that’s 
underlined — to build a provincial children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, almost all of the signatures on this petition come 
from the city of Saskatoon, although I do see one from 
Warman. I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of a 
dedicated health care facility for children. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a 
petition by people concerned about the provincial children’s 
hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 
I’m pleased to present this petition on behalf of the signators 
from Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned that we do not 
have a children’s hospital in this province. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators to this petition all come from the city 

of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the dire need of a 
children’s hospital here in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the great city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues concerned about the lack of pediatric care facilities 
and services in this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Warman and Saskatoon. I’m pleased to present 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those people in this 
province who are very concerned about the lack of a children’s 
hospital. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition requesting allocation of funding for a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents across Saskatchewan. They are concerned 
that Saskatchewan is the only province besides PEI [Prince 
Edward Island] that does not have a dedicated children’s 
hospital. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live in Sutherland, Erindale, Arbor Creek 
and Silverspring in northeast Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with my 
colleagues I’d like to present a petition on behalf of people that 
are getting quite upset with the lack of commitment by this 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government toward a children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed in total by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too arise to present a 
petition for a children’s hospital. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of the fair 

city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleagues in presenting a petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I arise also with 
my colleagues. 
 

That a health facility focusing specifically on the areas of 
pediatric patient care, disease and injury prevention, 
pediatric health education, and research would best 
optimize the safety, health, and welfare of our children. 
 

And the prayer ends: 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to present a 
petition requesting an allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by concerned citizens from 
the constituencies of Saskatoon Riversdale, Saskatoon 
Eastview, and Saskatoon Fairview. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I also join with my 
colleagues in opposition rising on behalf of citizens concerned 
about the need for improved pediatric patient care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The prayer of their petition is as 
follows: 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
resources in this year’s budget to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners are all from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 4, 7, 8, 644, and 669. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: did management of the department have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: how did management of the department 
monitor any established programs and controls to mitigate 
fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 
2001? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: does management of the department have 
any knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activity within the department during the year 2001? If so, 
what is the nature of this activity? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: what did management of the department find 
as a result of its monitor of any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 
2001? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: is management of the department aware of 
any allegations of fraud or other illegal activity within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2001, such as 

information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? If so, what is the 
nature of the activity? 

 
I have similar questions for the year 2002, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 
[13:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice, 
the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, victims 
services volunteers who have unselfishly dedicated themselves 
to serving victims of crime in this province. They are here today 
in recognition of the first National Victims of Crime Awareness 
Week which kicks off today across the country. 
 
I ask that each volunteer stand as I introduce them: Mr. Spence 
Bourassa, Regina victims services; Ms. Lori Campbell, Regina 
victims services; Ms. Holly Degelman, Regina victims services; 
Mr. Phillip Gunther, Regina victims services; Ms. Heather 
Kurz, Regina victims services; Ms. Pat Lee, Regina victims 
services; Ms. Deanne Brown, Regina region victims services; 
Ms. Carol Glowa, Regina region victims services; Ms. Joann 
McKay, Regina region victims services; Mrs. Joyce Warriner, 
Regina region victims services; Mrs. Sharon Wilde, Regina 
region victims services; Mrs. Jackie Calvert, who has 12 years 
of service with Moose Jaw and district victims services; Ms. 
Peggy Johnson, Moose Jaw and district victims services; Ms. 
Mary Rose Reid, Moose Jaw and district victims services; Ms. 
Sandra Sparkes, who also has 12 years of service with Moose 
Jaw and district victims services. 
 
I invite all members of the House to welcome these volunteers 
and recognize them for their contributions to the people of this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition would like to join 
in welcoming these hard-working individuals to their 
Assembly. 
 
We recognize the hard work and commitment that this role 
takes. We very much value their services. They are assisting 
individuals who are probably going through some of the most 
traumatic and difficult times in their lives after they have been a 
victim of a crime. In my practice I have had occasion to deal 
with individuals that have dealt with some of these people and 
have heard only the very best comments and favourable 
remarks about them. 
 
And on behalf of this side of the House I would like to thank 
them for their continuing hard work and would like to welcome 
them to their legislature today. Thank you. 
 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Nutana, 
the Minister of Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery today are 23 public servants from the departments 
of Agriculture and Food, Corrections and Public Safety, the 
electoral office, the Environment department, Health, the 
Legislative Library, the office of honours and protocol, the 
Office of the Lieutenant Governor, Highways, and the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of a program that goes on for public 
servants in our province, these members of the public service 
are visiting the legislature today to receive an in-depth history 
and tour of our Legislative Building. They’ve received briefings 
from the library, I think from the Office of the Clerk, as well as 
Executive Council. They’re now here to observe the 
proceedings, and then they have an opportunity to meet with 
members of the official opposition and the government this 
afternoon as well as yourself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that the public service in this province provide 
important public programs to our citizens. I’m pleased that 
they’re able to be here for the day, and I would ask all members 
to welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the public servants to their 
legislature this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, little has been taken for 
granted by people of this province when it comes to the role of 
the public service. We here in this Chamber enact the laws in 
the best interests of the people, but the public servants are the 
people that give it life and give it meaning and give it 
interpretation to the citizens of our province. We owe them a 
great deal for the work that they do, and it’s wonderful that 
they’re here today. And on behalf of the official opposition, 
we’d like to join in welcoming you to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to all the members of this Legislative Assembly, 55 students 
from St. Angela Merici School in the west gallery. And they are 
accompanied by teachers Jim Walker and Wendy Gervais. 
 
And I’m looking forward to meeting with them later on in the 
afternoon and having an opportunity to talk with them about 
what they observe in the session here. And I would like all to 
join with me in welcoming them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 

Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you two individuals 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery. If I could get them to stand 
when I name them. They are Arielle Zerr and Alyssa Fullerton. 
 
Now of course these two individuals are no strangers to this 
Legislative Assembly because of course Arielle was a Page 
during the last session and Alyssa is of course her friend and 
visited this Assembly quite often. 
 
But they’re here today in more of an official capacity. I believe 
they’re here to get ready for the 12th biennial Western Youth 
Parliament which is going to be taking place on the May long 
weekend. And in the government in that youth parliament, Mr. 
Speaker, Alyssa is going to be the minister of 
intergovernmental affairs and Arielle is going to be the premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — So Premier Zerr has gone from being Page one 
session to premier the next. So it’s a meteoric rise, Mr. Speaker. 
Anyway, I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming 
them to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Tribute to Canadian Soldiers Killed in Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Saturday four members of the Canadian Armed Forces made 
the ultimate sacrifice in serving their country on operations in 
Afghanistan. Corporal Matthew Dinning, Bombardier Myles 
Mansell, Lieutenant William Turner, and Corporal Randy 
Payne were the victims of a roadside bomb. 
 
These individuals placed the national and collective security of 
both Canada and the Afghan people before their own. One 
could argue that there is no greater example of humanity than 
those that put the well-being of others before themselves. 
 
All members should recognize the valuable work these men did 
not only in serving Canada, but the work they did to bring 
security, democracy, freedom, and stability to the people of 
Afghanistan. 
 
We should also be very proud of the hard work that all of the 
men and women of our Armed Forces are doing to improve the 
lives of the people of Afghanistan. We extend our deepest 
condolences to the families of these soldiers, and our thoughts 
and prayers are with them throughout this difficult time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in honour of the first 
national and provincial Victims of Crime Awareness Week, I 
will share a testimonial. Open quotations: 
 

On December 12, 1999, my family’s world came crashing 
down. At approximately 1:30 AM, our youngest son and a 
police officer came to our door with the horrible news that 
our oldest son and his brother had been cut in a bar fight. 
 
We left the house right away to go to the hospital to see 
him. We had only driven 50 feet when a police officer 
stopped us to tell us that our son and brother had passed 
away. We carried on to the hospital to see our son and 
brother, just to make sure they had the correct person. We 
couldn’t believe something like this could happen to our 
family. 
 
We went into the emergency room and went to be with 
him. When we came out of the room, a few minutes later, 
Maxine was there. Maxine, we found out, was with Victim 
Services Estevan. We knew nothing about Victim Services 
or what to expect. 
 
Maxine comforted us at the hospital and has been with us 
since that day. She has made numerous trips to our house, 
the court house, and has offered to go to Regina, 
Saskatoon, or Prince Albert with us for sentencing, 
appeals, the upcoming parole hearing, and anything that 
has to do with our lives since that night. She has been a 
source of comfort for all of us including not only myself 
but also our son and my husband. 

 
I don’t have a clue what would have happened if there had 
not been a Victim Support Service here when this 
happened to us. After our encounter with Maxine at 
Victim Services, I cannot imagine what it would have been 
like [not] to do it on our own. She truly has been an angel. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

More Services Needed for Autism Spectrum Disorder 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the House to 
speak about a neurological disorder that affects many children 
in this great province and one which deserves further attention 
by this government. 
 
The neurological disorder that I speak of is autism spectrum 
disorder, ASD. In Saskatchewan the number of children being 
diagnosed with ASD is high, 1 in 251 in the year 2003, and the 
rate of increase is alarming. For a variety of reasons the 
provisions of the much needed resources to provide the proven 
intensive behavioural intervention therapy is not yet available in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I rise today to ask the government to act on the 

recommendations made in February 2005 by the Government of 
Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to the 
Saskatchewan Minister of Health. 
 
These recommendations called upon the minister to coordinate 
among the necessary departments and stakeholders to formulate 
a comprehensive provincial ASD treatment program; to provide 
adequate, effective, and early treatment based on this program; 
to increase the early diagnosis of children with ASD; provide 
respite and family support more accessible; and to make access 
to specialized equipment and supplies based on need; and to 
support a regional autism service provider program; and to 
ensure ASD adult services and supports are accessible; and to 
encourage and support autism-related research in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is in a unique position to be at the 
forefront of providing the necessary resources and support to 
those in communities who need it most. Mr. Speaker, the 
government has had since February 2005 to provide this. We 
call on them to do this now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Recognition of Saskatchewan Volunteers 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, this morning at United Way 
Connects we raised the flag for National Volunteer Week, April 
23 to April 29. The theme, Volunteers Grow Community, is 
especially true in Saskatchewan. As we look back on our proud 
history, we see very clearly that helping others is something that 
just comes naturally to the people of this province. 
 
Volunteers are the foundation for more than 5,000 incorporated 
charities and 12,000 cultural and recreational organizations, and 
represent over $1 billion annually in delivery of services and 
programs to Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, it’s the 
enthusiasm, energy, and commitment of our volunteers that 
enables thousands of community-based organizations to provide 
services and support to hundreds of thousands of individuals. 
 
As Chair of the Premier's Voluntary Sector Initiative, I’m 
extremely proud of the work that has been done by the members 
of the joint steering committee to strengthen the relationship 
between government and Saskatchewan’s voluntary sector to 
assist volunteer organizations in effectively fulfilling their 
mandates. By fostering a greater and richer understanding of 
each other’s processes and challenges, we create yet another 
innovative first for the nation and we come closest to realizing 
the goal of a Saskatchewan where no one is left behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
our volunteers and their enormous contribution in making 
Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and raise a family. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

Westside Irrigation Project 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday 
between 200 and 300 people attended a westside irrigation 
project meeting in Conquest, west of Outlook. They came to 
hear the findings of an initial report about the feasibility of 
irrigating up to 370,000 acres from Lake Diefenbaker on the 
west side of the South Saskatchewan River from Macrorie to 
Harris, Delisle, and Perdue. 
 
Project steering committee Chair Doug Ball gave an overview 
of the progress to date, and two engineers contracted to provide 
initial insight as to project viability went into more detail. The 
mayors of Rosetown and Outlook and councillors from five 
rural municipalities as well as scores of farmers and business 
people were at the meeting to show their support, which came 
in the form of a unanimous vote to press forward with the 
project. This means local farmers and their governments are 
prepared to invest more dollars into the project. However, for 
the westside irrigation project to move forward, it will require 
funding and co-operation from both levels of senior 
government. 
 
Now what must happen for the project to become reality is 
getting more than just farmers’ support. The Outlook newspaper 
quotes Roger Peterson, Chair of the Saskatchewan Irrigation 
Projects Association, as saying: 
 

It all comes down to one thing, and that is political will. 
Studies have been done, economics show it works. It’s 
been proven time and time again. Irrigation is a great 
economic benefit to the province. It is a matter of 
politicians realizing it and doing something. Plain and 
simple. 
 

To members on both sides of the House I say, I couldn’t have 
said it any better than Mr. Peterson, who fairly represented the 
sentiments of the meeting. The project has been on hold for 
over 30 years. It’s time to get moving. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Crystal Clear — A Play About Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, It was my pleasure on 
Saturday afternoon to attend Crystal Clear, a play written, 
produced, and performed by the Saskatchewan Native Theatre 
Company in Saskatoon. This play is an educational piece 
directed towards young people detailing the horrors of crystal 
methamphetamine, crystal meth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cast and the award-winning company was 
comprised entirely of youth with potential. These young actors 
are all overcoming challenges and are well on their way to 
obtaining educational or career goals and aspirations. 
 
I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the government was well 
represented in the audience of this performance. My colleagues, 

the members from Saskatoon Massey Place, Saskatoon 
Sutherland, Saskatoon Centre, and Regina Dewdney joined with 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest to watch the 
performance. 
 
At the end of the performance, Mr. Speaker, all those who 
attended were invited to a question and answer session that was 
hosted by these courageous and talented young people. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to say that all the government members 
stayed. At the session the performance told their various stories, 
all of which involved addiction experiences, including crystal 
meth. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Saskatchewan Native Theatre 
Company on the success of the production Crystal Clear, which 
will be performed in approximately 30 schools across 
Saskatchewan. I would also like to congratulate the talented 
cast who had the courage to answer questions about such 
difficult experiences. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 23 to 29 is 
National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week. I had the 
opportunity to attend the kick-off this morning at the F.W. Hill 
Mall on behalf of the opposition. I’ve heard stories from people 
such as Yvonne Wedrick who talked about losing her daughter. 
She spoke on behalf of donors’ families. She lost her young 
daughter in a playground accident and they had talked, her and 
her husband, before about donating organs, and in this situation 
that’s what they did. 
 
Also heard testimony from David Milliken who is a young heart 
transplant recipient and how his life had absolutely changed 
after receiving his heart. Also Dale Banks talked about being 
one of those that are waiting on the list for organ donations. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that it was a great opportunity to make 
people aware of the absolute need for organ donation, when you 
hear testimonials like these. It doesn’t take a lot. 
 
How to donate organs. Talk about it with your family or next of 
kin about your wishes. Sign your organ and tissue donor card 
and put the sticker on your health card. To get one of these 
organ donor cards contact Sask Health or Sask Transplant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the saying on the back of the pamphlet I think 
says it all: it’s not what we take with us when we leave this 
world, it’s what you leave behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sign the donor cards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Delivery of Pediatric Services in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of April, 
18-month-old Paige Hanson was admitted into Royal University 
Hospital because her arm was swollen and she was in 
excruciating pain. She was treated for infection and given 
painkillers. After two weeks, baby Paige was sent home limping 
and without a diagnosis. 
 
By Good Friday she was unable to walk or crawl because of 
severe swelling of her legs, and again she was screaming in 
pain. The family doctor left a message for the pediatrician in 
Saskatoon on Saturday. No one responded or bothered to tell 
the family doctor that the pediatrician was on holidays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: what does he have to 
say about the breakdown of communication in the Saskatoon 
Health Region? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
want to thank the member opposite as well for calls that she 
made to me on Thursday of last week with regards to this case. 
So I’ve had the opportunity to review some of the information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say to members of this House and 
the public that the circumstances of this case of course are 
particular to the Saskatoon Health Region and to the family. 
That having been said and knowing the very difficult 
circumstances that the family found themselves in, the 
unfortunate circumstances that the family has found themselves 
in, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know all of the details. I have asked my 
deputy minister, with permission of the family, in coordination 
with the quality care coordinators in the province and the chief 
medical officer for the province, to thoroughly review this 
situation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to help the 
minister with some of those details. 
 
Having heard nothing from Saskatoon by Tuesday, Michelle, 
Paige’s mother, rushed her daughter to emergency at Royal 
University Hospital. Michelle was told that Paige would require 
an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] and a bone scan. And at 
this time, she was informed that the MRI was not working and 
that she would have to wait three weeks for a bone scan. Paige 
stayed in the hospital overnight. All that could be done for her 
without a diagnosis was to continue with the antibiotics and the 
painkillers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this acceptable that an 18-month-old screaming 
in pain should be forced to wait three weeks for diagnostic 
testing because of equipment failure and because of waiting 
lists? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
the member opposite to respect the privacy of the family and at 

the same time the internal workings of the Saskatoon Health 
Region while they also do an investigation into this 
circumstance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard on several occasions and now again 
in the House that the MRI in Saskatoon was not working. I have 
yet to confirm that the MRI was not working. 
 
I have been informed that a regimen of care was prescribed for 
young Paige and that there were communications between the 
health region and the family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not at liberty because in most cases I respect 
the privacy of individuals within the health system. But I am 
aware, Mr. Speaker, that the investigation will take into account 
the work of the professionals and the work of the administration 
in this case. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the family decided on their 
own to contact the media, and the family is who is giving me 
the information. 
 
According to baby Paige’s aunt, while they were in the hospital 
in fact in Saskatoon, they were told by one of the staff that if 
they weren’t happy with the service that they should call their 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 
 
If that is not an indictment of the failures of the system, I don’t 
even know what is. Even the professionals in the system are so 
frustrated that they’re sending people to the opposition. I was 
asked to be involved. Mr. Speaker, does the minister think that 
that’s acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the 
question is no. The system is designed to assist people who 
need care. And to the best of my knowledge at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, the system had a care regimen in place and a care 
delivery system that had been worked out for baby Paige. The 
fact that there was money in the system to cover these costs, the 
policies were all in place, this is a matter that will be subject to 
an investigation both by the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority and by the deputy minister in my office. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Michelle took baby Paige 
home from the hospital because the hospital was telling her that 
there is nothing more that they could do without a diagnosis. 
Paige’s condition deteriorated. And I was speaking with 
Michelle quite frequently. Finally baby Paige started to vomit 
violently, and she was only sleeping 20 minutes a day and when 
she was awake, she was screaming. Any time that I spoke with 
Michelle, I could hear Paige screaming in the background. 
 
Despite the mother’s pleas to anyone — to anyone who would 
listen — to have her daughter referred to children’s hospital in 
Edmonton, nothing was done. That is what I requested of that 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

minister’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why, when a child is so obviously critically ill, is 
our health care system failing so miserably? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
yes, when the member opposite called my office on Thursday, 
my office immediately made inquiries of the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority, had been informed that a care 
regimen was in place and that, I’m told, she was welcome to 
Saskatoon for a continuation of the care. The family, I 
understand, left that evening for Edmonton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the specialists and family physicians, we 
have referral mechanisms to Edmonton. And, Mr. Speaker, as I 
understand it, the doctors talked to each other, and she did 
receive very good care at Stollery Hospital in Calgary . . . or in 
Edmonton. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, no one would give baby Paige 
a referral. There was a three-week waiting list for testing. There 
was poor communication from one facility to another. There 
was a lack of specialists available to look at baby Paige. There 
was equipment failure, and there was a reluctance by everyone 
to refer her out of province, including his office. 
 
The quality care coordinator told Michelle to go back to square 
one. He told Michelle to go back to the family doctor, even 
though what they needed was diagnostic testing and 
consultation with specialists. Meanwhile baby Paige had been 
on painkillers for three weeks. This is an 18-month-old baby, 
and her parents were no closer to knowing what was wrong 
with her. Mr. Speaker, this family had done everything that they 
could do, and they were so desperate that, yes, on Thursday 
they packed up their car, and they took Paige to the hospital in 
Edmonton. 
 
Why are families being forced to flee the province to seek 
urgent medical help? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Families in Saskatchewan should not be forced to seek 
out-of-province care for help. Mr. Speaker, there may have been 
some unfortunate circumstances in this case that will be 
examined when the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority 
conducts its investigation and when the deputy minister of 
Health, utilizing the chief medical officer for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, conduct their investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that families, and particularly 
families of young children, seek health care when their children, 
who can’t speak, indicate stress. Mr. Speaker, we have to and 
will be responsive to those needs. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 

Ms. Harpauer: — The problem is the response is too late. 
According to baby Paige’s aunt, it was only after the family left 
for Edmonton that a call came from the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority. Paige’s aunt told a talk show program this 
morning, and I quote: 
 

It was once they were in the car on the way to Edmonton 
that I got a phone call saying, don’t let them go to 
Edmonton. We’ll have a pediatric doctor look at her 
immediately. 

 
But they were already on their way. And guess what, Mr. 
Speaker? Paige was diagnosed in Edmonton within 24 hours 
with leukemia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family had already waited three weeks and 
was facing an additional three-week wait in Saskatoon. Why 
could baby Paige get all the testing and diagnosis in Edmonton 
within 24 hours but was being forced to wait an additional three 
weeks in Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I indicate that we 
should not prejudge this case based on the information that’s 
circulating either through secondary information, information in 
the House, or information that may have been carried on the 
radios. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the advice that is provided in these cases, 
from the time that a patient presents to the time that decisions 
are made about care, are handled by professionals who are 
trained to deal with disease, distress and, in some cases, grief. 
Mr. Speaker, the system functions extraordinarily well 99.9 per 
cent of the time. Mr. Speaker, occasionally — and we don’t 
know if it’s the case in front of us today — but occasionally 
there are problems. And, Mr. Speaker, both the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority and Saskatchewan Health, under my 
jurisdiction, have launched investigations in this regard. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the minister 
that I have been talking directly to the mother, and this isn’t 
information just floating out there that I’ve picked up. The 
mother and I have been in contact on many occasions. We 
know that Saskatchewan Health has a policy that if you go out 
of province for medical treatment, you must get prior approval 
in order for your medical costs to be covered. 
 
I’d like the Minister of Health to put himself in the shoes of 
baby Paige’s parents. They’ve had a baby girl screaming in 
constant pain for three weeks, and they can’t get any answers 
out of this system. They can’t even get any testing done. They 
can’t get a referral for out of province, and this baby’s condition 
was getting worse every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, baby Paige’s parents did what any responsible 
parent would do. Could the minister commit today in covering 
the family’s medical costs while they’re in Edmonton? 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’d indicated before, I’m not yet aware of all of the details in the 
case. And out of respect for a certain amount of respect for the 
privacy of the family, I can say however that I am aware 
enough of the care that she received at Stollery hospital in 
Edmonton, I am aware enough to be able to state that all of her 
medical costs today or in the future, either in Saskatchewan or 
in Alberta, will be covered by Saskatchewan Health. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to thank the minister for that 
answer. Is his department going to cover the cost for baby Paige 
from Thursday night going forward until she’s returned to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, there are very specific 
guidelines with regards to out-of-province care and the costs 
that are covered by Saskatchewan Health insurance. Mr. 
Speaker, baby Paige’s medical care is covered whether she’s in 
Saskatchewan or Alberta. It would have been covered 
previously. It’s covered going forward. 
 
There are costs that are not covered under Saskatchewan’s 
insurance, Mr. Speaker, for anyone in the province, and that 
includes travel and accommodation. So travel and 
accommodation costs — to be clear, Mr. Speaker — are not 
covered. All of her medical costs are indeed covered. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Future Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
anything highlights the urgent need for a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon, it’s this case. These parents were told they would 
have a very long wait to see a pediatrician. And they had no 
choice but to take matters in their own hands. Parents in 
Saskatchewan shouldn’t be forced into doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A children’s hospital in Saskatoon would be a resource for the 
entire province. A children’s hospital would be a magnet for 
research. A children’s hospital would help our province retain 
the specialists they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government stop talking and begin 
working on behalf of the children of Saskatchewan? Can the 
minister commit to starting today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact on May 11, 2005, this government made the announcement 
that we are committed to the building of a children’s hospital or 
a hospital within a hospital in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of this period of time, from May 

11 of last year until today, the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority has been doing two things, including an assessment 
of all of facilities in Saskatoon, so that the children’s hospital 
within a hospital will fit in a appropriate matter. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ve been doing the planning necessary to bring 
forward a complete budget request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have supported the need for a children’s 
hospital or a children’s facility within Saskatchewan for some 
time now, and we are continuing to be committed to that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this government talks a lot, 
but there’s no action. The people in Humboldt were promised a 
new hospital in August 1999. They’re still waiting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Last year parents across Saskatchewan heard supportive noises 
from the former minister of Health about the need for a 
children’s hospital. But there was nothing in this year’s budget 
to get that project started. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to moving this 
along and getting it started today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I like 
my predecessor, the member from Regina Lakeview, and this 
government are 100 per cent committed to a children’s hospital, 
a hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
We have provided resources to the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority to proceed with the planning process in this regard. 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot begin to put forth a request for 
proposals with regards to tenders until such time as the 
necessary planning has been done. Saskatoon Health Region is 
discussing with the senior medical people as to what the needs 
are and the way in which it’s configured within the facilities in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we remain committed. We will see this 
project go ahead in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may be 
interested to know that last week I had a meeting with the 
doctor spearheading the effort to get a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon at their request. They’re tired of waiting. They’re fed 
up with the promises. They want to get started now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer will they have to wait? How 
much longer will parents in Saskatchewan have to wait? How 
many more children like baby Paige Hanson will be left behind 
by this NDP government before something is done? Enough 
planning, it’s time for action, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m sure the member opposite didn’t mean to say what he said 
when he said, enough planning; build it. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
in planning. I believe in doing a thorough job of doing the right 
thing at the right time in the right place. 
 
The Saskatoon Regional Health Authority has been given the 
responsibility of doing the planning. They’ve been given the 
fiscal resources to do that planning. They are in the process of 
doing that planning. Mr. Speaker, this project will happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Quality of Health Care 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well Mr. Speaker, you can forgive Saskatchewan 
people for being a little doubtful about the minister’s comments 
because they’ve been planning for a hospital in Preeceville for 
six years, in Humboldt for ten years. Mr. Speaker, who knows 
how long in Moosomin? Press releases are one thing; action is 
quite significantly different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. We have heard him 
in his Throne Speech, and his ministers and himself almost 
every day stand up and say . . . give us the slogans. They’re not 
going to leave anyone behind. No one will be left behind on the 
pathway to opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly Paige Hanson was left behind. Her family 
has been left behind. They had to watch her lose the use of her 
legs. They had to watch her, unable to ease her suffering, the 
screaming in pain that went on for days in that household, Mr. 
Speaker. And yet somehow there was no place for her in the 
Saskatchewan health care system. 
 
My question is to the Premier: the Premier, is he satisfied with 
the minister allowing an internal departmental investigation or 
will he do the right thing today and announce an independent 
investigation into this incident so that no other parent, so no 
other child has to face this kind of suffering again, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this circumstance, I 
believe the Minister of Health has taken the very appropriate 
action upon being informed about the circumstance facing this 
young child. The minister has asked not only of the Saskatoon 
region a thorough investigation, but he has instructed his own 
department, through its deputy and the chief medical officer and 
quality care coordinators, to do the investigation of the 
circumstances in this case, Mr. Speaker. He has also assured the 
family, this legislature, and the people of Saskatchewan that the 
medical costs for this child will be borne by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are building, as best we can, a high-quality 
health care service in Saskatchewan. Today, Mr. Speaker, there 
are literally thousands of people who are being served by the 
health care professionals in this province — by our hospitals, by 
our doctors and nurses, and in long-term care. Thousands of 
people are being served on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. And they 
are doing that without call, without call on their ability to pay, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the fundamental principle, and we are 
delivering good, quality health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the mom and dad of Paige 
would probably disagree. Others, whose case we have raised at 
this Assembly would disagree with the Premier about the 
quality of care they’re getting from this NDP health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know, we know that in this case referrals were 
even requested. Out-of-province referrals were requested and 
not approved, and not approved until they had to go on their 
own and drive all the way to Edmonton to seek care for Paige. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something has gone seriously wrong. Not only in 
this case but in others that we have raised. I wonder, would the 
Premier answer this question: why could Paige get the diagnosis 
and the treatment, the beginnings of the treatment that she needs 
within 24 hours in Edmonton? And why was our system here, 
under the NDP government, unable to provide it after weeks, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely what 
the Minister of Health has asked both the Saskatoon region and 
his own department to probe the answers to. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition across there, he talks about 
the New Democratic Party health care system in this province. 
You bet it’s a New Democratic Party health care system in this 
province. It’s a commitment to care that’s not based on your 
ability to pay. That’s the fundamental principle of this 
government and this party. 
 
I challenge the Leader of the Opposition opposite, so what is 
the Sask Party version of health care in this province, Mr. 
Speaker? What kind of a third way does he have planned if he 
had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, to criticize the system, and it’s 
appropriate when there are flaws that we discover those flaws 
and do the repair, Mr. Speaker. But, you know, if you’re going 
to be credible, you need stand up and provide some alternative, 
Mr. Speaker, some alternative other than saying, other than 
saying, well the solution, I guess, is we should have cut further 
taxes in this budget, or we should have put more money in this 
budget. Mr. Speaker, we need some practical solutions, the kind 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

of solutions we achieve by working with medical professionals 
but based, Mr. Speaker, on the fundamental principles. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this NDP 
government presides over the longest waiting lists for health 
care in the country. He says he’s proud of health care in the 
country. Day after day we bring forward cases of people who 
have been let down and betrayed by that Premier’s health care 
system which seems to be more about ideological rhetoric in the 
1940s than it is about health care in 2006 for people like Paige 
Hanson, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it seems to be about. 
 
This year’s budget has $3 billion plus 380 million more dollars. 
And that’s their solution: to have press releases about the 
amount of funding that’s gone on and no direction from this 
government as to what they’re going to do to ensure that that 
money is getting to the frontline and not being deflected in 
administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s an opportunity for that Premier to stand up and say, we 
need an independent investigation into this case — a 
pediatrician from outside the province, some authority from 
outside Saskatchewan or independent of any government office 
— to find out what happened with respect to Paige Hanson. 
Will he commit to that today in this Legislative Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition says one thing in this House and says quite a 
different thing in his hometown of Swift Current when we’re 
cutting the ribbon on the turning of the sod for the new hospital 
in Swift Current. What does he say there, Mr. Speaker? He 
praises the government, praises the system. What does he say in 
Outlook where we’re now creating the new hospital in Outlook? 
What does he say about that? What does he say about the new 
MRIs? What does he say about the CT [computerized 
tomography] scanners that are being put in? 
 
He stands in his place, and he votes against the very budget that 
put these facilities available to Saskatchewan people. So now 
we’ve heard it, Mr. Speaker. He got to his feet today, and he 
promotes his solution, his solution to health care in our province 
including issues like for baby Paige. It’s an audit of the system. 
That’s what he proposes. That’s his one solution. Audit the 
system. Audit the workers. Audit the professionals as if they’re 
not doing their work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No, we will work in partnership with the medical professionals, 
and we will work with administration, and we will work with 
the people of Saskatchewan to ensure the quality of care that 
comes to the people of Saskatchewan based on that fundamental 
principle of medicare — it’s not determined by your ability to 
pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

[14:30] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise in the House today to recognize the first annual National 
Victims of Crime Awareness Week which runs from April 23 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Once again the 
Chair invites the Minister of Justice to start over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. Order. Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise in the House today to recognize the first 
annual National Victims of Crime Awareness Week which runs 
from April 23 to 29. Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to 
announce that I have also declared this week Victims of Crime 
Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. This annual event was 
formerly known as Victims Services Week. 
 
The purpose of this week is to raise awareness about victim 
issues and services and laws in place to assist victims of crime 
and their families. The week will also highlight victim services 
progress across Canada. 
 
It is also important that we use this week to recognize the 
dedication of volunteer victims’ support workers. Each year 
nearly 300 volunteers donate 17,000 hours of their time to assist 
15,000 victims of crime through police-based victims services 
programs. This year six volunteers have reached the 10-year 
plateau in their careers as victims services volunteers. This 
brings the total to 40 volunteers who have contributed at least 
10 years of their lives to those in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these volunteer victims’ support workers help to 
put a caring and familiar face on the justice system. They 
provide comfort, advocacy, and a sense of security to victims of 
crime and help to reduce the trauma experienced by victims 
during their involvement with the criminal justice process. 
Through the dedicated work of victims services volunteers, 
Saskatchewan Justice is better able to respond to the needs of 
victims in a meaningful and compassionate way. The 
Saskatchewan government is pleased to help raise awareness of 
victims’ issues, needs, and services and recognize the 
contributions of all victims services volunteers. 
 
We encourage all people across Saskatchewan and all 
Canadians to promote National Victims of Crime Awareness 
Week by joining crime victims, their families, victim advocates, 
and justice professionals planning and taking part in the 
activities to mark the week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition recognizes as 
well the importance of Victims of Crime Awareness Week. The 
opposition is committed to raising awareness about victims’ 
issues and services and laws that are in place to assist victims of 
crime and their families. 
 
We also this week honour the volunteers who work to assist 
victims of crime through police-based victims services 
programs and through government-based programs. We 
recognize the care, compassion, dedication, and commitment 
that those workers have. It is particularly important here in 
Saskatchewan that we recognize the serious effects that crime 
has on its victims and on their families. 
 
It’s also important to note, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
under the NDP government has become the crime capital of 
Canada. The NDP government has failed to keep its promise 
from the 1999 election to hire 200 new police officers. 
 
We have the highest overall crime rate in Canada and a violent 
crime rate double that of Ontario. We unfortunately and 
tragically have the highest youth crime rate in Canada. The 
worst crime record in Canada over the past ten years belongs to 
Saskatchewan, the worst violent crime record in Canada for the 
past 7 years, and the highest concentration of youth gang 
members per capita. It’s estimated that there are 1,315 youth 
gang members in Saskatchewan. This has translated into high 
levels of crime victimization in Saskatchewan. 
 
It is essential that we do more to assist the victims of crime and 
support the many community-based organizations that provide 
assistance to victims of crime. It is important that we have a 
government in Saskatchewan that will be proactive in reducing 
crime. 
 
We have also argued that the NDP needs to be more proactive 
in taking steps to reduce addictions in our province which are 
one of the main causes of crime. We also recognize the need to 
deal with property crime and victims of property crime as well, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Condolences 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to advise 
members that earlier today I have expressed condolences on 
behalf of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to the 
family, friends, and legislative colleagues of Jobie Nutarak, 
Speaker of the legislature of Nunavut, who died Saturday, April 
21, while out on his snowmobile on a hunting trip. 
 
Speaker Nutarak represented Pond Inlet in Nunavut’s 
legislature since the territory was created in 1999 and was 
selected as Speaker in the year 2004. 
 
Jobie Nutarak leaves behind his wife, Joanna, and five children. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 908 to 923 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 908 to 923 inclusive have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Evidence Act repeals and replaces The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act and The Recording of Evidence by 
Sound Recording Machine Act. The Evidence Act governs the 
issues of evidence in matters over which the province has 
jurisdiction. The Canada Evidence Act, Mr. Speaker, governs 
matters within federal jurisdiction. The Saskatchewan Act deals 
primarily with the evidence of witnesses and the proof of 
documents and records. 
 
The Evidence Act updates the current Saskatchewan evidence 
Act, much of which has not been changed in the last 100 years. 
The present Act is a mixture of provisions based on 19th 
century English statutes and more recent provisions meant to 
deal with contemporary Saskatchewan problems. Because the 
Act has never been reviewed for consistency between the 
various provisions, Mr. Speaker, some issues of interpretation 
arise. As well the Act presents issues of unclear terminology, 
obsolete references, and antiquated language. 
 
The new Act also includes the provisions now contained in The 
Recording of Evidence by Sound Recording Machine Act. This 
Act provides that court proceedings may be recorded and sets 
out procedures for transcription, destruction, and preservation 
of records. As with The Saskatchewan Evidence Act, this Act 
has not been reviewed in some time and is out of date. 
 
The goal of the revision is to re-enact the legislation in a more 
user-friendly version so that the Act may be more easily 
understood. To this end, significant consultations with 
Saskatchewan judges and lawyers have occurred in the 
development of the new evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in re-enacting the legislation, some updating has 
been necessary. As I mentioned, many of the provisions have 
not been changed in 100 years. As well a fair bit of 
reorganization of provisions has occurred. The Act contains 
new definitions intending to clarify terms used throughout the 
Act. 
 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Definitions of action and matter describe the types of civil 
matters covered by the legislation. Mr. Speaker, the Act applies 
to all proceedings within provincial jurisdiction including 
actions and matters in the civil realm and quasi-criminal 
proceedings such as prosecutions under provincial statutes. 
 
Court is defined generally as an entity authorized to hear 
witnesses, take evidence, make orders or exercise any judicial 
or quasi-judicial function. This definition makes it clear that the 
Act will apply to entities such as boards and commissions, 
public inquiry commissioners, and arbitrators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spouse has been defined in the legislation. The 
definition refers to a legally married spouse or a person in a 
spousal relationship for two or more years. This reflects the 
definition of spouse that has been developed by the courts and 
is used in other Saskatchewan legislation. The definition comes 
into play in the provisions relating to the compellability to give 
evidence. Consultees asked for guidance in the legislation 
respecting rules for determining what the laws of other 
jurisdictions are. These rules are not presently well understood. 
New provisions will provide clarification. Mr. Speaker, the 
general rule respecting competence and compellability is that 
every person is competent and compellable to give evidence in 
a proceeding. However spouse witnesses may refuse to disclose 
communications made during the spousal relationship. 
 
An exception to the rule respecting spouse witnesses has been 
expanded. The new provision states that if a spouse brings an 
action against his or her spouse, or a child brings an action 
against one or both spouses, the spouses are compellable to 
disclose communications during their marriage. The effect of 
this change is to extend the current provision beyond toward 
actions by spouses and to include actions brought by a child. 
 
Another new provision based on a provision in the Canada 
Evidence Act provides that in a prosecution, the failure of an 
accused to testify or the refusal of a spouse to disclose a marital 
communication is not to be the subject of comment by the court 
or prosecutor. 
 
The Act provides that evidence with respect to proceedings 
before quality improvement committees is privileged. Provision 
has been updated in light of changes in the health care system. 
New definitions of committee and health services agency reflect 
the fact that quality improvement committees are no longer 
confined to hospitals. Committee activities occur in a range of 
health services agencies including the regional health 
authorities, health care organizations, and other facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Act provides that the reports of 
doctors, dentists, and chiropractors are admissible without proof 
of the professional signature, qualifications, or licence. This 
provision has been updated as a result of our consultations with 
judges. The new provision which expands a list of professionals 
to include psychologists, physical therapists, and occupational 
therapists reflects the current practice of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench in relation to health care treatment reports. 
 
The Act states that proposed witnesses may swear an oath or 
make an affirmation. Reflecting current practice, each option is 
given equal weight. Witnesses may take an oath in any form 
that binds their conscience. The goal is to ensure witnesses find 

the court experience to be inclusive and relevant to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provisions presently contained in The 
Recording of Evidence by Sound Recording Machine Act have 
been updated. The provisions were developed when tape 
recorders were the latest in technology, and of course much has 
changed since that time. Consultations with personnel working 
in the courts have ensured that provisions reflect current 
practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provisions dealing with judicial notice and the 
proof of public documents have been substantially revamped as 
they are very much out of date. This has involved updating and 
reorganizing provisions and modernizing language. The new 
Act will require that judicial notice be taken of federal, 
provincial, and British legislation, federal and provincial 
proclamations, constitutional documents, and international 
treaties. Judicial notice will also be taken of Aboriginal treaties 
that are published by the Queen’s Printer of Canada. Modern 
publication practices have allowed this list to be significantly 
expanded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provisions respecting business records have 
been rewritten to reflect changes in the business world. For 
example, provisions respecting banking records have been 
expanded to include the records of similar financial institutions. 
Provisions in the current Act relating to vulnerable witnesses 
and electronic documents are recent and did not require 
significant updating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Evidence Act is being re-enacted in French 
and English. This, along with the clear language and the new 
provisions, will help make the Act more accessible to members 
of the public. 
 
As I mentioned, significant consultations with the 
Saskatchewan judges and lawyers have occurred in the 
development of the new Evidence Act. The bench and the bar 
are pleased that the revision will provide clarification to judges, 
lawyers, and others interpreting The Evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Evidence Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 60, The Evidence Act be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on the second reading debate of the An 
Act respecting Evidence and Witnesses, making consequential 
amendments to other Acts and repealing The Recording of 
Evidence by Sound Recording Machine Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister in his comments made very extensive 
reference to the fact that there are really two major components 
to this legislation as I understand it. The first is to update the 
terminology and the way the courts reflect the technology that 
has changed much over the last course of years and certainly 
over the last hundred years to reflect the fast-moving 
technological changes that are occurring in presenting evidence 
and recording it. 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also outlined a number of new 
provisions that further reflect changes to the legislation that we 
now have on the provincial statutes. And, Mr. Speaker, it seems 
as if all of these changes have been well-thought-out and are 
appropriate to improving the legislative framework in our 
province. 
 
The minister mentioned that this was done as a result of a 
serious amount of consultation between the judiciary and the 
lawyers of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
official opposition is going to want to consult with these 
individuals as well to make sure that the legislation is thorough 
and complete and nothing has been overlooked. And in order 
for that process to occur, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate of second reading of Bill No. 60, The Evidence Act 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[14:45] 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Evidence Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, this Act makes consequential 
amendments to English Acts resulting from the passage of the 
new evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Evidence Act is being passed in English and 
French and includes consequential amendments to other Acts 
that have been passed in both English and French. 
Consequential amendments to Acts passed in English only 
require a separate Bill. The consequential amendments update 
the name of the Act and section references. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 61, The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This piece of 
legislation is very much parallel and in tandem with Bill No. 60, 
The Evidence Act, that I previously spoke about. Mr. Speaker, 
it certainly is important that this legislation is being passed in 
both official languages, and it is appropriate that this legislation 
follows the legislative course of Bill No. 60. So in order for that 
to be streamlined, I would move at this time to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 61 be now adjourned. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Bill No. 50 — The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment 
Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine (médiation) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment 
Act, 2006. This Act amends the mediation provisions in The 
Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, The Children’s Law Act, The Family 
Maintenance Act, 1997, and The Small Claims Act, 1997. 
 
The mandatory mediation program in The Queen’s Bench Act, 
1998 requires that mediation occur early in the civil litigation 
process in non-family litigation. The requirement to engage in a 
mandatory mediation session applies in the judicial centres of 
Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current, 
and Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the integration of mediation into our Queen’s 
Bench court process began more than 10 years ago. It has been 
extremely successful in assisting parties resolve civil disputes 
early in the litigation process on a consensual basis. Court 
statistics show that following mediation session, minutes of 
settlement or notices of discontinuance are filed in over 30 per 
cent of the cases. A number of other cases simply have no 
further action once the mediation session has been completed. 
 
One of the key components of this early dispute resolution is 
providing the parties and their legal counsel an opportunity to 
speak freely without the fear of the comments being taken out 
of context or being used against them at some future time. The 
parties can discuss issues and potential solutions openly. 
 
The mediation provision in The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 
provides restrictions on the admissibility in any action or matter 
before the court of evidence arising out of the mandatory 
mediation. Thus this information cannot be used in court. 
 
This legislative amendment provides that evidence directly 
arising from anything said in the course of mediation is not 
admissible in any civil, administrative, regulatory, or summary 
conviction proceeding. The pre-trial conference provision in 
The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 includes the same confidentiality 
provision. It is amended in the same way. The amendment 
clarifies that only evidence directly arising from anything said 
during the course of mediation should be excluded. The same 
evidence otherwise obtained should be admissible. This change 
was requested by some members of the legal community, and 
other members agree that it is a beneficial change. 
 
A number of other statutes provide for mediation and include 
the same confidentiality provision. The Children’s Law Act has 
a mediation provision in the parts of the Act respecting custody 
and access. The Family Maintenance Act, 1997 provides that 
the court may appoint a mediator when a person has applied to 
a court to establish or vary the amount of maintenance that must 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

be paid for a child or a spouse. The Small Claims Act, 1997 
provides that the judge may direct the parties to participate in a 
mediation session, and also provides for a case management 
conference in most small claims actions. 
 
These statutes are being amended in the proposed legislation to 
include the same changes as are being made to comparable 
provisions in The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. The consultations 
that have taken place indicate that this amendment clarifies the 
confidentiality provisions and will help maintain the integrity of 
the mediation process. Consultees agree that the changes will 
enhance the full and frank discussions that are critical to any 
successful mediation process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 and to enact consequential 
amendments to certain other Acts. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 50, The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on second reading of The Queen’s Bench 
Act, 1998. Mr. Speaker, I think that in the last decade since 
compulsory mediation has been the norm in our province, I 
think that there have been a great many cases where this has 
been shown to be a much preferred route than what we had 
prior, where it was into immediate and automatic litigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that after the decade of usage of this 
provision of The Queen’s Bench Act, I think it has been shown 
that it has been very valuable, but also that it pointed out some 
areas that need to be strengthened and improved. And the 
minister has outlined that following consultations with a 
number of individuals in the process, that these amendments 
have been largely supported and agreed to. Mr. Speaker, I 
certainly want to make sure that there is appropriate time for the 
official opposition to have those same consultations with 
affected parties and professionals in the field. And in order for 
that to be facilitated, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on Bill No. 50, second reading, be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 32 — The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
be now read a second time.] 
 

The Speaker: — Speaking to Bill 32, the Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to have this Bill 
proceed forward today. We recognize as well that’s it Victims 
of Crime Awareness Week. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, 
we feel that it’s appropriate to move this Bill to committee to 
have further debate. 
 
One of the principles that’s behind this Bill is trying to work 
towards restorative justice. The opposition is highly supportive 
of the notion of restorative justice. It is a factor that the courts 
are increasingly using in sentencing. 
 
One of the issues that we have and one of the issues that is not 
represented in this Bill is the notion of what will happen with 
victims of property crime. This Bill deals only with victims of 
violent crime. And while we have the greatest amount of 
respect and wish to deal with it and be of assistance to the 
trauma that those victims face, we as opposition members hear 
increasingly from victims of property crime who have been 
victims of break-in, victims of minor thefts, and these people 
are waiting for restitution orders. And unfortunately although 
there’s a great willingness on the part of the court to make those 
orders, there is no great enforcement mechanism other than to 
take out a judgment and to deal with remedies in the usual 
fashion as any other judgment. 
 
It’s certainly the position of the opposition that this willingness 
on the part of the offender to try and make restitution and try 
and make the victim economically whole should be something 
that should be considered by the courts as a factor in 
sentencing. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we would be 
prepared to allow this Bill to proceed to committee. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 32, The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 32 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 47 — The 
Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is one of a number of 
Bills that moves our various regulatory system forward. In 
particular, this Bill allows Indian bands to register a business 
name as a sole proprietorship — in effect allowing a business 
name to operate a casino, golf course, whatever else they may 
choose to. So it’s certainly progressive in that it recognizes that 
our First Nations partners are getting active in the business 
community, creating jobs, and moving forward. And we’re 
certainly very supportive of that. 
 
It also recognizes that professionals will want to carry on 
business using their surname as part of their professional 
trading name. It makes necessary changes for that. It also makes 
a slight change to the three-year registration provision in 
allowing a month’s grace period in allowing names to be 
registered during that grace period without having the name 
unnecessarily lapse and possibly run the risk of having 
somebody else try and register during that period of time. 
 
As we move forward, Mr. Speaker, towards a national economy 
and a global economy, it’s essential that we bring our 
legislation into compliance with what is taking place in other 
provinces and in other countries. And this Bill certainly is a step 
in that direction. 
 
We are supportive, Mr. Speaker, of moving this Bill into 
committee so that we can go through a consultative process or 
move forward on a consultative process with the various 
stakeholders that are affected by this Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re prepared to allow this Bill to be voted into committee at 
this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly has been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 47, The Business 
Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I move 
this Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 47 be referred to the 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 46 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 46 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
The Snowmobile Act one would think would be a rather 
innocuous Bill that no one would be taking offence with. 
However there are certain groups in Saskatchewan that are not 
happy with this particular Bill or more specifically are not 
happy with the trail permits being mandatory. 
 
While the snowmobile association and SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] are certainly promoting this as a safety 
factor, there are a good number of people who do not support 
the forced use of the licensing fee system to go to the support of 
the trail designations. And fact is I’m told that the registration 
of snowmobiles has dropped since the mandatory trail fees were 
placed on the snowmobile licences. So that’s a bit of a problem 
when you’re reducing the number of licensed snowmobiles, of 
snowmobiles with licences, because of the trail registration that 
has been put in place. 
 
I guess the question has to be asked as to how these funds are 
going to be administered. They’re supposed to be administered 
by the trail administrator, the trail manager. And yet I think 
back to the Wildlife Development Fund that was put in place 
for an additional fee on hunters for wildlife development lands, 
and yet a few years ago the government sucked money out of 
that fund, didn’t use it for the development of wildlife lands, 
and used it in the general Consolidated Fund. Are there any 
guarantees that this money that’s supposed to be designated for 
trail use will not be used for some other use in the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund]? 
 
So I think those are the kind of things that people are concerned 
about on this particular piece of legislation, and we’ll need 
answers to that when it comes before committee. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about on this Bill, 
and it says, and I quote: “. . . no person shall operate a 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

snowmobile on a designated trail situated on private land . . .” I 
have some very serious concern that this is restricting a 
person’s access to their own property. If a designated trail 
traverses their piece of property, can they legally travel from 
one side of that trail with a snowmobile to the other side of that 
trail without a trail permit? 
 
[15:00] 
 
You know, it may cross through a farmer or a rancher’s land. 
He has cattle perhaps in areas on either side of the trail. Can he 
travel from one side of that trail to the other side of the trail 
without having to have a licence, without having to have paid 
the trail fee when he hasn’t even left his own property? I think 
there’s a concern there that needs to be addressed, that anyone 
who is allowing a designated trail on private land isn’t losing 
control, isn’t losing usage of their own property. 
 
One of the areas that there was a concern raised to me in the 
past was the availability of the park’s equipment, their trail 
grooming equipment, to be utilized on the trails because to the 
best of my understanding, it is not allowed to be used on trails 
outside of the park itself. 
 
And so some of the clubs that operate the trails were concerned 
— why can’t they be paid to utilize their equipment on the 
parkland rather than parks buying high-priced equipment to do 
very limited amount of trail? Where what it does for them, is it 
would give them additional revenue certainly, but it also means 
that they are making a circuit. They come up to one side of the 
park; they can’t utilize their equipment. They now have to 
transport it to the other side of the park and continue to groom 
the trails, whereas if they were paid to go through the park, they 
could make a big circuit and end up back at the original spot 
where they had launched their trail grooming. So there is some 
very practical reasons why the clubs wanted to be able to do the 
trail grooming through the parks as well and be compensated 
for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another concern that we have is all the fees will 
now be set in regulation. What sort of controls will be in place 
to ensure that this isn’t simply a method to extract money from 
the snowmobiling population for some other use? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these issues are some of the ones that we will 
be raising in Committee of the Whole when this Bill comes 
before the committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development that Bill No. 46, The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Regional 
Economic and Co-operative Development, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 46, The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 46 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 40 — The 
Income Trust Liability Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise today 
to make comments regarding this Bill. Income trusts have 
become an increasingly popular investment vehicle not just in 
our province but throughout Canada. 
 
There was a number of small clouds that sort of circulated and 
hung over income trusts as an investment vehicle. One was the 
great disaster that the previous federal Finance minister found 
himself in with regarding leaking certain information on the 
taxation of income trusts. And fortunately the last federal 
election has provided a very satisfactory resolution to that 
particular issue. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there is another issue that this Bill is 
intended to address, and that’s the potential liability for 
beneficiaries of a trust. And that liability would come by the 
treatment by the courts of the beneficiaries or participants in an 
income trust, in the event that the trust lost money or ran into a 
financial difficulty, and whether the courts would treat the 
income trust as a partnership and would apportion loss back to 
the participants in the trust. 
 
This Bill goes towards addressing that problem to prevent the 
beneficiary from the trust from having that liability. And what 
participants in an income trust will now have at risk will be 
their original contribution and only their original contribution. 
They will not be at risk for anything else unless it’s specifically 
acknowledged, whether they have signed a guarantee or 
somehow became involved in a trust otherwise. We’re pleased 
to see that this Bill addresses that concern because of the 
increasing popularity of income trusts.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to allow this Bill to go to 
committee so that we can ensure that there’s been adequate 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

discussion and consultation with investment brokers and 
investment dealers throughout the province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly, it’s been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 40, The Income 
Trust Liability Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, The 
Income Trust Liability Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 40 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 45 — The 
Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand and comment for a few minutes on Bill 45, An Act to 
amend The Local Government Election Act. And basically, Mr. 
Speaker, these amendments are generally housekeeping in 
nature, changing some language and such as that. 
 
There’s a couple of things that it does do, I’d like to just point 
out. The amendment allows urban municipalities to hold joint 
elections with school divisions, and that provides some 
uniformity with the rural municipalities. It also changes the 
definition of voter from a person that “is an occupant of 
property in . . . [an RM] that is used for business purposes;” to a 
person that “is licensed with respect to property in the . . . [RM] 
used for business purposes.” 
 
It also sets out the date for resignation of a councillor who 

wishes to run for reeve and make them correspond to 
amendments made to The Rural Municipality Act of 2003. 
 
One of the items in this Bill that I think we all would agree with 
is amendments to this Act will ensure that voters are only 
allowed one vote regardless if they qualify as a voter twice 
under the definition. I think we would all agree with that one. 
Also official agents for candidates must take an oath swearing 
that they are the official agent, and this actually corresponds 
with school board election procedures. And a change on 
election day — which is done provincially, but now for 
municipal elections — no candidate or official agent or any 
person is allowed to canvass for votes at a polling station. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s only one flag that was really raised by 
myself when I looked at this Bill and the comments by the 
minister on this Bill. And what was stated was the amendments 
were developed in consultation with a bunch of different people 
— the city clerks, SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association], administrators. 
 
But that raises a flag because we have heard in the past from 
that government that they have done consultations, and in fact 
we know that the consultations have not been thorough and 
complete. The example is the smoking issue and what resulted 
with smoking in Native casinos. And so we know that the 
consultation was not done. And there’s other cases, Mr. 
Speaker, where the consultation process has not really been 
thorough and has not been accurate, if you wish. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do have some concerns about the 
consultation process. But all of the issues that I have we can 
bring up in committee, so I would recommend that this is 
forwarded to committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly, it has been 
moved by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
45, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And to which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
45, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Government Relations that Bill No. 45 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 45 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 35 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant 
la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise to 
make comments on Bill No. 35, The Interpretation Act. In the 
post-Enron world that we now live in, US [United States] public 
corporations trade differently. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act has 
posed a much higher standard of care and burden on directors. 
 
This Bill is probably in recognition of the potential liability that 
came out of the US court cases and the US legislation and tries 
to bring this province’s legislation into consistency with what is 
taking place elsewhere. It allows for protection of directors 
from liability where the liability would arise from their reliance 
on professionally designated people such as a lawyer or an 
accountant. It allows them to make reasonable inquiries from 
those professionals and to rely on the advice that they get. It 
also allows corporations to purchase insurance and pay for the 
insurance in advance to allow for the coverage of director’s 
liability to cover these particular situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will be seen as progressive and moving 
our legislation forward. Recruitment of directors for 
corporations, both public and private, is sometimes a difficult 
thing to do and largely because of the risk of liability. We are 
pleased to see this Bill moving forward and would like to see it 
moved into committee so that we can move on with the 
consultative process with members of the investment 
committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly, it’s been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 35, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 35, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 35 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 31 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill recognizes and clarifies 
the roles of certified general accountants, Society of 
Management Accountants, and the chartered accountants of 
Saskatchewan. It recognizes their professional status and allows 
them specific legislative authority to hold funds for trust 
accounts, for builders’ liens, for royalties, and a variety of other 
things. It gives them some of the same obligations and liabilities 
that lawyers have in holding funds and administering funds for 
other people. 
 
It is a Bill that has been requested and is supported by the three 
professional bodies supporting accountants. And it is a Bill that 
hopefully will streamline business operations and allow more 
options for people that have to have funds held. They can look 
towards other people and it gives greater diversity. As a lawyer 
I guess I should be somewhat troubled that it is diluting the 
areas that I may practise in, but in spite of that I think it is 
probably a worthwhile endeavour, and we certainly support this 
Bill moving forward so we can once again participate in the 
consultative process that will take place in committee. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly has been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 31, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 31, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment 
Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 31 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill No. 31 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 37 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a companion piece of 
legislation to The Interpretation Act. It provides indemnity and 
insurance provisions for directors of certain corporate entities. 
These would be corporations that would be incorporated under 
The Business Corporations Act and The New Generation 
Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union Act, and The Crown 
Corporations Act. And it specifically allows for corporations to 
enter into contracts to indemnify directors of the corporation 
and to acquire insurance in support of that indemnity where the 
directors have acted in good faith. 
 
The downside to this legislation is the risk that investors or 
others may have that they may well be precluded from a remedy 
against the directors. But once we move forward into these, I 
think it will likely turn out that we want to maintain a fair and 
equitable balance, and that this moves us back towards a fair 
playing field where we can find and recruit quality, high-calibre 
directors. And we’ve also maintained a reasonable standard for 
people that are dealing with those corporate entities. 
 
We will once again be prepared to see this Bill move forward 
into committee so that once again a consultative process can 
take place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly, it’s been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 37, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 37, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 37 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell, that Bill No. 36 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 
2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des 
administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (n° 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a companion Bill to Bill 
No. 37. It broadens and deals with non-profit corporations and 
also co-operatives. It contains similar provisions protecting 
directors and allowing directors to be indemnified by the 
corporate entities as well as obtaining insurance to protect those 
individuals. It does certain other things like deals in English and 
French, and once again would be regarded as a progressive 
piece of legislation. 
 
We will once again want to go through the consultative process 
as the Bill moves forward through committee, and am prepared 
to allow it to go to committee at this time. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly, it has been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 36, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for this 
question? 
 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 36, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 36 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor, that Bill No. 43 — The 
Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
join in the debate on An Act respecting Medical Radiation 
Technologists, Bill No. 43. This Bill looks like it’s pretty much 
a Bill that has been asked by the radiation technologists. It’s 
regarding self-regulation. Certainly they have been calling for 
this over a number of years — many, many years. And after 
speaking to them briefly, the Bill looks like it’s in order as to 
what they want to see in the Bill, Mr. Speaker. So I at this time 
would move it to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 43, The 
Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the Bill be referred to the Crown and Central 
Agencies Committee. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 43 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 42 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 42 — The 
Respiratory Therapists Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 42, an 
Act respecting respiratory therapists amendment Act is again a 
Bill similar to the previous one. It’s been a Bill that has been 
driven by the association for the most part. It’s a Bill that 
they’ve wanted for 11 years. They’ve also been able to have a 
look at it regarding self-regulation and it looks like it covers 
most of the bases that they’ve been interested in. 
 
But I do want to say a little bit about this Bill, and I guess I’m 
not sure who would lead the association to think that the Bill 
would go through without some scrutiny, whether it’s a 
planning branch or whoever it is from the government that had 
relayed some information to this association that the Bill would 
pass through almost automatically, which is, you know, it’s 
very, very frustrating when you hear associations coming back 
to us with that type of information. And if they get that 
information from the government, it is extremely frustrating. 
 
And I know different Bills over a number of years . . . I 
remember The Cities Act and I remember town administrators 
and town — this was an Act regarding urban municipalities — 
mayors and such getting back to us saying, how come you’re 
holding this up? Well we’re not holding it up; we’re making 
sure the proper scrutiny is done. 
 
So whoever in the government is putting forward information to 
these associations that Bills will pass through without any 
scrutiny needs to learn the system a little bit better. Because it 
would be absolutely delinquent on our part not to do the proper 
due diligence to make sure these Bills cover what they are 
intended to cover. 
 
And in this situation with the respiratory therapists, after talking 
to them it looks like it covers off everything that they’re 
interested in. But I can tell you from years past where Bills have 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

gone through and associations will come back and say, well 
that’s not quite exactly what we thought was going to be in the 
Bill, it would be . . . we would be lax in our duties if we didn’t 
hold the Bill up so the associations got to have a look. In this 
situation I believe, again, it was driven by the association. 
They’ve been waiting 11 years for it; it meets their 
expectations. So I don’t see any need to hold it up any longer. 
So we’d be willing to move this to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 42, The 
Respiratory Therapists Act be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall Bill No. 42 be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the Bill be referred to the Crowns and Central 
Agencies Committee. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 42 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crowns and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill No. 42 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crowns and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 41 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 41, The 
Partnership Amendment Act, is a Bill that again we’ve looked 
at and there are some questions that we’ve looked at and for the 
most part have been answered. It adds new definition to the Act, 
defines firms, firm name, Indian band, and person — all useful 
definitions in the business world. So it sets out provisions that 
an individual must be 18 to be a partner. 
 
So a number of those changes in the Act have been looked at 
and certainly we have talked to a number of the stakeholders 
that are impacted by this Act. For the most part the issue of the 
changing of names and things like that, firm name, means that 

the name under which the firm carries on its business, issues 
like that. It’s more of a housekeeping Act than anything else. 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move — after we’ve 
talked to the people that it impacts — we would move this to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 41, The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 41, The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 41 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 41 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 39 — The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to speak to Bill No. 39, an 
amendment to the watershed authority Act. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is quite short. It has one new clause in it. It deals with the 
watershed . . . Clause 83.1 gives the Watershed Authority the 
ability to register notices of complaint against landowners. 
These notices will be registered on the title. 
 
It deals with drainage that takes place out in rural 
Saskatchewan, draining water from one parcel of land onto 
another. This is an issue, Mr. Speaker, that can cause a great 
deal of friction amongst neighbours and amongst neighbouring 
communities and municipalities. And particularly in a year like 
this where in parts of the province we are seeing record runoffs 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

and record amount of water that is collecting up on farmers’ 
fields, and there’s always the desire to have that water drained 
into a drainage system and eventually finds its way into a creek 
and then into a river and so on. 
 
And if that in fact is the case, that is quite the most desirable 
situation. But quite often what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that one 
landowner will do some drainage work in the fall to drain water 
that will collect in the spring — and it’s called creative 
landscaping — and it’ll drain off into the neighbour’s field, and 
the neighbour ends up with excessive water. And as I said, it 
has caused in the past and I suspect will cause in the future 
heightened tensions between landowners and so on. So anything 
that we can do to deal with the issue, I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
is certainly a step in the right direction. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to add at this time that there are a 
group of individuals within our province and without in other 
provinces who are developing a concept called the alternative 
land use service. And what that principle or that concept 
embodies, Mr. Speaker, is that landowners would be paid for 
the environmental goods and services that they provide. 
 
And up until this point in time, landowners have all the costs 
associated with water collecting on their fields and none of the 
benefits. Society will benefit through enhanced wildlife 
population, the ecosystems of wetlands. 
 
And a lot of this strife and a lot of this desire to drain standing 
bodies of water off of farmers’ fields would be alleviated if the 
farmers would see some compensation for that particular 
service that they are providing to society. And so we need to 
embrace the concept of alternative land use service or ALUS as 
it’s known by its acronym. We need to develop the systems that 
will allow landowners to be compensated for the environmental 
goods and services that they are providing. 
 
However having said that, this Bill certainly doesn’t have it. It 
has the legal ability for the Watershed Authority to register 
notices of complaint against the title which would then impede 
that piece of property from being sold. Ownership probably 
wouldn’t take place — at least that’s my understanding — until 
that notice of complaint was removed from the title. 
 
There are a number of questions around that whole procedure 
that we would like to discuss with the minister but, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I think we can deal with that in committee. So 
therefore we are prepared to move this piece of legislation 
forward to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly read for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
Bill No. 39, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 39, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment 
Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that Bill No. 39, The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority Amendment Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Infrastructure . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Economy. Sorry. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 38 — The 
Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act/Loi sur 
le règlement des différends internationaux relatifs aux 
investissements be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Speaker, I had said earlier in remarks 
on another Bill that the fact that Saskatchewan is moving 
increasing into a national and a global economy, and as such 
it’s necessary to bring our legislation into line with what takes 
place in other jurisdictions. 
 
This Bill will take a significant step towards that. It will enter 
into force the convention on the settlement of investment 
disputes between states and nationals of other states. 
 
It actually is a Bill that goes back and was created in other 
jurisdictions as far back as 1965. So this is a doctrine or a 
convention that was in place for actually over 40 years. Canada 
signed the international convention for the settlement of 
international investments dispute, and it applies to 
Saskatchewan when it is entered into force for Canada. So it 
becomes as such, Madam Deputy Speaker, for our province to 
pass the enabling legislation for it to come into place in this 
province. 
 
Under the British North America Act the issue of property and 
civil rights is something that is exclusively within the 
jurisdiction of the provinces. So as such it becomes under 
provincial jurisdiction and as such becomes necessary for the 
province to enact enabling legislation. 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

It includes as a schedule the entire convention so that the entire 
document becomes part of our statutes and it makes changes to 
incorporate that agreement and to make it applicable in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the significant things it will hopefully do is streamline 
investment dispute mechanisms that will take place between 
other countries and Saskatchewan. It creates and allows for 
arbitration proceedings and may preclude people from having 
access to our courts or tribunals or otherwise. 
 
In certain situations, Madam Deputy Speaker, it becomes 
necessary to go forward with this where you don’t allow things 
to have direct recourse to the courts. As much as I’m a fan of 
our court system, it is necessary at times to bring in other 
parties or other agencies that have specific expertise in dealing 
with those type of things so as such we can have another entity 
that has the expertise to deal with it in a professional and a 
timely manner. So for that reason, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
we’re prepared to let this Bill proceed to committee. 
 
We know that we want to be competitive with other 
jurisdictions. We want to have a framework, an environment 
that we can work with other jurisdictions and it’s necessary that 
we enact this and bring this into place as quickly as we can. 
 
We know that we have a large economic force next to us with 
Alberta and I know we talk about and don’t like to talk about 
but continue to talk about Alberta envy. But if we want to 
remain competitive, we have to know and accept the fact that 
Alberta is one of our significant competitors and as such we 
have to have the appropriate dispute mechanisms in place so 
that people will want to invest and will see our province as 
being an attractive place in which to do business. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this type of vehicle will hopefully 
serve our province well. In the 40 years it’s been in existence in 
other jurisdictions, it has served them well and, as such, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we are prepared to allow this Bill to proceed to 
committee. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 38, The 
Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 38, The Settlement 
of International Investment Disputes Act be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 38, The Settlement of International 
Investment Disputes Act be referred to the Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 44 — The 
Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. This is 
an opportunity to put a couple of thoughts in place with regards 
to this particular Bill. One of the things that we have to make 
sure in this day and age is that the federations and the 
associations of people like the teachers or any other 
professional groups are in fact adequately covered through 
legislation, that their concerns are met with clear and 
unequivocal definitions and directions within the legislation. 
 
I think that’s been the problem that has accumulated over a 
number of years with The Teachers’ Federation Act. It became 
a collection of amendments, and it became to the point where a 
lot of the things were either not up-to-date or not very clear, so 
in this particular case the amendments in Bill 44 are such that it 
allows some of the things that you’d normally expect 
professional groups to be able to do. 
 
It appears then that because there’s a lot of consultation with the 
association, they’re very much in favour. I would at this time 
recommend that this goes to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Others have something to say. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Others will have something to say I’ve been 
told. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be here and join in the debate today 
about The Teachers’ Federation Act. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
in prefacing my remarks, I would like to first of all, on the 
public record, correct a comment that was made by my 
colleague, the member from Carrot River Valley, when he 
entered into the debate. He mistakenly implied that there was 
some direct connection between the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation and funding of the NDP party. 
 
I would like to categorically state that that is not correct, that 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation has been outstanding in 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

making sure that it doesn’t align itself with any political party 
and very diligent in the fact that it makes sure that there are no 
dues or fees that are attributed to contributions to any political 
party. 
 
I think it’s also important to state that in their governance and 
operation bylaws, it states under category 2.9.4, and I’ll quote: 
 

The STF . . . [does] not align itself with any political party 
or group, but encourages its members to be active in the 
political parties of their choice, in seeking political office 
and in influencing the electorate on educational matters. 
The STF will support such individual actions with 
information and training. 
 

I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is important function to 
recognize that the Saskatchewan teachers have a critical 
responsibility in making sure that they educate our children in 
the political process. And certainly the Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute that’s sponsored by the provincial legislature 
is an example to make sure that we, as legislators, have all the 
tools made available to our teachers that are necessary in order 
that they properly portray the political process in our province. 
 
So in saying that, I want to make sure that the record is set 
straight, and I want to thank the teachers for their understanding 
and the work that they do. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in speaking to the Bill, I’ve had the 
opportunity to have consultations with the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation; I’ve had opportunities to talk to the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association. And they all assure 
me that this legislation is not designed to change the powers or 
the responsibilities or the relative balance that there currently 
exists in existing legislation but is indeed an opportunity for the 
legislation to be upgraded and modernized in a contemporary 
framework. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think this is appropriate. Certainly 
the work that the teachers do — and as represented by their 
organization, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation — that 
it’s critically important that all components of the education 
process work together to make sure that the education of our 
children is indeed done very, very well. 
 
[15:45] 
 
You know, I’ve often said that there’s a special bond between 
teachers and the parents of this province. When they take their 
child to their first day of school, when they walk up the school 
steps with their son or daughter holding onto their finger, it’s a 
very emotional and a special day for parents and these students 
and I think for teachers as well because there’s a special bond 
that’s created between those parents and their expectations for 
their child and the teaching system and by and large that’s 
embodied by a teacher. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we can’t 
fail, and we shouldn’t fail to articulate the special place that 
teachers have in developing the citizens of the future. 
 
There’s a lot of challenge and stress and strain in the 
educational process right now with the amalgamation process, 
with the reality that we’re expected to lose almost 4,000 
students next year, that we’ve lost 3,800 students this year. That 

creates a great deal of uncertainty and concern for our teachers 
as they strive to make sure that programs are relevant and that 
the very best curriculum is being offered to our children. And 
certainly the profession needs to continue to be diligent and 
continue to work together with school boards and educators of 
every type to make sure that the well-being of our children is 
maintained. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are a few technical details in this 
Bill that I think need to be clarified, but certainly that 
information can be done very comfortably in committee. And I 
would suggest that we would have no further impediment to 
adjourning this Bill and indeed would like to see it referred to 
committee. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 44, The 
Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ 
Federation Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 33, an amendment to The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act, is a very short Bill. Basically what it 
does is that it removes some of the land that is currently being 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

protected by the habitat protection Act and removes it from that 
protection so that it can be used for the purpose of settling a 
specific land claim with the Mistawasis First Nation. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we certainly don’t have a problem 
with that. There are some questions that we would want to ask 
the minister, and we will be doing that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But before I recommend we move it to committee, I think I 
would like to just make a few statements about wildlife habitat 
in general. I certainly feel that environmentally sensitive areas 
or areas that are unique and have a species of wildlife that need 
to be protected or that we need to encourage greater numbers of 
certain wildlife, we need to set areas aside. And I think by 
doing so with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act it certainly 
has proved to be one system that will work to accomplish those 
sorts of things. 
 
However we could also I believe encourage wildlife habitat on 
other properties that don’t necessarily need to fall into the 
category of a protected area. Through much of our province we 
have farm land that is not suitable . . . the whole area, the whole 
quarter section as such, or section is not suitable for agricultural 
purposes, particularly grain production, and does have wildlife 
habitat on it. And again going back to some of my earlier 
comments this afternoon, where if the landowners . . . 
Landowners are great stewards of the land, and they, most 
landowners, like to see wildlife on their property, and they will 
go out of their way to leave some wildlife habitat. But again as I 
said earlier they bear the sole cost of doing such things and 
enhancing wildlife habitat. 
 
And I would just like to reinforce the statements I made earlier 
where there is a concept that is currently out there and is being 
tested with pilot projects, one as near as our neighbouring 
province of Manitoba. I understand Alberta is moving down the 
road to have pilot projects set up whereby they evaluate the 
mechanisms and the effectiveness of paying landowners for the 
ecological goods and services, the environmental goods and 
services they do provide society with, whether that’s wildlife 
habitat or protection of our watershed areas, riparian areas, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And that is something that I would 
urge this government to get on board with, the alternative land 
use concept because I see many benefits for wildlife but also for 
the landowners, and it’s a concept that we need to move on. 
 
But having said that, Madam Deputy Speaker, getting back to 
Bill 33, as I had said earlier, we have a number of questions for 
the minister, but I believe all those questions can be discussed 
with the minister in committee. So I would recommend we 
move this to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
Bill No. 33, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 
2006. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly it be now read a second 
time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 33, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 33, The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the Bill No. 34, an amendment to The Wildlife 
Act, deals with a number of issues that are quite important. It 
deals with the provisions that are currently in the Act that for 
the seizure of illegal wildlife that individuals may have 
captured. Currently the provisions are quite onerous on the 
Department of Environment staff to house the seized animals. 
The amendments talk or make provision for partial seizure and I 
believe basically streamline the procedures in dealing in that 
area. 
 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, by reading the Bill and listening 
to the minister in his second reading speech, there are 
provisions to amend certain sections of the Act that deal with an 
individual’s ability to obtain licences — whether it’d be hunting 
licences or fishing licences. Currently if an individual is 
convicted of an offence dealing with big game, they could still 
perhaps qualify for a game bird licence or a fishing licence and 
other licences other than big game. 
 
The amendments are proposed to change that so that those 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

individuals who have been charged with offences under the Act 
dealing with, as I’d said, big game, the amendments will 
prevent those individuals from obtaining other licences, wildlife 
licences which I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, certainly seem 
reasonable. We certainly will be discussing these changes, these 
amendments. 
 
There’s one proposed amendment to the Act that’s contained in 
this Bill that certainly we would have some questions about 
extending the commencement date for prosecution beyond the 
two-year limit. I understand that there could be some reasons 
for delaying those procedures beyond the two-year limit. 
 
We would like to have the reasons and the processes, the 
reasoning processes that led to this amendment. But I believe, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that our questions can be answered in 
committee. I believe we will be taking some time on this 
particular Bill to examine all the various sections to the Bill and 
making sure that what is intended is actually in the Bill and that 
the amendments are workable and that they make some . . . that 
common sense is being used in some of these provisions 
because there are some changes that are departing from 
established procedure in this Bill, but I believe we can deal with 
those issues in committee. So therefore I would recommend that 
this Bill move to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 34, 
The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 34, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that Bill No. 34, The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 28 — The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I just want 
to add a few more comments to the comments I raised the other 
day regarding the veterinary Act that is currently before the 
Assembly. And let me begin, Madam Deputy Speaker, just 
making a few comments in regards to the appearance that a 
number of veterinarians may be getting throughout the province 
that the Saskatchewan Party is trying to create a division 
between veterinarians themselves and the very clients they 
work with — the agriculture community and the farmers in 
those communities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, about a year and a half ago we had a 
piece of legislation that was brought to this Assembly by the 
government. And at the time the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association was really pressing for . . . and I 
remember when the association president and the director and 
CEO [chief executive officer] came to meet with our caucus in 
the fall of 2004 regarding the municipal Act, and they were 
very adamant that as a caucus, an opposition caucus — 
members of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition — that this piece 
of legislation be moved forward because they had taken the 
time to consult with everyone that would be affected by the 
legislation and that there was nothing in the legislation that 
would impact other municipalities or other levels of 
government within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And it appeared to us as well. And the sense that we received 
was that the minister had given and the government had given 
the assurances that when the Act was introduced, that the Act 
would speedily move through the legislative process. And we 
all know, Madam Deputy Speaker, that at that time we had a 
14-day, I believe it was around a 14-day legislative session. 
And each and every one of us knows that when we began in 
November ’04, we started with a Throne Speech which eats up 
about eight days of the legislative process. Then Bills are 
introduced. 
 
And Bills don’t go through the House in a matter of a few 
hours, Madam Deputy Speaker. A Bill is laid on . . . notice is 
given, and 48 hours later the minister would introduce second 
reading to which the opposition would respond. And it just 
seemed . . . the sense was that SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, felt that the legislation that they’d 
been working on for a good period of time was indeed fully 
thought out. There weren’t any problems with it, and that piece 
of legislation should move through the Assembly in a few short 
days. 
 
And of course, Madam Deputy Speaker, we found out that 
within a few hours there were some significant problems with 
that piece of legislation. And at the time the Saskatchewan 
Party, Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, they indicated to the 
government we would continue to debate this Bill. It would not 
pass in the fall session. And we had suggested as well at the 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

time that the government pull the Bill and address the areas of 
major concern and reintroduce it in the spring. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, what happened was the Bill 
didn’t move forward in the fall. We expected it to come up in 
the spring, to which it showed up on the order paper when the 
House sat. And then a couple of days later, we all of a sudden 
noticed it had left, was not on the order paper any more. The 
government had actually pulled it. 
 
And indeed, Madam Deputy Speaker, the government did take 
that piece of legislation — that fairly large piece of legislation 
— and after they’d been listening as well and they’d been 
hearing the arguments from all the other stakeholders about 
some of the problems that that Bill had and that would impact 
their associations or their ability to provide governance to their 
level, whether it’s at the municipal or the urban community, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and the government listened. The 
government pulled the Bill reintroduced the Bill with a number 
of changes that as we sat down and talked to the stakeholders, 
most of the stakeholders could say at the end of the day really 
met what was intended. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we now have The Veterinarians 
Act, and it would seem to me that the same thing has happened, 
is that this Act has been introduced. And there are a number of 
good parts to this legislation, but there are some concerns as 
well. 
 
Some of the comments however we’re getting from individuals 
are along the lines that we’re trying to create a rift between the 
individual veterinarians and their farmer customers. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that is certainly the farthest thing from 
the truth. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, if the association in consulting 
with its members is indicating that the government had told 
them that this piece of legislation met all the requirements and 
would move through in a short order, unfortunately, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I believe the government — if that’s what’s 
happened — certainly the government was not forthright with 
the veterinary association and then the veterinary association as 
well has maybe not been communicating as well with its 
members. They’re communicating what they’ve been led to 
believe by the minister and by this government. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when a piece of legislation comes to 
the Assembly, it’s as I indicated earlier. The Veterinarians Act 
was introduced, and 48 hours later the minister did second 
reading. And our opposition critic responded to it and indicated 
that, as an opposition doing its job forthrightly and doing it 
appropriately, that we would adjourn the debate at the time, and 
we would consult with people throughout the province in 
regards to the legislation and whether or not The Veterinarians 
Act not only met the guidelines that the Saskatchewan 
Veterinary Medical Association was looking for, but indeed that 
it didn’t infringe on the abilities and the rights of others in the 
province — farmers themselves — who would seek at 
performing procedures that they’ve done in the past and that 
wouldn’t impact what the individual producers have over the 
years done in their line of maintaining their livestock herds. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I can appreciate the fact that the 

veterinary association has some major concerns in regards to 
how they look at disciplining members they feel may not be 
complying with the broad view of what a veterinarian’s 
responsibilities are and how they not only perform their duties 
in the province, but also how they work within the association. I 
can appreciate that, and that’s part of what this piece of 
legislation is intending to do. 
 
On the other hand, Madam Deputy Speaker, this piece of 
legislation as well, as we have seen over the past number of 
months and even today . . . I had an individual mention to me 
over the weekend, indicated that some family members — 
there’s I believe a son and a daughter are veterinarians, and I’m 
not sure if they practise in the province, and a nephew — 
there’s a number of family members. And his indication was 
that even within his own family there wasn’t agreement 
amongst these individuals themselves who are practising 
veterinarians in regards to this piece of legislation. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s only appropriate that my 
colleagues and I take adequate time to review the legislation 
and to raise the concerns that have been brought to our 
attention, whether it’s by individual groups like the Moose 
Mountain trail blazers or whether it’s individual veterinarians 
themselves, Madam Deputy Speaker. I think it’s important that 
we raise these concerns, and it’s certainly our responsibility to 
ensure that the concerns of everyone are addressed. 
 
And at the end of the day, Madam Deputy Speaker, we would 
trust that with the concerns that have been raised not only with 
our caucus but with the minister and with government members 
opposite, that we could look at the Bill. And it doesn’t mean the 
Bill has to totally die on the order paper. But through some 
amendments made to the Bill, we can address those concerns, 
and the needs of the veterinary association can be met as well as 
recognizing the rights and responsibilities of other individuals. 
 
Now when I spoke last time, I spoke of an elderly gentleman 
who used to do a fair bit of practice. And I may have left the 
wrong impression that this gentleman basically did and 
operated a veterinary clinic which, if I did, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that certainly wasn’t right, and I apologize for that. 
This gentleman helped a lot of individuals out over the years 
but in a limited fashion, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
This gentleman didn’t go around and prescribe medications. 
There were certain procedures that he had learned quite capably 
of, and in fact the local veterinarian of the day was quite 
knowledgeable of. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, even as I 
grew up on the farm with my dad and brothers, on many 
occasions after we had exhausted calling the three or four 
veterinarians in the area and found that they were all out on a 
call, in fact the closest veterinarian would suggest maybe 
calling this gentleman if we needed a hand before he was able 
to arrive at the farm. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunate that maybe we 
created some waves that have raised some concerns with 
veterinarians because that certainly wasn’t the intent. The intent 
of the debate is to raise the other issues that have been brought 
to our attention and the importance that this legislation at the 
end of the day recognizes the rights and responsibilities of 
individuals, and it doesn’t impede especially farm entrepreneurs 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

or farmers or . . . and in this case, one of the major concerns in 
this piece of legislation is equine dentistry. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleagues and I have 
received a number of letters and while we appreciate the letters 
— we appreciate the comments and the thoughts that have been 
brought forward by the individual veterinarians who have taken 
the time to write — unfortunately sometimes, maybe from what 
we have said in debate, may not necessarily reflect the views or 
how an individual veterinarian may have interpreted the debate. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, to indicate that all the 
veterinarians are in line or on board with this piece of 
legislation would certainly be far from the case, as we see that 
we have had veterinarians themselves who have called. In fact, I 
may have quoted last time, but I just want to add to the quote I 
made. And this comes from a gentleman who has not signed his 
name on, but one of my colleagues knows him very well — 
veterinarian, been there in the area for a number of years. And 
he writes, and he says: 
 

It used to be fun being a Veterinarian. It is not much fun 
any more. The work is still the same, it is still most 
enjoyable to see and treat the wide array of animals and 
for the most part, to deal with the people who own these 
animals. But there’s an ominous cloud over the horizon 
that is taking the pleasure out of it. It is becoming too 
risky. 
 

And he goes on to talk about litigation. And as we see in so 
many associations and as we have seen over the past number of 
years, so many groups and organizations . . . We are living in a 
society now where it’s so easy to immediately draw a 
conclusion on . . . whether you’re in an argument or whether a 
dispute has taken place and immediately go to the courts to try 
to settle that argument. And it sounds, as this gentleman is 
writing, that that is certainly becoming the case and that the 
veterinary association as well, veterinarians are facing that. 
 
And as this individual said, well he enjoys working with the 
animals that he has worked over the years and continues to 
work with and with the farm community that he continues to 
work with. There are some areas about being a veterinarian that 
he finds becoming more difficult. And it’s like he said. It’s just 
taken the fun out of being a veterinarian. 
 
He also went on to say there’s another element that clouds the 
horizon far more ominously than the litigation spiral. That is a 
self-regulating professional association syndrome. And he goes 
on to list a number of associations where we have had 
individuals, questions . . . where we’ve had questions in regards 
to how associations have worked with and treated their 
members. 
 
And he raises a number of points that he feels need to be 
addressed in the piece of legislation, so that as a veterinarian he 
is treated fairly by the association he is a member of and that 
indeed he also recognizes the fact of the responsibility of 
individuals to treat this profession seriously as well as 
recognizing the rights of individuals. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the legislation before us certainly is 
one that needs clarity. There certainly are a number of areas that 

we need to . . . As we debate the piece of legislation and as we 
work with the Minister of Agriculture and the government, we 
need to look at very carefully so that at the end of the day when 
the legislation finally moves through the process of the 
Legislative Assembly, that indeed all of the questions and the 
concerns that have been raised are addressed. 
 
And it’s imperative, whether it’s . . . Veterinarians themselves 
have some concerns with the legislation and how it’s written. 
And I guess the concern, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the 
concern arises around, what does this specific section mean? 
Well can it be interpreted differently than the way the section is 
laid out? 
 
And that’s a legitimate concern. Individuals want to know that 
when a section says one thing that that’s exactly what it means 
and that the association can’t go beyond that; that the 
association has the ability to deal with its members to a point 
but not over and above a point; that that individual, that 
member actually has rights as well, and that they need to be 
adhered to and followed through. And therefore, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it’s important that we take the time to debate 
this legislation and debate it thoroughly. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunate that in legislation at 
times as we debate legislation as individual members and as we 
raise concerns that have been brought legitimately to our 
attention as opposition members, that individuals within 
organizations who may be impacted by legislation like The 
Veterinarians Act may feel we’re trying to drive a wedge 
between them and the people they work with. That’s 
unfortunate because, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the 
privilege over the years of getting to know a number of 
veterinarians and knowing them very well. 
 
We’ve had the privilege in our area of being able to call a 
veterinarian in Kipling. And if the gentleman, or the 
veterinarian was not available . . . And unfortunately, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we must also acknowledge that many of these 
practices are single individual practices. And as a result when 
the veterinarian gets called out, he may be out on a call that may 
be an hour or two hours on the call. And you may have 
something that needs to be addressed even sooner than that, 
much more quickly than two hours. 
 
So where we happen to live, we have the privilege of either 
calling Whitewood or we can call Wawota. They’re about equal 
distance. And on many occasions we’ve been fortunate. We’ve 
been able to find someone in one of the other communities who 
was able to come immediately. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the concerns that was 
raised — and I appreciate the comments that were raised by the 
individual who wrote me — is veterinarian medicine is 
changing quite dramatically. And there’s no doubt about it that 
a lot of veterinarians find small animal practice a lot more 
rewarding and not as taxing, I don’t believe, as large animal 
practice, in view of the fact that over the years large animal 
practice has meant that you’ve had to be in your vehicle driving 
for miles. 
 



April 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

In fact the veterinarian from Kipling will be driving up to 
Montmartre and even further, or south to the Moose Mountain, 
or north into the Broadview area. It just depends on where the 
call comes from. And if it’s a call that the individual producer 
isn’t able to load up the animal that they need to have dealt with 
and bring it into the clinic, it means that that veterinarian is on 
the road. And it may be 15, 20, 25, sometimes 35, 40 minutes. 
Which means that’s an hour just in itself just on the road, and 
then whatever time you have to take at the location you were 
called to, to deal with the situation. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, what we’ve seen over the past 
number of years, we’ve seen a major shift as more and more 
producers have really upgraded their corral-handling facilities. 
Most producers now have a fifth wheel livestock trailer, and in 
many cases it’s actually quite simple to transport an animal to 
the clinic. And I can appreciate the fact that, as was raised in the 
one letter, how much easier it is for a veterinarian. Yes it is 
easier if producers can bring their animal to the clinic but that 
doesn’t always work out. 
 
And in the past it certainly wasn’t the practice of the day. It’s 
just over the past number of years, a few short years, that we’ve 
actually moved to larger animal clinics in communities where 
people can bring their large animals for veterinary services and 
to be checked, to have a variety of diseases dealt with and 
problems in animals dealt with. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, if in my comments I’ve left the 
impression that what I was trying to drive a wedge or wasn’t 
appreciative of the veterinary services that we’ve had over the 
years, I apologize for that, Madam Deputy Speaker, but I also 
want those who may be following this debate today to realize 
that by the fact that The Veterinarians Act has been adjourned 
on a number of occasions does not mean it necessarily . . . that 
the Act at the end of the day may not move through the House. 
 
The government may decide as they did in the municipal Act to 
pull it and come back with the revisions. Or the government can 
certainly let us know a number of areas that we’ve already 
raised that they’re getting concerns raised and drawn to their 
attention, what areas where they can bring forward amendments 
when we get into committee that we will address a number of 
the concerns that have been raised with us, and the legislation 
can move forward. 
 
But it certainly would be inappropriate for any legislation or 
any opposition party to just let a piece of legislation to come to 
the floor, be set on the table, introduced, and move through the 
House without giving it thoughtful and indeed in-depth 
scrutiny, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I trust that having added those few 
words can alleviate some of the concerns that have been raised 
to my colleagues and I trust that the veterinary association 
themselves will be more upfront with their own members and 
that if they have not been . . . the government hasn’t been as 
forthright, that the government will acknowledge as well that 
there is a process and say it may take us some time for this 
legislation to move forward but we will move forward in the 
best interests of everyone involved — not only your 
association, but your members and other individuals that will be 
impacted by this piece of legislation. 

So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to 
again rise in this Assembly to speak to The Veterinarians Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the minister for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, for that 
promotion but I think we may have to wait for a few months. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I was listening very closely to my 
colleague, the member for Moosomin, who eloquently 
explained the legislative process and the role of an opposition 
and the duties in fact of an opposition to make sure that the 
legislation that is passed by this Legislative Assembly is the 
very best piece of . . . best that it can be. 
 
And in this case, Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular Bill 
that we have before us in its present form is not that. It can be 
improved and therefore we need to take our time to consider the 
legislation, look at possible amendments, hear from all those 
groups and parties that are affected by this piece of legislation 
and hear their concerns so that we can see the full picture and 
the full impact of this legislation. 
 
And as my colleague, the member from Moosomin, had 
indicated, that we have seen this in the past with most recently 
The Municipalities Act which wasn’t the best piece of 
legislation that could be put forward. There were many 
inadequacies and eventually the government ended up pulling 
that particular Bill and resubmitting a new Bill with the 
improvements that were required. 
 
Now I’m not sure whether it is the intention of the government 
to pull this particular piece of legislation and bring forward a 
new Bill that would deal with the issues that are contained in 
the present piece of legislation or whether they may be bringing 
forward amendments. But we also have had some recent 
information come forward to us that we need to consider. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, until we have an opportunity to do 
that I must indicate we don’t need a lot of time but we will need 
a few more days to examine the new information that we have 
and therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Committee of Finance. I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Deputy Chair: — So I’ll bring the committee to order, 
members of the Assembly. And the first item of business before 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2006 

the committee is the estimates for the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee 
recess until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Government 
House Leader that the committee recess until 7 o’clock. Is it the 
pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is agreed. The House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. Thank you. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1275 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1275 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1275 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1276 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1276 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1276 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1276 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1277 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1277 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1277 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1277 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tribute to Canadian Soldiers Killed in Afghanistan 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1277 
 Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1278 
 More Services Needed for Autism Spectrum Disorder 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1278 
 Recognition of Saskatchewan Volunteers 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1278 
 Westside Irrigation Project 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1279 
 Crystal Clear — A Play About Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1279 
 National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1279 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Delivery of Pediatric Services in Saskatoon 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1280 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1280 
 Future Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1282 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1282 
 Quality of Health Care 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1283 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1283 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Victims of Crime Awareness Week 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1284 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1285 



STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Condolences 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1285 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1285 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1286 
 Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
 Bill No. 50 — The Queen’s Bench (Mediation) Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine (médiation) 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1288 
 Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Yates (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................................1289 
 Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Serby (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1290 
 Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1291 
 Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1292 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1293 
 Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment 
 Act, 2006 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1293 
 Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment  
 Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (n° 2)  
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
 Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1294 
 Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1295 
 Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1295 
 Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1296 



 

 Bill No. 38 — The Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act/ 
 Loi sur le règlement des différends internationaux relatifs aux investissements 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1297 
 Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
  Higgins (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................1298 
 Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1299 
 Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1299 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1300 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1300 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1303 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




