
















































Hansard: December 05, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 24A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 665 
 December 5, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s again 
my privilege as it has been over the past number of days and 
weeks to present a petition to this Assembly on behalf of the 
people from the communities of Kipling, Broadview, and 
Whitewood and other communities along the Trans-Canada 
Highway — that part of the province — in regards to the need 
for dialysis services in the southeast corner of the province. And 
I read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
again today to present a petition on behalf of individuals from 
around the province of Saskatchewan. Since the incidence of 
colorectal cancer has become so prevalent, their concern with 
the funding of the drug Avastin is represented in this petition. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the cancer drug Avastin. And it’s quite a long list of 
petitions here so it will take a while to read some of the names. 
But first of all the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numerous petitions are signed by people 
from . . . [inaudible] . . . Turtleford, Mervin, Major, Macklin, 
Kerrobert, Unity, Lloydminster, St. Walburg, and many other 
. . . Edam, many other places, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of a constituent from Carnduff. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the very southeast 
corner of the province — from Carnduff, Glen Ewen, Estevan, 
Regina, Gainsborough, Carievale, Mr. Speaker — all the way 
up to the northwest corner, Mr. Speaker, Lloydminster and 
Baldwinton, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of the province who share concerns about the 
availability of some funding for the cancer drug Avastin. Mr. 
Speaker, with your indulgence I’ll read the prayer of their 
petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure today to rise on behalf of petitioners 
who come from Carnduff, Saskatchewan; from Brandon, 
Manitoba; and from Calgary, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 

 
All the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Bruno. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition regarding the funding of the drug Avastin. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures are all from the village of Carnduff. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are very concerned with this government’s addiction to gravel. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from a number of 
communities including Strasbourg, Bulyea, Regina, Southey, 
and Cupar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
number of petitions of citizens concerned with safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And to demonstrate how well-travelled this particular highway 
is, the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Asquith, Meacham, 
Saskatoon, Bruno, Cudworth, St. Denis, Humboldt, LeRoy, 
Dana, Regina, Invermay, La Ronge, Watson, Kelvington, 

Muenster, Sturgis, Lloydminster, Hendon, Carmel, Bjorkdale, 
Viscount, Preeceville, Kindersley, Aberdeen, Biggar, Wadena, 
Elrose, Clavet, Prince George, Pilger, Annaheim, St. Gregor, 
Jansen, Lake Lenore, Lanigan, Fulda, Englefeld, Guernsey, 
Quill Lake, Burr, Peterson, and Middle Lake. Also from 
Alberta, Drayton Valley, Edmonton, and Calgary. From 
Manitoba, Virden, Swan River, and Winnipeg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are very concerned about this government’s two-tier health 
system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again to present a petition from citizens in Wilkie who are 
concerned about their reduction of health care services in their 
community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
once again rise in this House and present a petition on behalf of 
frustrated parents across Saskatchewan who for the past seven 
years have been lobbying this government for a dedicated 
children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
constituencies of Saskatoon Meewasin, Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, Biggar, and Muskeg Lake Cree Nation. I so present. 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
once again rise in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf 
of citizens that are very concerned about the NDP’s [New 
Democratic Party] two tiered health system. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good folks of 
Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition — actually a lot 
of petitions — for tougher sentences for sex offenders against 
children. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
a known sex offender in their community as soon as 
possible and lobby the federal government for tougher 
sentences for sexual offenders against children, tougher 
measures to keep track of offenders once they are released 
from the correctional facility, and a review of the 
dangerous offenders designation process. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Spiritwood, 
Medstead, Leask, Shellbrook, and a number of other places in 
northwest Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to bring forward 
a petition for the people of Saskatchewan that are urging the 
tougher sentences for sex offences against children. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
create a website that provides information about high-risk 
offenders who live in the province who are going to be 
released into the province, lobby the federal government 
for tougher sentences for sexual offences against children, 
tougher measures to keep track of offenders once they are 
released from correctional facilities, and a review of the 
dangerous offenders designation process. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of Wakaw 
and Cudworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition that 
is calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 

And as we know coming up today in the highways, we really 
need that section shop today on that particular piece of 
highway. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Watrous again. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today 
to present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 
that this is the first time in the province’s history that the 
government has denied coverage of a cancer drug recommended 
by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Carnduff, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege in 
the House today to rise and to present a petition regarding the 
funding of the highly effective cancer drug Avastin. This is 
signed by citizens that are concerned about two tiered health 
care. Mr. Speaker, I will read briefly the prayer for relief, and it 
states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, I note that this petition has been signed by many 
people, and on the particular one I’m presenting today, it is 
signed by people from Saskatoon on Egnatoff Way, Gathercole 
Crescent, RR [rural route] no. 5, Nordstrum Road, Buckwold 
Cove, Crean Crescent, Whiteswan Drive, and also from 
Martensville, Dundurn, and Langham. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to present this on behalf of those citizens. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the Assembly to present a petition urging the 
government to repair Highway 36. And I’ll read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so that it can return to being a 
safe and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of petitions to present, signed by 
people from Coronach, Scout Lake, Southey, Big Beaver; 
Amherst, Nova Scotia; Fife Lake, Willow Bunch, Rockglen; 
Richmond, BC [British Columbia]; Dundurn, Assiniboia, 
Bengough, and Harptree. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise again 
today on behalf of people who are still concerned about 
Highway 49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Lintlaw, 
Buchanan, Melfort, Kelvington, and Yorkton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
be able to again present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens who are very concerned about the future of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide 
the future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet.  
 

As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from Woodrow, Regina, 
Sedley; Virden, Manitoba; Wilkie, and Coronach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide 
the future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from 
Weyburn, Regina, Waldeck, Grenfell, Tramping Lake, Edgeley, 
Moose Jaw, and Raymore. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
  
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I too am pleased to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned 
about the future of the Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position of 
the right of Western Canadian farmers to decide the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board, and not the federal cabinet. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on the petition are from Cavell, 
from Kipling, from Balgonie, from Naicam, and from Wynyard. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I present the petition. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 34 without 
amendment. 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

The Speaker: — When shall Bill 34 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll move that consideration 
in Committee of the Whole be now waived. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader is requesting 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 
No. 34. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 34 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title.  
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 34 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the standing economy on the 
committee is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 1 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 1 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When will this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has moved that Bill 
No. 1 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 29 without 
amendment.  
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 29 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 29 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour.  
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Labour Standards Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards 
Amendments Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has moved that Bill 
No. 29 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now table the sixth 
report of the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Biggar: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, the Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy, seconded by the member for Biggar: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
 Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure now be 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, the member for Regina Northeast, seconded by 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services is recognized. 
 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
And I move, and seconded by the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services, the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move by a 
motion, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. It has been moved by the 
member for Regina Walsh Acres, seconded by the member for 
Cannington: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The motion is carried and 
pursuant to rule 95, the private Bills 301 and 302 are deemed to 
have been read the first time and are ordered for second reading 
on the next private members’ day. 
 
Any further reports by standing and special committees? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to all of the members of the House a group that 
is seated in your west gallery. This is a group of grade 12 
students from Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School. And I think it 
be a very well-informed group because they’re all participating 
in social studies 30 classes. I look very much to meeting with 
them after question period. And at this point, I would ask all the 
members to make them feel very welcome today. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today in the west gallery, I am pleased to introduce to you and 
to all members of the Assembly guests from the Regina Open 
Door Society, Regina area Refugee Support Group, and several 
newcomers to our country. 
 
The Regina Open Door Society provides settlement services to 
immigrants and refugees in the Regina area. This past Friday 
the federal Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, Monte 
Solberg, recognized Regina as the first city in Canada to create 
settlement services and supports for all newcomers. The Regina 
area support group is made up of dedicated volunteers that have 
been sponsoring and supporting refugees coming and living in 
Regina for many, many, many years. 
 
These two organizations have just completed a calendar entitled 
Dispelling the Myths which profiles 12 refugees from the 
Regina area, some of whom have joined us this afternoon in the 
gallery. The focus of the calendar is to provide awareness and to 
dispel myths associated with immigrants and refugees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are presently 20.8 million refugees living 
outside of their home countries. We are indeed fortunate that we 
have refugees who have become permanent residents and 
Canadian citizens now living in the province of Saskatchewan. 
These folks, Mr. Speaker, are contributing to society. They have 
jobs. They are raising their families. Their kids are going on to 
post-secondary education, and they are doing well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in welcoming the dedicated staff and volunteers plus the 

profiled newcomers in the calendar to our Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would like to join the minister in 
welcoming all of the people here from the Open Door Society. 
My daughter volunteers there and thoroughly enjoys the work 
that she has done with the organization and with all of the 
people that come there and use the services. 
 
It is such an essential service that you offer, and we appreciate 
everything that is done there. So on behalf of the opposition, 
welcome to your Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know I risk 
offending by doing this, but I do want to single out my good 
friend Muna DeCiman because just last week the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview made a statement and gave us some 
statistics around the AIDS [acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome] issues in Africa. And Muna DeCiman and some 
other women will be heading off very shortly, at the end of this 
week, to take some of their knowledge and work to Africa to 
work on that issue. So thank you very much, and could you 
recognize Muna. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, seated in your gallery, some guests that have joined 
us for the proceedings today. 
 
Seated there today is the brand new candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party for the constituency of Martensville. Nancy 
Heppner has joined us, as well as Whitney Friesen, a long-time 
assistant to the former member — Nancy’s dad, Ben Heppner. 
As Ben would say, the number of Nancy’s visits here is three. 
The first time was for the tributes that we all got to share in for 
Ben. The second is today. And the third one will be when she is 
sitting down here, Mr. Speaker, for a short time over on this 
side, and then we’ll move over to the other side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I’m on my feet, if I may, I’d also like to introduce a 
friend of the member for Yorkton, the Deputy Premier, who’s 
here. The Saskatchewan Party candidate for Yorkton has also 
joined us. Will all members help me welcome Greg Ottenbreit, 
Nancy Heppner, and Whitney Friesen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome in your 
Assembly as well this afternoon, two individuals: Mr. Greg 
Lightfoot who is the Chair of the Battlefords REDA [regional 
economic development authority], along with Ryan Bater. Just 
give a wave. 
 
They’re here earlier today, meeting with the Minister of 
Industry and Resources to talk about all of the good work that’s 
happening in their community and region, and also to provide 
some lobby for some additional staffing of which they want for 
their REDA in their region. So I’d like the House to welcome 
them. 
 
And before I sit, I’d like to also, Mr. Speaker, welcome Mr. 
Ottenbreit to the Assembly today. Greg and Leone do great 
work in the community, Mr. Speaker, in relationship to the Cuts 
for Cancer. They do tremendous work in our community. As 
well Mr. Ottenbreit is a successful businessman. 
 
When I talk to people around the community, they say he’s a 
pretty good guy, but he’s with the wrong party, Mr. Speaker. 
And then they go on to say that, I love it when he’s here, Mr. 
Speaker, because he spends less time driving around the 
community showing off these two posters, Mr. Speaker, of two 
wanted guys, Mr. Speaker. And I think they want votes, is what 
they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to welcome, Mr. Ottenbreit, Greg, and Mr. Lightfoot 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to join 
with the Deputy Premier in welcoming Greg Lightfoot and 
Ryan Bater to their legislature. We’d met with them earlier. 
They’re here to promote the western part of the province, and 
they’re doing an excellent job. I also want to mention Greg used 
to be my neighbour; he used to be from my own constituency at 
the town of Kenaston so I wish him well, and I know he’s doing 
very well in the town of North Battleford, promoting that area. 
And I wish them all the success in the future, and I know that 
they will have that in promoting their part of the province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for me 
to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the legislature 
a group of 50 individuals from the great Southwest. Now I’m 
not going to identify them by name, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell 
you that they’re here in support of the Southwest drought 
disaster committee. There’s farmers. There’s ranchers. There’s 
a few business people in the crowd up there. There’s some 
elected municipal officials, and we are also privileged to have 

one member of the Swift Current media here, Mr. Scott 
Anderson from The Southwest Booster based in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people have come to their legislature today 
over difficult roads. There’s wind and snow blowing throughout 
the Southwest, but their courage in coming here today is in 
support of a very good cause, and I’d like all of us to welcome 
them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with the member in welcoming the folks from 
the Southwest drought committee. We’ve had correspondence 
with a number of them and certainly had meetings in the past 
with delegates from the group, and I know it’s been a very 
challenging issue — continues to be. And I know that coming 
here today on roads that are slippery and with snow having 
come down makes it a little difficult. And I wish them safe . . . 
And, Mr. Speaker, we do wish them safe journeys on their way 
back when they’re finished their business here today. And I 
would like to join in welcoming them here to our legislature 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly I would like 
to introduce a constituent of mine. Seated in the east gallery is 
Bill Kish from Estevan. Give us a wave, Bill. He’s here today to 
observe the proceedings, and I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming him to his Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Gradworks Program 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Crown Investments 
Corporation’s Gradworks program provides recent 
post-secondary graduates with internships in the Crowns. 
 
The program’s goals are to help develop the Crowns’ future 
workforce and to provide career opportunities so our young 
people can stay in Saskatchewan to build their future. During 
their one term, graduates gain valuable work experience, 
develop career-related skills, and receive mentoring from a 
coach who is an experienced employee and supervisor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the establishment two years ago, Gradworks 
has been a huge success with 163 internships created so far and 
48 young people currently in the program. Some former interns 
have returned to school, and a handful are seeking employment. 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

But the great news, Mr. Speaker, is that 104 former interns have 
already secured full-time jobs, and all but six of those jobs are 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous success story. Gradworks is 
helping our educated young people stay in Saskatchewan. 
That’s good news for the future of our province, and that’s good 
news for our young people. It’s just one more reason why 
Saskatchewan is such a great place to live, work, and raise a 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend CIC [Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan] and its subsidiary Crowns for implementing 
and supporting this program. I wish them continued success. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Candidate Nominated 
for Martensville By-Election 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
November 30 the Saskatchewan Party chose its candidate for 
the upcoming Martensville by-election. And in case the 
members opposite are wondering, in this House there will 
always be a Heppner. Over 700 people packed the hall in 
Warman to select Nancy Heppner as the next Saskatchewan 
Party MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. Nancy beat 
out two other very able candidates in this close nomination 
battle. The Saskatchewan Party would like to thank Stan 
Reddekopp and Kelly Block for their hard work and continued 
dedication to the party. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is set to give this out-of-ideas NDP a 
real drubbing when the Premier decides to call the by-election. 
Since our latest member, the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
was able to secure a two percentage point PST [provincial sales 
tax] cut shortly after his decisive victory, I wonder what tax cut 
the government will slash or how many other holidays they will 
create to try and prop up their dying chances of re-election. 
 
I’m also wondering, Mr. Speaker, if Liberal leader, David 
Karwacki, would like to go for the hat trick and try and go 
down for a third straight defeat. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is ready to offer a positive voice for 
the people of Martensville. Nancy looks forward to following in 
her late father’s footsteps, and the Saskatchewan Party can’t 
wait until she gets that chance. The upcoming Martensville 
by-election will be another wake-up call to the sleepwalking 
NDP government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point 
out that Arlene Heppner has joined her daughter and Whitney 
Friesen in the House, and I’d like to ask the members to 
welcome Arlene as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Community Association Hosts Forum on Gang Violence 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
August of this year the North Central Community Association 
in Regina Elphinstone-Centre established the ganging up on 
violence committee. 
 
The committee was established to help fight gang activity in the 
inner city and beyond, and to help take on the devastating toll 
gang violence can take on young people, families, and 
community. Its purpose was to develop solutions and strategies 
to educate young people about the destructive, often tragic, 
effects of gang activity. 
 
As part of this initiative, the North Central Community 
Association hosted a community leaders forum on gang 
violence at the Albert Scott Community Centre on Saturday. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that I was one of over 100 
people in attendance, and it was a very positive, very 
worthwhile event. 
 
The day began with a pipe ceremony and a prayer. Readings 
were brought and an anti-gang educational video R U Down or 
R U Out made its premiere. A panel discussion was held with 
some courageous young people who have left the gang life 
behind. And we heard from people who’ve had their lives 
tragically affected by gangs. The afternoon broke into smaller 
group discussions and the issues were considered and strategies 
developed to help protect young people and communities from 
gangs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the North Central Community 
Association for hosting this forum. I want to thank awesome 
facilitator, Reggie Newkirk; Rodger Ross and Creerunner for 
the powerful video; elders, Norma Jean Bird and Lily Daniels; 
and pipe carrier, Harold Lavallee. I especially want to thank the 
courageous former gang members who participated and who are 
using their special knowledge and experience to help in the 
fight against gangs and to help take back our colours. 
 
And I especially want to thank, Mr. Speaker, the commitment 
. . . and I want to acknowledge the commitment and dedication 
of Kevin Daniels, co-founder of the ganging up on violence 
committee and Chair of the forum. Thank you to him for 
turning tragedy into something very positive. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Announcements and Ideas 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation has become the king 
of reannouncements and stolen ideas. 
 
On November 13, 2006 the minister announced that there will 
be an additional $54.6 million invested in Saskatchewan 
highways. However he had already announced 25 million of 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

that on July 13, 2006. What’s old is new again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More recently this tired, old NDP government announced that 
they were going to dedicate all gas tax revenue to Saskatchewan 
roads and highways, even though they’ve been saying that they 
were doing it all along. Where did they get that idea? The 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. That idea had been in our 
policy guide for over a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has been talking about creating 
economic corridors and having a rolling four-year plan for 
highway construction and maintenance for a long time, Mr. 
Speaker. Now all of a sudden the minister thinks that that’s a 
great idea and has started to talk about it. In his ministerial 
statement on November 8, 2006 this minister said, “. . . this 
government will be bringing forward a bold and visionary new 
strategy before the end of this session.” 

 
It’s so bold and visionary that it doesn’t exist. I have two 
questions for the minister. There’s only one day left, so where’s 
the grand highways plan he spoke of? And secondly, how many 
of the Saskatchewan Party ideas will it include? Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Hudson Bay Primary Health Care Team 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Hudson Bay primary health 
care team from the Kelsey Trail Health Region recently held a 
celebration. Why were they celebrating? Well, Mr. Speaker, a 
recent survey of their clients has shown that their innovative, 
team-based approach to health care is working, and working 
wonderfully. 
 
Clients who used this team’s services indicated high satisfaction 
with the quality of the service, Mr. Speaker. More than 90 per 
cent of those surveyed said the team spent sufficient time 
listening to their health concerns. The vast majority rated their 
overall health as good to excellent. And 92 per cent said access 
to health care service was not a concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the groundbreaking team consists of health care 
professionals with many different skills and backgrounds. It’s 
an excellent example of a primary health care model, one of the 
first in the province. 
 
In addition to meeting the day-to-day primary health care needs 
of the residents of Hudson Bay and surrounding communities, 
the dynamic team has initiated a number of exciting programs 
addressing a range of issues like diabetes, mental wellness, 
literacy, and women’s health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to visit the centre shortly 
after its opening, as I was the associate minister of Health at 
that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join me in 

congratulating the Hudson Bay primary health care team and all 
of those from Kelsey Trail Health Region. Today the people of 
Hudson Bay are reaping the benefits of their innovative work. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Climate Change 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a recent 
appearance on NBC’s [National Broadcasting Company] Meet 
the Press, former President Bill Clinton was asked, what issue 
presents the greatest threat to long-term world stability? And 
you know what his answer was, Mr. Speaker? He answered, 
climate change, Mr. Speaker. Climate change coupled with 
depleting oil reserves around the world will present a great 
threat to world stability, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some weeks later Alan Greenspan, the former Chair of the US 
[United States] Federal Reserve, speaking in Calgary, also 
identified climate change as a threat to world stability. But he 
went on to talk about the great opportunities that this issue 
presented for Canada and the leadership role that Canada could 
play, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what is happening here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Well 
I’ll tell you. We have some of our municipalities and cities 
moving ahead and dealing with this issue. They are putting 
plans in place, like the city of Regina and its green ribbon 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what is this green NDP government doing, Mr. Speaker? 
Well let me tell you. What does the Suzuki Foundation say? 
They say they have no plan, and in fact Saskatchewan has the 
highest per capita greenhouse gas emissions of any province in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. So what do we get from this green 
government, Mr. Speaker? We get nothing but greenwash, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Benefits of Minimum Wage 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every 
day in this Assembly I am reminded of the vast philosophical 
differences that separate us from the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — We operate . . . Thank you. Thank you. We 
operate from what’s-best-for the-common-good end of the 
spectrum while the members opposite tend to occupy the 
what’s-in-it-for-me end of things. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the only 
loyalty the members across the way seem to have is to their 
hard right philosophy of everyone for themselves and the devil 
take the hindmost. 
 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

On this side of the Assembly we’re used to hearing their hard 
right pronouncements, but every once in a while they’ll say 
something so over the top and so outrageous that it just can’t go 
unchallenged. Here’s one from the member of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs from just last week, and I quote: “They [the NDP] like 
to talk about having increases in the minimum wage, but who 
does that benefit?” 
 
When it comes to minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite show minimum understanding. He’s not kidding. He 
doesn’t know, so I’ll tell him. Young people, students, the 
working poor, immigrant workers, single moms — just to name 
a few — that’s who benefit from an increase in minimum wage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s comments like that that remind me of why our 
political movement was created in the first place and hardens 
my resolve to work even harder on behalf of the working men 
and women of this province to ensure they never find 
themselves at the mercy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Martensville By-Election 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other night, 
Thursday night in Warman the Saskatchewan Party held a very 
large nomination meeting for the constituency of Martensville. 
Mr. Speaker, about 700 people attended, and there was three 
excellent candidates. The winner of course, we’re delighted to 
say, is Nancy Heppner. Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part for 
the folks in that constituency is that they’ve gone this fall 
session obviously without any representation. And it’s 
important that we address that quickly. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: will he commit to calling 
that by-election for the Martensville constituency, commit to 
holding that by-election before the spring sitting of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes, I will be 
calling that by-election. 
 
Now I will give members opposite a Christmas period off. And 
we wouldn’t ask of course the constituents of Martensville to be 
out involved in an election campaign during the Christmas 
season. But in the new year, Mr. Speaker, I will be calling that 
by-election and look forward to the result of that by-election, 
adding a member to the government benches. Thank you very 
much. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Participation in Energy and Trade Organizations 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that by-election will be 
another opportunity, as Weyburn-Big Muddy was, for a 
discussion of competing visions for the province’s future — one 
that we would offer on this side of the House and a lack thereof 
on that side of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure we’ll be talking about energy in terms of 
the future of Saskatchewan. We know the Premier has at least 
said he agrees with our position that our province can be a 
centre for energy on the continent. Mr. Speaker, there is an 
organization to this end called the energy council. It’s made up 
of representatives from ten US states, four Canadian provinces, 
and a nation. 
 
Government officials, industry representatives are a part of this. 
They work together on energy issues like energy development, 
secure energy supply, alternative energy sources, new 
technologies. The ministers of energy from the provinces, the 
representatives from the States are involved. Guess who’s not 
involved, Mr. Speaker? The second largest producer of oil, the 
province of Saskatchewan, under the NDP. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: on such an important issue 
where he talks the talk, why has he not walked the walk? Why 
is Saskatchewan outside looking in at this important energy 
council, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
development of the oil and gas sector, I can assure the Leader of 
the Opposition that although we may not belong to every 
organization relating to energy, the oil and gas sector is 
certainly growing in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who 
likes to go around spreading gloom and doom, that the amount 
of purchases of mineral rights for oil and gas in Saskatchewan 
for the first five sales was up 33 per cent from last year. And 
last year was a pretty good year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition who is always quick 
to point out, if he thinks Saskatchewan is behind Alberta, that in 
fact this year, Mr. Speaker, Alberta’s drilling will be going 
down 12 per cent. BC’s will be going down 28 per cent. 
Saskatchewan’s will be going up. We’re doing just fine in oil 
and gas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is not just an issue about 
drilling activity which is up of course in every jurisdiction that 
happens to have oil and gas at $60 a barrel. Mr. Speaker, this 
energy council, this energy council also is investigating, 
discussing the importance of energy sustainability, of security 
for the continent. They’re talking about alternative sources of 
energy, Mr. Speaker — non-renewable and renewable sources 
of energy. 
 
Guess who’s involved, Mr. Speaker? The province of Alberta, 
the province of British Columbia, the province of 
Newfoundland, the province of Nova Scotia, and 10 US states. 
They are involved in this effort, Mr. Speaker. This is the second 
largest producer of oil in the country, third largest producer of 
gas. 
 
The question to the Premier is why, if the stated goal is for this 
province to be a centre for energy development, why is he again 
on the outside looking in? Why does his vision stop at the 
borders of this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s listen to what the 
Leader of the Opposition says. He says drilling is up 
everywhere where they have oil. That’s what he says in this 
House. Yet when we listen to the Petroleum Services 
Association of Canada, what do they say? They say there will 
be a 10 per cent decrease in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. So who’s 
right? Who’s right? The Leader of the Opposition or the oil 
industry? Well I’ll put my money on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order. 
Let’s do it one at a time. Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll put my 
money on the industry over the Leader of the Opposition 
because what he said is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say this too, Mr. Speaker. We’re involved with the 
United States. There’s a conference that goes on every year 
called the Williston Basin Conference, and it alternates between 
North Dakota and Saskatchewan. We gather with people from 
the United States and talk about issues that are relevant to the 
Williston Basin which is where most of the oil in Saskatchewan 
is located. We do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I were in the White House 
visiting the United States vice-president to talk about oil and 
gas policy, and the Leader of the Opposition wants to tell 
people we’re not involved . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the rest of, the other 

two Western Canadian provinces involved don’t understand 
why this province isn’t there. They don’t understand why they 
wouldn’t be at the table with respect to a deal between those 
two provinces on trade. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is worried that he won’t be, 
that this organization won’t accept a left-wing outfit. But he 
ought not to be because apparently Venezuela is a part of it, Mr. 
Speaker. He would be welcome to be a member of the energy 
council. 
 
This is an important council, Mr. Speaker, for our province to 
be represented at. Mr. Speaker, we need to have a presence 
there with these other states, with these other provinces. We 
need to show some leadership and some vision. Why won’t the 
Premier stand, take to his feet today and commit to that, commit 
to participating in this important council, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to make the Leader 
of the Opposition very happy. I’m going to advise him that two 
days from now, I’m going to get on an airplane here in Regina, 
and I’m going to go to San Antonio, Texas, to an oil and gas 
conference, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I’m going to do. And you 
know what else, Mr. Speaker? While I’m there, I’m going to 
talk to the energy council of the United States. So, Mr. Speaker, 
the Leader of the Opposition wants us to get involved with the 
United States — I’ll be gone in 48 hours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if that’s all that it 
takes — given how close the House is — would he leave a little 
bit later this day so we can have a vote in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
This is good news. The conference that the minister is talking 
about in San Antonio is put on by the energy council. It’s not an 
American organization. I hope he does a little research and gets 
briefed on this organization before he goes because BC is there. 
Alberta will be there. I think Newfoundland is a part of it. Nova 
Scotia is a part of it. 
 
Can the minister then also stand up and confirm that his 
government, that he will take the step that his government will 
also sit down with the new Premier of Alberta and the Premier 
of BC to determine Saskatchewan’s lead role in the new West, 
sit down and talk about the trade agreement between those 
provinces? Will he do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I said, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be there. 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

We’ll be represented. We don’t need the Leader of the 
Opposition to plan our itinerary for us. But I would have hoped, 
Mr. Speaker, that while he was at it, the Leader of the 
Opposition would have complimented us — and the member 
from Thunder Creek was with us — on co-chairing the Beijing 
first World Heavy Oil Conference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking to people in the United States. 
We’re talking to people in Canada. We’re talking to people in 
China. We’re talking to people all over the world, Mr. Speaker, 
because they know that there’s a good story to be told about all 
the great things happening in this great province. And we’re 
proud to tell our story around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Shortage of Health Professionals Impacts Rural Hospitals 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately hospital closures in Saskatchewan are becoming 
almost so common that they’re not even newsworthy. So far 
this session Canora, Preeceville, Spiritwood, Big River, 
Shellbrook, Bengough, Coronach, and Vanguard have all 
experienced closure situations, and once again we’re hearing 
that services have been reduced in Kamsack. Yesterday the 
Sunrise Health Region announced there will be no emergency 
or outpatient services at the Kamsack Hospital from 5 in the 
evening until 8 in the morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, emergencies don’t work that way. They don’t take 
12 hours off so this government can find enough staff. Why, 
once again, do the people of Kamsack have to experience a 
hospital closure under this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I reiterate to the member opposite and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the temporary closures are enacted by 
regional health authorities to ensure the safety of the patients in 
the hospital and in the people who live within that community. 
Mr. Speaker, these temporary closures — and Kamsack is no 
different — the temporary closure in Kamsack, Mr. Speaker, 
has been announced for four days to handle a temporary 
shortage of professional staff within that facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our government’s commitment to provide enhanced, quality 
health care to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
delivered by the regional health authorities through the safe and 
secure mechanisms that are available to them and, Mr. Speaker, 
the circumstances in Kamsack are no different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, and it’s not just doctors. Once 
again the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses pointed out just 
exactly how fragile our health care system has become. A news 
release released by SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] this 
morning points out that there are 599 vacancies of registered 
nurses and registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
The minister’s own committee he put in place this fall has 
targeted only 400 nurses. There’s a huge discrepancy between 
the 599 that SUN is talking about and the minister’s numbers, 
which he’s finally admitted that there is a nursing shortage, 
which begs the question: when we are that short, which 
facilities does this NDP government plan on closing? 
 
Rosalee Longmoore, the president of SUN, says, and this is a 
quote from her news release, “It is only a matter of time before 
more rural facilities are forced to reduce beds or close entirely.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mankota has four nurses working. Two are over 
the age of 65. If they retire, the facility will close. Which 
facilities does this NDP government plan on closing in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I hope the member opposite will listen very closely, and I 
expect it’ll be front page news tomorrow in all of the media — 
none, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I wish they would have said 
that two months ago when we see, day after day, more hospitals 
closing because of lack of staff. And I don’t believe it’s going 
to end because this minister stands in the House today and says 
no. 
 
When you look at the number of vacancies that SUN has 
pointed out — such as in the Royal University Hospital, 94 
vacancies; St. Paul’s Hospital, 54; Saskatoon City Hospital, 29 
— that’s 177 vacancies in Saskatoon alone. Regina General has 
47 vacancies; Pasqua, 44; Prince Albert, 24; North Battleford, 
21 vacancies. 
 
Here’s the advice of SUN for the minister back in September: 
why doesn’t he stop setting up committee after committee to 
advise him and start acting on the real problem? Put that money 
to fixing the real problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Him standing in this House saying that there’ll be no more 
closures is of no solace to anywhere in Saskatchewan. What we 
need are the health care professionals this government fails to 
provide. When will he start doing his job and provide the health 
care professionals we need in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
simply answered the member’s question. He didn’t like the 
answer; I’m sorry about that. 
 
Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the 
recruitment and retention of health care professionals, and in 
particular nurses, Mr. Speaker. And our record over the course 
of this last year has been very clear, and it’s more than setting 
up a committee to advise the minister, Mr. Speaker. In fact 
we’ve dedicated specifically interim financing in addition to the 
$300 million increase in the budget this year, Mr. Speaker. We 
dedicated an additional, additional, Mr. Speaker, $25 million 
specifically for health care professionals in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot create out of nothing a registered nurse 
or a position, Mr. Speaker. If they don’t exist, Mr. Speaker, we 
have to keep the ones we’ve got. Or, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
recruit them from other jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, we are doing 
those things. And if the member opposite paid attention on our 
recruitment efforts, Mr. Speaker, we have 90 per cent of 
graduates committed to working in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Drought Disaster Assistance for the Southwest 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are some 50 people in the gallery today who have come back to 
their legislature to have some questions answered. They want to 
know why this NDP government does not treat them fairly. Just 
last week five members from the Southwest drought disaster 
committee were here asking for fairness. And now more than 10 
times that number have returned to get an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the Premier please explain to the farmers 
and ranchers here today why he will not give them the same fair 
treatment as he did for the flooded producers in the Northeast? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly we recognize that in the Southwest they are facing 
difficult times because of drought. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 
been working diligently to try and make sure that we have good 
programs in place. 
 
But I think it’s very important to acknowledge that both the 
Saskatchewan Party and the government have said, and 
acknowledge clearly, that the federal government has primary 
responsibility for disaster. And I quote from the Sask Party 
caucus release. I quote: 
 

“Obviously, when a disaster hits and Saskatchewan 

farmers really need help the most, the support just isn’t 
there” . . . “It’s up to Ottawa to develop better farm 
support programs . . . ” 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working with Ottawa to develop those 
better programs. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I recall correctly, when 
we had a flood situation in the Northeast, the federal 
government did come to the table first. They put their $15 an 
acre on the table before the provincial government even knew 
what hit them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Agriculture minister flat out denied 
the request of the drought committee to have a meeting with the 
farm support review committee. He said that all inquiries to that 
committee should go through him. But that was not the case 
with the flood affected areas in the Northeast, Mr. Speaker. The 
farm support review committee did meet with the farmers 
affected by flooding. Mr. Speaker, what kind of a double 
standard is this? One group gets a meeting; another group 
doesn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why he will not allow the 
Southwest drought disaster committee to meet with the farm 
support review committee? And if he can’t, then can the 
Premier explain why he allows this double standard to continue 
here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly there are significant differences not only in the 
circumstances but also in the time, Mr. Speaker. And the reality 
is, Mr. Speaker, that the farm support review committee is an 
advisory body for the minister and to speak directly with the 
minister gets the message through very clearly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the Northeast, Mr. Speaker, we had some circumstances 
wherein I wanted to get specific guidance because there was no 
disaster program in place, Mr. Speaker, no framework put 
together by the federal government. And so this body which is 
helpful in developing programs, I asked if they would just 
specifically deal with one segment of the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they did that for me and provided some advice. 
Mr. Speaker, in this case I’m offering to spend the time myself 
to listen to the case of the people from the Southwest. I’ve done 
that on several occasions, Mr. Speaker, and the farm support 
review committee is not needed to intervene in this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

Crop Insurance 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
farmers and ranchers that are here today have a lot better things 
to do than keep coming to the legislature to ask for help, but 
they have no choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these same farmers and ranchers have watched for 
15 years this government download onto agriculture and neglect 
rural Saskatchewan. They’ve watched them cut programs. 
They’ve watched them cut program funding. And the problem 
just goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug Davidson last week when he was in here 
said, “‘The crop insurance program has been gutted.’” And I 
quote: 
 

“These are the programs that would get us through the 
droughts in the past. We can’t sustain back-to-back 
droughts if we don’t have the vehicle to do so.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to start rebuilding 
the crop insurance program so it actually works for farmers in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think the member opposite should know a little better about 
how the crop insurance program works. Mr. Speaker, it is on a 
15-year cycle, and it has to rejuvenate itself, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is exactly what it’s doing. It’s paid out significant dollars 
over the last few years — billions, Mr. Speaker. And in that 
payout, then it reduces the amount that’s available. And 
therefore rates go up; coverage goes down. That’s the reality of 
the crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the program is there and does provide coverage, and people 
can get up to 80 per cent coverage which was there and is there 
for the farmers in the Southwest as well as for the rest of the 
country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about this 
government and what we have done or not done for agriculture. 
Mr. Speaker, we are supporting agriculture at an unprecedented 
rate. When we went to the federal government for more money 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
minister, that government knows very well they have done 
nothing but cut programs in this province for 15 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And for him, Mr. Speaker, to stand here 
today and say they’re doing everything they can for farmers is 
not . . . It’s actually a joke, but it’s not a funny situation that 

these farm families are in out there. They need this government 
to come to the table and help them. 
 
One way they could help them is start rebuilding the crop 
insurance program. Manitoba farmers have a better program. 
Alberta farmers have a better program. But we’re stuck in 
Saskatchewan with an NDP government, and all they do is gut 
the farm program. Will he finally deal with the problem, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 
matter how loud the member opposite gets, what he is saying is 
still absolute nonsense, Mr. Speaker. Very clearly we have put 
significant dollars into agriculture, far more than any other 
province on a per capita basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I went to Ottawa in the spring to ask 
for more money for farmers in this province, $575 million, 
where, Mr. Speaker, was the member opposite? Well you know, 
he was too sensitive to travel with me because he might not get 
along, so he didn’t come. But, Mr. Speaker, we were there 
fighting on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have been active on this particular case. 
We have taken action, Mr. Speaker, and we have got specific 
programs that are working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have gone to the federal government. We have 
pushed for immediate funding for Saskatchewan livestock farm 
water program. We requested the federal government to 
reinstate deferral drought-induced breeding tax on breeding 
stock, Mr. Speaker. They’ve said they will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister is probably right. There’s a number of 
reason I won’t travel to Ottawa with him, but the main reason is 
I’ve been there with Ag ministers from that side of the House. 
The first thing they say when they get down east and meet 
before the standing committee on agriculture is, it’s your 
problem. We’re not helping our farmers, and we’re never going 
to. And we hear that continually out of that government. 
 
We hear that out of that minister, Mr. Speaker. We heard that 
out of the member for Yorkton when he was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve heard that same comment from that minister. We’ve 
heard it from the member from Yorkton when he was the 
minister. We heard it from Mr. Lingenfelter when he was the 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

minister. We even heard it from one of my relations, Mr. 
Upshall. He continually said, we are not supporting farmers in 
the province of Saskatchewan; it’s the federal government’s 
fault. 
 
It was the federal Liberals. Now it’s the federal Conservatives. 
Mr. Speaker, at what point do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order. I would just ask 
members to allow the question to be put. Order. Order. I would 
invite the member for Melville-Saltcoats to put his question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask that minister and that government today to start 
doing the right thing. Meet with this group of farmers and 
ranchers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. I would 
ask the member for Melville-Saltcoats not to involve members 
or guests in the gallery into the debate. Member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask the minister 
today and that NDP government and that Premier to do the right 
thing. Meet with the farmers of southwest Saskatchewan. Come 
to a conclusion of how this government can actually help those 
farmers. And then the next step is to start rebuilding the crop 
insurance program, so they don’t have to come in here with cap 
in hand and ask for help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see the 
member opposite stick by their party’s code of ethics in his 
comments. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to know is, did the member 
opposite come clean and tell the folks that are asking about the 
southwest jog, did he come clean and tell them his view on 
what should happen around weather-related production 
problems in agriculture, Mr. Speaker? And I’ll quote what he 
said in The Four-Town Journal: Should the government step 
in? He says, “No, I don’t think there would be need for the 
government to step in.” That’s his position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to say anything to any crowd you 
want to when you’re in opposition. But we have to be 
accountable, Mr. Speaker. I have to be clear, straightforward, 
and honest with the people I’m dealing with. That I will be. If 
the people want a meeting with me, they ask for a meeting, I’ll 
be there, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Why is the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member just hold his point of 

order for about a minute please. Order. Would the member hold 
his point of order for a moment, please. Ministerial statements. 
Introduction of Bills. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast on a point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during the last exchange during 
question period, the member for Athabasca stated, and I quote, 
“Once again you guys lie.” That statement was heard very 
clearly here on this side of the House, and I’m sure the 
microphones picked it up, Mr. Speaker. It’s inappropriate 
language. It’s not acceptable in this Chamber. Mr. Speaker, we 
would ask that you direct the member to withdraw the statement 
and to apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
withdraw the comment and I apologize profusely. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his apology. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 222 to 328. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for all of the questions nos. 222 
through 328 have been submitted. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce motions 
of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move 
motions of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Karl Frank Klein 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There are three motions of condolence this afternoon and I 
would begin with a motion of condolence, which I will formally 
move at the end of my remarks, for Karl Klein. And I believe 
the Leader of the Opposition is going to second the motions 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like so many members of this Assembly both past 
and present, Karl Klein was a farmer. He was also, again as 
many members are and have been, he was also a teacher. And 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

like so many of his generation, Mr. Speaker, he was a veteran of 
the Second World War. 
 
And as we know, having very recently been part of 
remembrance ceremonies around the 11th, with each passing 
year there are fewer veterans from that conflict for us to thank 
for the freedoms we enjoy today. And so in some ways this is a 
special condolence as we have this opportunity to honour and 
acknowledge the service of Karl Klein, not only to this 
legislature but to the Royal Canadian Navy from 1940 to 1945. 
Like so many of his generation, he was a teacher when he 
enlisted and he spent his young adulthood far from home in a 
very uncertain time, but for a very definite purpose and that was 
the service of Canada. 
 
It was later in his life, Mr. Speaker, that Karl Klein served as a 
member of this legislature, serving the whole province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think it’s always fitting, Mr. Speaker, that 
we pause on one afternoon of our sitting to formally offer 
condolences to the families of former members. But we also do 
it to acknowledge the debts that we owe as sitting members to 
those who went before us. 
 
The influence that members of this House may have on younger 
citizens considering public life can be very profound. And I 
therefore think it bears mentioning today, Mr. Speaker, that 
when the current Member of Parliament for Regina Wascana, 
Ralph Goodale, made his maiden speech in this legislature in 
1986, he took that opportunity to pay tribute to Karl Klein and 
declared his own intention to uphold the high standards that he 
had observed as a young constituent of the former member for 
Notukeu-Willow Bunch. This is the kind of legacy to which 
each of us would aspire, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move, then seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorry and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Karl Frank Klein, who passed away on June 22, 2006, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1956 
until 1964 representing the constituency of 
Notukeu-Willow Bunch for the Liberal Party. Mr. Klein 
was born October 17, 1922 in Lafleche. He married Agnes 
McCarthy on July 1, 1948, and together they had six 
children. Mr. Klein received his early education in local 
schools before enlisting in the Royal Canadian Navy in 
1940. He served overseas as a wireless telegraphist until 
1945. 
 
Upon his return, Mr. Klein attended teachers college in 
Regina. He completed his degree in education at the 
University of Manitoba. Mr. Klein’s teaching career 
extended over 27 years. He also found time to farm and 
participate in the activities of his local church and the 
Knights of Columbus. Mr. Klein served two terms in this 
Assembly, winning his seat in the 1956 and the 1960 
general elections. 
 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to join in the discussion today and the remembrances of 
members and former members of this Assembly who have 
passed away. 
 
Without, at the risk I guess of repeating some of the words of 
the Premier, I know that there are also other members on this 
side of the House . . . I know the member for Wood River, who 
knew Mr. Klein, as well as the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy would also like to put some remarks on the record. And 
I want to certainly make way for that, especially for the 
personal comments of the member for Wood River. 
 
As the Premier has highlighted, Mr. Klein was a veteran, an 
educator, and of course an esteemed member of this Assembly. 
From 1956 to 1964 he served here. And I can imagine . . . well I 
mean we can read about the debates that were, that this 
Chamber hosted during those years. It would have been quite a 
place to be in terms of the history of the province, the political 
history of Saskatchewan. And I know the people of Mr. Klein’s 
riding were well served and well represented by his views on 
their behalf in those important debates. 
 
According to one of his relatives, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Klein never 
lost his passion for teaching. He continued to visit schools to 
talk about his time with the navy, Mr. Speaker, and his time as a 
veteran, even after he had finished teaching. And as I’m sure 
you and other members of this Assembly are aware, many 
veterans who have served in those great wars, in World War I 
and World War II and any conflict, sometimes have difficulty 
sharing about what they saw first-hand, what they witnessed, 
what they experienced as they encourage all of us to avoid, to 
avoid the scourge of war throughout the world in the future. For 
many, frankly the memories are just too painful to speak about. 
But thankfully for the students in the Lafleche and the Wood 
Mountain areas, Karl KIein was more than willing to talk about 
that experience overseas. 
 
In a memoriam for his great-uncle, one of Karl Klein’s 
great-nephews had the following to say, and I quote: 
 

I have several memories of my Uncle Karl, and the most 
vivid as a kid is shared by many of my schoolmates. Karl 
was invited by Wood Mountain School to speak about his 
military time served on the Atlantic Ocean during World 
War II fighting the Nazis. I think everyone found it 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

interesting, but Karl was so enthusiastic about telling his 
stories that he lost track of time and talked past 3:30 p.m. 
when the buses were ready to take the kids home. He had 
been a school teacher, so he was no stranger to a gym full 
of kids itching to be dismissed. 
 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, like his colleagues in this Assembly, all 
those kids who were there that day, all the school children who 
heard what he had to say on those occasions of remembrance, 
benefited from the fact that he was willing to tell the stories 
even if he ran over a bit in terms of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Premier, as do all members 
on this side of the House, all members here today want to join 
in supporting this motion and ensuring that the family and the 
friends of Mr. Klein know of our best wishes for them, our 
sympathies on their bereavement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 
talking a little bit about one of our past members, Mr. Karl 
Klein. And at the start I would like to say that I knew Karl very 
well. Karl was a very good friend of mine as it turned out over 
the many years. 
 
I first, I guess met Karl . . . I was fairly young but he was the 
principal of the school in Fir Mountain, and that was my 
hometown. That’s when we had a school. And Karl was 
extremely well-liked by students, and even at that time there 
was schools that were having difficulty with staying open. And 
Fir Mountain was a very, very small town and the neighbouring 
town was a bit larger, but students were travelling on their own 
hook by car, I guess, to come to Fir Mountain to go to high 
school because Karl was such a great teacher. And Karl was just 
totally, totally liked by all of the students as attested to by the 
people that came from the other communities to be taught by 
Karl. 
 
I was in intermediate grade school at the time and some of the 
memories I have of Karl was recess periods and lunch hours. 
We had quite a gopher infestation around the schoolyards at the 
time. No running water in the school and so us junior kids we 
would be carrying water from the town well at noon hour and 
recess to pour down gopher holes. Well you can imagine the 
amount of pails of water that we had to carry to get a gopher to 
come out. And Karl, as the teacher, was the person that was in 
charge of getting rid of the gopher. And I don’t know if it 
would pass the tests of the environment and the humane people 
today how gophers were exterminated but we did keep the 
gopher population down in our schoolyard, and thanks to Karl. 
 
[15:00] 
 
In a few later years I had the opportunity again to be in school 
with Karl Klein when Karl came back to school in Glentworth 
to teach and it was in my final year of high school, and so I 
actually became a student of Karl’s. And he was just an 
outstanding individual and an excellent teacher. I probably owe 
Karl a bit of gratitude for me joining the military because there 
was times when we did talk about his career in the navy and 

maybe subconsciously that prompted me to go into the military. 
 
I do remember when Karl was a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly. And I believe in those days, Mr. Speaker, that you 
still had the opportunity to hold a full-time job and then you 
took a leave of absence to come when the House actually sat. 
And Karl would get a replacement teacher in while he was 
actually in the legislature. But I do remember one of his maiden 
speeches, and I can’t say for sure if it was his maiden speech, 
but he talked passionately about the constituency then of 
Notukeu-Willow Bunch and the area. 
 
And particularly he talked about a bit of a phenomena south of 
the town of Fir Mountain called the sinking hill. And I’ve used 
that example a couple of times in my speeches where Karl had, 
back in the early ’50s or mid-’50s when he was sitting in this 
Assembly, talked about the opportunities of that time for 
tourism and ecotourism in southern Saskatchewan. And talked 
passionately how we could draw tourists into southern 
Saskatchewan and into Saskatchewan by such things as visiting 
the sinking hill of southern Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve spoke about the same thing some 50 years later, talked 
about still the opportunity is still there for the tourism down in 
that area. 
 
It was very interesting sitting and discussing politics with Mr. 
Klein. It’s very interesting because we could debate — sit and 
have a friendly debate — and we could agree on most things. In 
fact I would suggest that Karl and I would agree on everything 
until we walked into a polling booth. And Karl was a very, very 
strong Liberal, and he could never convince me that that would 
be the way I should vote. But we agreed on everything we 
talked about, which is quite ironic. 
 
One of the concepts that Karl constantly talked about even up 
until the time of his passing was how we could revitalize areas 
of rural Saskatchewan. And Karl lived in Lafleche up until his 
passing, a short stint in the Gravelbourg hospital. But he talked 
about such things as the abandoned farmyards and small, let’s 
say they’re farmyards which a lot of people would call an 
acreage. And the opportunity it would present itself to people 
that were on social assistance and how they could have a hand 
up by inhabiting some of these farmsteads and actually houses 
in rural towns. And it’d give them an opportunity . . . for an 
example, as Karl had put so passionately, that if you had people 
that were on social assistance with a few kids and you put them 
out into a 10- or 15-acre property where they would have an 
opportunity to grow a garden, they may have an opportunity to 
have a few animals such as chickens and pigs. And he said, 
look what that would do for this province if we could have 
some of these people into these places. 
 
And I know I mentioned that one time, and I kind of got told 
that we would be forcing people away from what they’re used 
to. And I said no, that’s not true — and this was Karl’s view 
also — we would be offering them an opportunity rather than 
telling them they had to do something, but giving them the 
opportunity to move to an area such as rural Saskatchewan and 
to one of these farm lands or acreages and make a life for 
themselves that would help them along the road to 
self-independence. And Karl up until the time of his passing 
talked very, very passionately about that. 
 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

Karl was also very much into winemaking. And we would 
spend some time discussing different types of refreshments, and 
he very much enjoyed talking about it. And on occasion I’ve 
had the opportunity to sample a couple of his products — which 
was very interesting — over a little bit of a political discussion. 
 
Prior to Karl’s passing, we met in Lafleche one day and he said 
to me, he said, this is the first time in my adult life that I do not 
have a federal political party. And I use the word federal 
political party, because I’m pretty sure that Karl would have 
supported me in my bid for a seat in this legislature. I don’t 
know that for sure. But Karl, as a lifelong Liberal, was very, 
very upset with the same-sex marriage Bill and the federal 
government. And so his last discussion with me on politics was 
that he did not have a party any more, and he really felt sad 
because he was really not in favour of this Bill that went 
through the federal parliament. 
 
Karl will be very much missed by people in the community. He 
was very active in the Legion. And again as age creeps up on all 
of us, you get less and less active, but Karl was a very, very 
staunch Legion supporter. He was a very staunch community 
person. He was very involved with the Knights of Columbus. 
And Karl was just an all around great individual and a great 
asset to the community. 
 
Karl will be greatly missed by so many people in the area, and I 
would like to join in supporting this motion and offering my 
sincere condolences to Karl’s family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour to rise today in the Assembly to speak to the condolence 
motion with respect to the late Karl Klein. Mr. Speaker, I will 
speak to the motion, not as somebody who knew Mr. Klein — 
because I did not — but as a member of the Assembly who 
currently represents the part of the province that Mr. Klein once 
did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s . . . I have a real appreciation for the 
time that we take in the Assembly to honour a former member 
at the news of their passing, so I consider it a privilege to say a 
few words on one of my predecessors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition have 
spoken very eloquently about Mr. Klein, as has the member 
from Wood River, who gave this House a very personal side of 
Mr. Klein. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of the session when I was given 
notice of Mr. Klein’s passing and notice of the motion and the 
offer to speak to the motion, I was in the middle of preparing 
my maiden speech in this House. And so I thought it would be 
interesting to go back and see what Mr. Klein had said in his 
maiden speech 50 years ago. And I want to thank the library 
staff for finding those resources for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might be a little bit biased. I think members 
know that I have an undergraduate degree in history and so I 
may be a little bit biased. But I think that history’s a very 
important tool to not only knowing where we come from, but to 

planning a road map to where we’re going. And certainly our 
history as a country and a province is important, but I think 
equally important is the history of our legislature. And we 
certainly have a rich history of this Chamber and what happens 
in this building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reading Mr. Klein’s maiden speech and the 
comments that he made, not only did I think I got a bit of an 
insight into the man, but also his speech provided some answers 
to my questions that I have and some of my personal curiosities 
about the history of this Chamber, and in fact answered some of 
the questions that I get most from my constituents. And I’ll 
share some of those with you today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since my election one of the most frequent 
questions that I get, especially from people who come to the 
legislature or tune in on television is, is the House always this 
loud and boisterous? And has it always been this way? Have the 
debates been as ferocious at times as they can get? And a bit of 
Mr. Klein’s speech will answer that question for me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you that it’s been indicated by speakers before me 
that Mr. Klein, prior to his election, was a teacher. And in his 
maiden speech he tells about the time that he was preparing his 
high school students for debating. And he thought it would be a 
good idea to tune in the legislature on the radio so that his 
students could hear what a good debate sounds like. He thought 
that the Assembly offered, in his words, “debating of the 
highest order in the province.” 
 
And as he’s telling the story, Mr. Speaker, he mentions that not 
only was it his students’ first time listening to the legislature on 
the radio, but it was also his first time. And as he called it that 
day that they listened on the radio, he called it a particularly bad 
feud going on at the time. So after the broadcast, Mr. Speaker, 
he turned off the radio and he turned to his students and he said, 
and I’ll quote him: 
 

Well, today we have learned what not to do in debating; 
next week, I will teach you what should be done. 

 
So my question on that matter has been answered. It seems to 
be it’s always been this way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second thing that I learned from his speech was that the 
more things change and the more time changes and time goes 
on, the more they seem to stay the same. And by that I mean 
this: how much of how today’s opposition, how we criticize the 
government of the day, is quite like it was back 50 years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Klein in his maiden speech said in the House 
that the first thing that his constituents asked of him after he 
was elected into the Assembly — he was a member of the 
opposition — but the first thing that his constituents asked him 
was for some good roads. And, Mr. Speaker, that really hasn’t 
changed because that’s, I think, what my constituents ask me 
about and I’ve presented petitions on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Klein in his maiden speech was critical of the 
government of the day for something called the Regina 
Manifesto. He reminded the government of many of the ideas 
that they stole from his party during the election that preceded 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

his sitting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Klein reminded the government of their 
failed investments, from the box factory and the shoe factory. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know the member, my colleague from 
Wood River, said that Mr. Klein was a lifelong Liberal. But 
from reading his main speech, I think Mr. Klein would have felt 
right at home in this caucus, in the opposition caucus of today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to know what a person thought when he 
was giving his maiden speech just from reading the text. You 
don’t get the emotion; you don’t get the context of the day. But 
I think that I can draw a couple of conclusions from Mr. Klein’s 
maiden speech. 
 
Mr. Klein took pride in representing the people of 
Notukeu-Willow Bunch. He held the Chamber and the 
proceedings and this building in high regard and respect. And, 
Mr. Speaker, while it was probably a highlight of his life to be 
an elected member of this Assembly for eight years, it was 
probably not the highlight of his life. He rightfully took pride in 
his long teaching career, his community involvement, and his 
family. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the obituary that appeared in the 
Leader-Post this summer is quite lengthy, yet it only has one 
line about his eight-year political career and, as I said, quite 
lengthy on everything else that he achieved in his life. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the good people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, I’d like to join with the Premier, the 
Leader of the Opposition, and all members of this Assembly in 
supporting this motion and offering my sincere condolences to 
the family of Karl Klein. Thank you. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the 
Premier, seconded by the member for Swift Current, the Leader 
of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. Karl Frank Klein. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

Bernard Leo Korchinski 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again at the 
close of my remarks I will move the formal motion. I believe it 
will be seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Assembly this afternoon will want to 
recognize the contribution, both to this House and to this 
province, of Mr. Bernard Korchinski. Mr. Speaker, Bernard 
Korchinski has the distinction, relatively unique and rare 

distinction, Mr. Speaker, of having been born on 
Saskatchewan’s first Christmas, December 25, 1905. There will 
only be a few who will be able to claim that distinction. 
 
He was born, Mr. Speaker, to a family of 13 children. He was 
the first of his brothers and sisters to be born in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, he was a teacher in our province for 35 years. His 
extracurricular activities ranged from war bond drives to 
organizing for the Wheat Pool to being a long-serving 
scoutmaster, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Korchinski was deeply devoted 
both to his church and to his Ukrainian heritage, and in 1932 
helped found the Ukrainian Catholic Brotherhood of Canada. 
 
Bernard Korchinski served in this Assembly on two occasions, 
through two terms as the member for Redberry in the Liberal 
opposition in the 1950s. Later in his life, Mr. Speaker, he was 
named Citizenship Court judge, a position, I am told, of which 
he was very, very proud, and one that gave him great joy as he 
welcomed new Canadians and bestowed upon them the rights 
and privileges of Canadian citizenship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the age of 100, a century old, Bernard 
Korchinski was still granting interviews — one that year to the 
Leader-Post and one to the University of Saskatchewan alumni 
news. And as a conversationalist and a raconteur, even at 100 
years of age he was still in very fine form, which may not be 
surprising when you consider that during his tenure as an MLA 
— and again this was during the 1950s when there were many 
accomplished orators in this legislature — in the 1950s Bernard 
Korchinski was selected by members of the press as the best 
debater in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his interview with the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] alumni news, Bernard Korchinski summed up 
the character of Saskatchewan people as follows. He said, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The spiritual attitude of people in Saskatchewan is one that 
says we won’t give up easily. We’re not going to surrender 
to political, social, or even environmental oppression; 
we’re going to fight back against adversity. We have lived 
through the Dirty Thirties and through times when we got 
90 cents for a bushel of wheat. Somehow we managed to 
survive. I say we can survive anything. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Bernard Korchinski, was more than just a 
survivor. He was an indeed an example of a full life very well 
lived. And so, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Bernard Leo Korchinski who passed away on October 
13, 2006 was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1948 until 1952 and from 1956 until 1960, representing 
the constituency of Redberry for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Korchinski was born on Christmas Day, 1905, at 
Beaver Hill near Ituna. He was educated at schools in 
Ituna, Yorkton, and Regina before attending the University 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

of Saskatchewan. He married Slawka Marak on July 21, 
1938. He is survived by his four children and numerous 
grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and five 
great-great-grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Korchinski’s teaching career spanned 39 years and 
schools throughout Saskatchewan. During the Second 
World War he took a leave from teaching to work for the 
National Film Board showing newsreels and promoting 
war bonds. Mr. Korchinski’s public service also included 
periods as the provincial director of the Emergency 
Measures Organization and as a Citizenship Court judge. 
He served two terms in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Korchinski was a lifelong supporter of the Boy 
Scouts, serving as a scoutmaster for 26 years and as 
president of the district scouting organization. 
 
Mr. Korchinski was proud of his heritage and was a 
founding member of several Ukrainian organizations 
including the Ukrainian Catholic Brotherhood, St. 
Athanasius Church, and the Ukrainian Catholic Youth. He 
was a member of the Knights of Columbus and an 
organizer with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family.  

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, to his constituency, and to the 
province. Bernard Leo Korchinski. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s a privilege 
for me to join in to pay tribute to a former member of this 
Assembly. Notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Korchinski lived 
to be over 100 years old, I’m sure that his family and friends 
will . . . and therefore had many, many birthdays and Christmas 
days to spend with his family, to share with his friends, I’m sure 
he will be very much missed. I am sure it won’t be an easy 
Christmas as his family and friends fondly remember him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two former members that we honour today, 
that we’ve honoured today so far — the Premier has spoken of 
Mr. Klein and as well as members on this side of the House, 
and now Mr. Korchinski — I couldn’t help but notice that they 
served together in this Legislative Assembly. They would have 
served together in the same party, working on the same issues. 
And I think all of us in this Assembly know a little bit about the 
kind of friendships that are born of that shared responsibility 
and work, and I have no doubt that that was the case for Mr. 
Klein and Mr. Korchinski. 
 

The Premier has highlighted Mr. Korchinski’s past, his 
contribution to this province, his contribution to the Ukrainian 
community here in Saskatchewan, to the Ukrainian Catholic 
community and, Mr. Speaker, again at the risk of repeating 
some of what the Premier highlighted for members of this 
Assembly, I do think that it’s interesting to look at some of the 
other quotes you’d find in that same Green and White 
publication, the U of S Alumni Association publication. 
 
In its 100th year, as the Premier has highlighted, Mr. 
Korchinski was interviewed and the Premier shared one quote. 
But there were some others that I thought were interesting, 
reflective of this individual, this man who served this 
Assembly, and of the times that he served, and even of the 
times that he went to university because of course he served in 
this Assembly for eight years and lived over 100. And so as 
important for him as service in this legislature would have been, 
there was so much more — so very, very much more — that he 
had to reflect on for that interview. 
 
When reflecting on his life at 100 years, Korchinski said it was 
extremely difficult to be a teacher in Saskatchewan when World 
War II broke out. “At the time, I was” . . . This is a quote from 
that article, Mr. Speaker. He went on to say: 
 

At the time, I was teaching high school in a place called 
Rama. When war broke out, the next thing I knew half of 
my grade 12 students had volunteered for the Air Force. 
Everybody wanted to get involved. It was a very 
emotional time. 
 

He was asked about his university life on the U of S campus in 
the 1930s now, Mr. Speaker. Korchinski said, at the time it 
really hadn’t changed much in 70 years. He said, and I quote: 
 

Students missed classes, tried to copy from each other, and 
engaged in all kinds of shenanigans [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

He said: 
 

University was co-educational so we used to socialize with 
the girls and go to dances as often as we could. [And] It 
was very social, but also very hard work. 
 

I’m sure the friends and the family and those who knew Mr. 
Korchinski well were so very pleased that he was able to see 
and enjoy the province’s centennial, that he was able to receive 
his medal as a centenarian in the province of Saskatchewan — 
probably for some selfish reasons, so they could hear those 
kinds of stories. We’re all well served by them, by the history 
of this province, when it’s told to us directly by leaders as Mr. 
Korchinski was. 
 
Mr. Korchinski was still active well into his later years, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader-Post columnist Will Chabun wrote his 
column about Bernie Korchinski a few days after his passing. 
Chabun had interviewed one of Korchinski’s long-time friends, 
Mike Shykula, who had written a book with Mr. Korchinski in 
the late 1980s. I’d like to share a part of that column, if I can, in 
closing today, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a quote from the column: 
 

Mike Shykula remembers how Bernard Korchinski sought 
his help in buying a computer. 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

“It was when he was over 90 — and he learned to used it,” 
said Shykula. “I helped him buy it and a printer, too. He 
wanted it because he was writing his family history. 
 
“So many people, when they’re in their 40s or 50s, say 
they’re not able to learn how to use a computer . . . ” 
 

Some may be in this room right now, Mr. Speaker — but Mr. 
Korchinski did. 
 
He was well loved in all of the communities he touched over 
those 100 years and all of those groups. A clear example of this 
is the fact that there were three official celebrations that were 
held for his 100th birthday by his family, his church, and the 
Knights of Columbus, an organization he served for an amazing 
77 years. 
 
The Premier has pointed out he is survived by his four children, 
a number of grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and 
great-great-grandchildren. And it is a pleasure on behalf of the 
official opposition to pay homage and tribute to Mr. Korchinski 
here today in this Assembly and to join with the members of 
this Assembly in a condolence motion for the bereaved family. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to pay 
tribute to Mr. Bernard Leo Korchinski. A lot of the details have 
already been put on the record, but I’d like to add to some of 
them. And I believe I have some new or different information 
that I’d like to add to the record about Mr. Korchinski’s life, 
and the fact that I got to know him somewhat in his later years. 
 
As was mentioned, Mr. Korchinski passed away October 13, 
2006. He was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1948 until ’52 and from 1956 until 1960, representing the 
constituency of Redberry for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was referred to by the Leader of the 
Opposition, there was an article in The StarPhoenix, but I’d like 
to just add a bit more from that article concerning Mr. 
Korchinski: 
 

Mike Shykula remembers how Bernard Korchinski sought 
his help in buying a computer. 
 
[And goes on to say] “It was when he was over 90 [years 
old] — and he learned to use it,” said Shykula. I helped 
him buy it and a printer, too. He wanted it because he was 
writing his family history. 
 
“So many people, when they’re in their 40s or 50s, say 
they’re not able to learn how to use a computer — but he 
did.” He even got online as well — an example of the 
energy and curiosity that made Korchinski, who died 
Friday at 100, so special. 

 
[As was mentioned before he was] Born on Dec. 25, 1905, 
at Ituna, Korchinski was educated there and in Yorkton, 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
He began teaching in the mid-1920s, when Ukrainian 

surnames were rare in any profession and bigotry against 
Ukrainian immigrants was building. 
 
He taught at Ituna, then at Holdfast and Hafford, where he 
met and married Slawka Maruk in 1938. He took a leave 
to work for the National Film Board during the Second 
World War, showing newsreels and promoting war bonds. 
 
After the war, he taught at Speers, southeast of North 
Battleford. He entered the legislature as a Liberal from the 
Redberry constituency in 1948, juggling teaching and 
MLA duties. 
 
Defeated in 1952, he returned to the legislature in 1956. 
After the Liberals took office in 1964, he became director 
of the province’s Emergency Measures Organization and 
later became a federal citizenship judge. 
 

[15:30] 
 

In a 2005 interview, he remembered how new citizens 
sometimes fearfully confused him with a judge of the 
criminal courts and how he heard horrifying stories of 
people forced to flee their homes because they feared 
torture or death. 

 
All in all, though “I think that was the happiest part of my 
life. My election as an MLA and appointment as a 
citizenship judge were the highlights,” he said. 

 
In the late 1980s, he and Shykula— a former journalist 
who lives in Kelowna, B.C. — wrote a biography of the 
late Bishop Nykyta Budka, the former Ukrainian Catholic 
bishop who might be the first person with Saskatchewan 
links to be named a saint of the Catholic church one day. 

 
So popular and respected was Korchinski that his 100th 
birthday was marked by separate celebrations by his 
church, the Knights of Columbus — the Catholic religious 
order to which he had belonged for 77 years — and [of 
course] his family. 
 

So Mr. Korchinski was quite an active individual in his 
community and in the province. 
 
I of course like many of us who was elected in 1999 first saw or 
spoke to or was introduced to Mr. Korchinski at the CPA 
[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] banquet in spring 
of 2000. My wife and I came in a bit late, and we just happened 
to sit at a table where there was some room. And I sat beside 
Mr. Korchinski and soon found out that he was the former 
member of Redberry. And of course at that time I was newly 
elected for the constituency of Redberry Lake so there was 
immediately a bond, and we shared many conversations. And 
he spoke quite eloquently about his days as an MLA and the 
area of Redberry, which I represented most of it at that time. 
 
So it was very interesting just speaking to him about the days 
when he was an MLA and his views of politics and the world. 
And so it was a great pleasure to have met him and just by 
chance to be able to sit at the same table with him and speak to 
him about his life and the province and his views on where 
things were going and where they should go. 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

I believe it was last year or the year before he was given the 
Centennial Medal at the CPA banquet. And of course there is a 
saying, never give a mike to a politician or a former politician 
because they just might go ahead and use it and speak. And he 
certainly did. He took that opportunity to start telling stories. 
And it was sometimes hard to hear what he was saying, but I 
remember some of the same stories that he had told me in 1999 
when I sat with him at the CPA banquet. So it was certainly a 
pleasure to be able to meet and speak to that man and hear 
about all his stories. 
 
So I’d like to certainly join in the motion. I’d like to join the 
Assembly with the feelings and the deep sense of loss and 
bereavement and express our most sincere sympathy to the 
family of this most outstanding citizen of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask leave of the Assembly to make a 
few remarks with respect to Bernard Korchinski. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members. I’m very honoured to be 
able to stand in this Assembly today and recall a few memories 
about Bernard Leo Korchinski. He was, I have to say, the first 
politician that I actually ever did meet in real life, and I think I 
was probably under 10 years old at the time when I met him. 
And it’s hard to say just how much a person impresses you at 
that age, but quite often it may have been the beginning of some 
kind of messages that are conveyed to a young person that 
eventually move one to work towards life in politics. I’ll say a 
little more about how that happened a little later. 
 
But I noted through the remarks today and also through the 
record that Mr. Korchinski was elected in 1948. He had 
defeated at that time Mr. Lazorko, who was a member of the 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], and I think he 
was able to defeat him because all of my relatives must have 
voted for him at the time. My family lives along the border, sort 
of moved around between Redberry constituency and the North 
Battleford constituency. 
 
And then in 1952, Mr. Dick Zipchen ran for the CCF, and Dick 
Zipchen was actually related to my family. So Dick Zipchen 
won that year. However I think some of the family must have 
deserted Dick because in 1956 Mr. Korchinski won again, and 
I’m sure that it must have been my family members that caused 
that to happen. And later on, 1960, he was defeated by Dick 
Michayluk of the CCF. And I think that happened when it was a 
movement of the boundary and so that some of my family 
members must have got moved out of the constituency. 
 
And I notice one other thing here as I read these names: 
Lazorko, Zipchen, Michayluk, and Korchinski. In those days 
you pretty well had to be Ukrainian to get elected in the 
constituency of Redberry. 
 
I mention that he was the first politician that I knew in real life 
and it happened this way. In those days of the one-room 
schools, we used to have these track meets. And schools from 
the entire unit would come together to one place in the spring 
and we’d have these competitions. Now it happened that I was 
at a school . . . in one of the schools in that area and we 

travelled to Speers for the track meet. And I think it was 
between, I think it was between the potato race and the 60-yard 
dash that we had a break. And all us children were assembled to 
the steps of a two-room school to hear the principal of the 
school. There were very few schools that had principals; just 
big schools with two or three rooms had principals. And he 
spoke to all of the assembled teachers and children that were 
there. 
 
From that, my memory is simply that he walked very straight. 
He was very straight in his demeanour as he walked, and my 
feeling was that he talked straight too. And hearing today that 
he was, as has been mentioned earlier, that he has been a 
scoutmaster, and I think he carried that right through into his 
school work. 
 
I knew that he loved to meet people. He took his work very 
seriously. He had a great work ethic. He was an outgoing 
person and a passionate fighter for the Redberry constituency, 
so passionate that he did, as the Premier mentioned, won . . . 
was recognized as a great, perhaps the best, debater of the time. 
 
Now the member for Biggar mentioned that he heard him and 
talked to Mr. Korchinski during our CPA meeting. I know that 
Mr. Korchinski was a very, very faithful and regular visitor to 
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association meetings that we 
had. He’d come annually with his daughter, Bernadine and 
Leslie. And the year 1905 . . . When we honoured him, we were 
reminded of what kind of a politician he was. So even though 
he was 100 years old at the time, he showed us that he had as 
much stamina as anybody else at the mike when his remarks 
turned into a historical account of his politics. 
 
So I wish to at this time to pay my respects and condolences to 
his family members. I look at Mr. Korchinski as somebody who 
loved politics. He had a roller-coaster career. He had a good 
career, and a good life, and he was a tremendous politician. 
 
The question before the Assembly then, members, is the motion 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by 
the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciate of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. Bernard Leo Korchinski. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 

Joseph Clifford McIsaac 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again at the 
close of my remarks I will move the formal motion of 
condolence. This to remember and celebrate the life and service 
to the province and this legislature of Dr. Joseph Clifford 
McIsaac although, Mr. Speaker, I think across this province 
best known as Cliff McIsaac. 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

Cliff McIsaac spent much of his early life on the move in this 
country. He was born, raised, and educated in Prince Edward 
Island, continued his education in Nova Scotia, and then onto 
Ontario where he obtained his degree in veterinary medicine. 
 
Fortunately for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Dr. McIsaac’s 
travels were not yet finished and he found a home and made a 
home in our province, beginning his veterinary practice in the 
Unity, where in the community of Unity he quickly became a 
leader in that community through his service on the local school 
board then taking him to service in the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, and a host of other organizations. Cliff 
McIsaac, as well as a vet was also a very successful rancher in 
his own right and businessman. 
 
Dr. McIsaac was elected to this Assembly on three occasions, 
Mr. Speaker, and served in the cabinet of Premier Ross 
Thatcher and the Liberal government at that time. He continued 
his public life beyond this legislature in the federal parliament 
in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Let the record show that the 
power failed us from 3:40 to 3:50. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was 
observing that in condolence of the passing of Dr. Cliff 
McIsaac, that following his service to this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, he continued in public life running and being 
successful in running for the Canadian House of Commons. He 
served in the Trudeau government as the Member of Parliament 
for Battleford-Kindersley. Mr. Speaker, a man of many 
interests, talents, and enthusiasms, Cliff McIsaac’s 
contributions were likewise many and varied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Cliff McIsaac chose Saskatchewan as his 
home and he chose a life of service to the people of his adopted 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, for his many years of service we 
pay him tribute in our Assembly today. And therefore, I move, 
seconded by the member of Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Joseph Clifford McIsaac who passed away on July 25, 
2006 was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1964 until 1974 representing the constituency of Wilkie 
for the Liberal Party. 
 
Dr. McIsaac was born in Mount Herbert, Prince Edward 
Island on August 30, 1930. He attended local schools there 
before graduating from the Prince of Wales College in 
Charlottetown. Dr. McIsaac continued his studies at the 
Nova Scotia Agricultural College from which he received 
his diploma in 1950. Later he was awarded a Doctor of 
Veterinary Medicine degree in 1955 from the Ontario 
Veterinary College in Guelph. 
 
Dr. McIsaac married Marie Vandervoort on July 29, 1953. 
He is survived by his wife and their six children. 

Dr. McIsaac began his veterinarian career by opening a 
practice in Unity. He expanded his interests in the farming 
field by establishing a commercial beef operation and a 
mobile feed milling company. In later years he moved his 
practice to North Battleford. 
 
Dr. McIsaac was active in a number of community and 
professional organizations. He belonged to the Knights of 
Columbus, served on the local school board, and the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
 
His professional interests led to his involvement with a 
number of cattle, farming, and veterinary medical 
associations. Dr. McIsaac was appointed to the Canadian 
Dairy Commission and served as Chair of the National 
Farm Products Marketing Council. 
 
Dr. Cliff McIsaac was first elected to this Assembly in the 
1964 election and retained his seat in the following two 
general elections. He served in the cabinet of Ross 
Thatcher as minister of Municipal Affairs and later in the 
Education portfolio. 
 
Upon leaving this Assembly in 1974, Dr. McIsaac was 
elected to the federal parliament for the 
Battleford-Kindersley constituency. He served as 
parliamentary secretary to the ministers of Transport and 
Regional Economic Expansion, and as Chief Government 
Whip. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. Joseph Clifford McIsaac. 
 

The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to second the 
Premier’s motion today, this motion of condolence for the 
family and friends of Dr. McIsaac, who was well-known in 
politics as Cliff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cliff McIsaac was one of those many Atlantic 
Canadians who contributed mightily to the province of 
Saskatchewan after moving here. But he retained a strong love 
for his alma mater, the Nova Scotia College of Agriculture. And 
in the year 2000, at the 50th anniversary of his graduating class, 
Cliff and two former classmates founded . . . they launched and 
founded a bursary fund, the class of 1950 fund, for students in 
need of assistance. 
 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

The trio had a target of $50,000 and encouraged all other 
alumni to pledge donations or to leave donations in their wills 
so that other students could access the college. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has already highlighted the great 
contributions of Dr. McIsaac to this legislature, to politics in 
general, and has noted the fact that he was a very well-respected 
veterinarian with a strong background in agriculture. You know 
that Dr. McIsaac, as you know, Mr. Speaker, also established a 
mobile feed milling company and a commercial beef operation. 
 
For 10 years he served in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, being 
asked to serve in the cabinet of Premier Ross Thatcher. And 
after his stint in provincial politics, as the Premier has pointed 
out, he spent some time in Ottawa where he did hold important 
positions as Chief Government Whip and was the minister in 
the federal cabinet for Regional Economic Expansion and 
Transport, and no doubt an influential force for this province, 
for the province of Saskatchewan, in the national cabinet. 
 
When he wasn’t in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, tending to his duties 
there, he was busy in his constituency. There are some events of 
note that he would highlight I’m sure if he had the chance, 
including what some might consider to be the small events in 
the life of an MP [Member of Parliament] that are not small at 
all but are quite significant for those communities — the 
opening of a new grocery store at the Red Pheasant Reserve 
south of North Battleford in ’74, the addition to the existing 
band office on the Sweetgrass Indian Reserve west of North 
Battleford in 1976. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when he left federal politics, Dr. McIsaac 
along with Léon Blacer was commissioned with what many in 
this Assembly would consider to be an unenviable job — to 
review the salaries of members of both the House of Commons 
and the Senate. And we know how contentious the issue of 
remuneration compensation for elected members can be. 
There’s a great deal of interest on this subject on the part of 
Saskatchewan people and the part of Canadians, and rightfully 
so. 
 
The McIsaac eeport, as it became known, is best remembered 
for some increases that it recommended for MPs. The reasons, 
according to the McIsaac report, were three-fold: MPs’ 
workloads had increased significantly over the years; the job of 
an MP had become a full-time position in the view of Mr. 
McIsaac; and an argument we still hear today, for competitive 
salaries, and candidate recruitment was difficult for all of the 
parties at that current rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that would have been a difficult report — maybe 
not difficult to prepare, but I’m sure there was much scrutiny 
and many questions asked on the part of the people of Canada 
for the McIsaac report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Donison, who works as a constituency 
assistant today for the current member for Thunder Creek, 
worked here at this Legislative Assembly when Dr. McIsaac 
was an elected member. In remembering him, she said this: 
 

Cliff McIsaac was a warm [and] friendly man who had a 
great interest in people and their problems. He really liked 
people and [he] was happiest when surrounded . . . [by] 

friends and family. He always had a big smile and looked 
like he enjoyed every day. The family found it very hard 
to watch him suffer with Alzheimer’s disease but even 
then he continued to have that same hearty hello and a big 
smile for everyone he met.” 

 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bonnie has, I think, captured the personality of 
Dr. McIsaac better than any of us could in this Assembly 
because she worked with him, and she knew the kind of 
personality he was. And she knew how difficult his passing was 
and the circumstances around his passing were for his family. 
 
And with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I do second the Premier’s 
motion of condolence, and on behalf of the opposition we offer 
our condolences to the bereaved friends and family of Cliff 
McIsaac. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
just add a few more comments to this condolence motion 
regarding Joseph Clifford McIsaac. While I didn’t have the 
privilege and honour of meeting Mr. McIsaac personally, I had 
the privilege of meeting one of his family members. 
 
His son Alex practised veterinary medicine in the community of 
Wawota for a number of years. And I remember, Mr. Speaker, 
when I was first elected and driving down to Wawota and 
meeting Alex and talking a little bit. He was the one who 
actually mentioned about being part of the family and his dad in 
politics. And Alex was one who enjoyed politics, but I think 
Alex also derived his abilities in veterinary medicine obviously 
from his dad. He was an excellent veterinarian in our area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my brother and I who have a mixed farming 
operation had the privilege of calling on Alex for his services 
over the years. And I know that the people in the community of 
Wawota and surrounding area really appreciated the work and 
the commitment that Dr. Alex McIsaac made to his community. 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, that he certainly represented his 
father well. 
 
And it was an honour to get to know Alex somewhat, Mr. 
Speaker, and just to hear him talk a little bit about his dad. And 
I would like to extend my condolences as well, not only to the 
McIsaac family but specifically to Alex and his family as they 
mourn the loss of a father and a special friend. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Premier, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. Joseph Clifford McIsaac. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave to move a 
motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move, seconded by the Government Deputy House Leader, the 
hon. member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with the 
transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of 
this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with the 
transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of 
this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
[The Assembly assumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 12 — The 
Planning and Development Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today and provide a few comments on Bill No. 12, The 
Planning and Development Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is to establish a system for planning and 
development in the province for municipalities and northern 
admin districts. This is quite important for the northern admin 
districts because it was definitely not in the combined Act that 
we went through last year or the year before. 
 
This Bill also identifies provincial interests that guide 
provincial and municipal planning, and is supposed to enable 
co-operation between municipalities, planning districts, and 
other jurisdictions and agencies in the delivery of planning 
services and infrastructure development. 
 
I guess one of the things that come to mind is what precipitated 
the introduction of this Bill? And those are some questions that 
we have and we’ll probably address some of that later on. 
 
But I’d like to make just a few brief comments on the minister’s 
remarks on the second reading of the Bill. And in it he talked 
about building communities that make Saskatchewan the best 
place for young people to live, work, and build strong futures. 
And very laudable, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t agree more. But it 
begs the question: if we’re doing that, what in this Bill is going 
to enhance people to stay here and live and work and build 
strong futures, when we know the record of this government 
right now. We’ve lost something in the neighbourhood of 
37,000 people in the last five to six years and 18,000 in the last 
two years, Mr. Speaker. And we have a Bill out with all of these 
remarks that this is going to help build futures for these people 
and yet they still leave the province. 
 
Also in the comments, the remarks from the minister, he talks 
about quality and adequate health care and human services. 
Well this is a statement obviously just put in for rhetorical 
purposes because we know over the last period of time what 
we’re seeing in health care services in this province. And we 
talk about adequate health care. What does the minister mean? 
 
I mean we look at one point where we’re talking about hospital 
closures — temporary closures albeit, but on a regular basis — 
and I think we’re up to about 10 or 12 or 14 now of hospital 
closures. And yet we have a feel-good speech here that says, 
communities, we want to develop communities with quality and 
adequate health care and human services. It’s saying one thing 
and actually another is being done within the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also the minister talked about extensive stakeholder and public 
consultations. We know the government’s record on 
consultations. We’ve addressed that on numerous occasions in 
this House in the last few years. We see that consultation to this 
NDP government sometimes means talking to their seatmate or 
talking to their party president or something and that constitutes 
consultations. And so there’s an awful lot of issues here when 
the feel-good part of the speech is talking about consultations. 
We question whether there’s been adequate consultation in this 
process. 
 
We also know that the consultations with the last Bill, the 
planning and development . . . The Cities Act, that it actually 
had to be pulled because there was so many amendments to the 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

Bill that the Bill had to be pulled and reintroduced. So that 
makes us very suspect as to why there’s a rush sometimes to put 
these Bills forward without proper consultation. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I think all of the questions that we 
will have on this Bill, we’ll be able to discuss in committee and 
ask questions in committee. So at this time I would recommend 
that Bill 12 be forwarded to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 12, The Planning and Development Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
12, The Planning and Development Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 12 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried, therefore this Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Addley that Bill No. 39 — The 
Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
join in to the adjourned debates on Bill No. 39, An Act to 
Recover Damages and Health Care Costs from Manufacturers 
of Tobacco. 
 
This piece of legislation is a piece of legislation that other 
provinces have seen prior to our province. Other provinces have 

passed this legislation and it really does go to the whole issue of 
tobacco use and some of the damaging effects that tobacco use 
has on our populations. It allows the governments to pursue 
tobacco companies and to sue them on behalf of their citizens 
and the Government of Saskatchewan, for example, to recover 
some of the expenses and costs that are incurred because of 
tobacco use. 
 
Tobacco use is a very, very costly substance — not only to 
purchase, but after, of course after people have smoked for a 
number of years, some of the health related costs. Every year 
approximately 1,000 people die from tobacco related illnesses 
and diseases in Saskatchewan. Health costs are about $145 
million a year which are associated with tobacco use. 
 
We’ve seen pieces of legislation come before this House before 
regarding tobacco use and one such Bill a couple years ago was 
eliminating smoking in public facilities. And, you know, it did 
have some effect definitely on some of the rural establishments, 
some of the bars in rural Saskatchewan. But the whole intent of 
the Bill was certainly not to hurt those facilities, although some 
of those no doubt were affected. But the whole intent of the Bill 
was to try and reduce and denormalize the use of tobacco in our 
society by making it, I guess, more difficult for people to smoke 
— not being able to smoke in public facilities. And certainly I 
think it has had some impact. 
 
But you know, when you look at the numbers of people 
smoking, we still see a large proportion of our young people 
smoking and how important it is for education to get to those 
people. And perhaps some of the proceeds, if a lawsuit is laid 
against the tobacco companies and revenue generated, much of 
that revenue I would hope would go towards education. 
 
Because if you’re going to change the attitude and habits of 
people, legislation is only one small part of it. Legislation 
without education usually is not very effective. Education 
without legislation at times may not be effective. So the 
combination of the two, we hope, will be effective. Because as I 
said we have a disproportionate amount of our young people 
using tobacco products still, and the consequences are not good 
for our health care system. 
 
There are other areas too, you know. And some of the issues 
that came to play when we passed the legislation banning 
smoking in public places, some of the issues that came to play 
were jurisdictional issues that really were very . . . quite 
frustrating for members on our side. Because when we debated 
that Bill, at that time the government had said that all the work 
had been done. 
 
There was the First Nations-run casino in Yorkton who at that 
time was a non-smoking facility. And you know, we listened to 
the government and . . . Well unfortunately probably is not the 
proper term. But in this case we were believing the government 
that proper consultation had taken place and that the First 
Nations were in agreement with this piece of legislation and 
would be following along with this piece of legislation. 
 
After the legislation was passed, unfortunately we found out 
that consultation maybe wasn’t done nearly as well. And in fact 
the one casino that was run through the First Nations, that was 
non-smoking to begin with, reverted back to smoking. 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

And you know, so it was a piece of legislation that overall I 
think has done some great good. But it really missed the mark, 
for example, in the First Nations community on the whole issue 
of tobacco use. And there’s much ground to be made up there 
because we know that the smoking rates in First Nations 
communities are higher in general than what they are for the 
rest of the population, and as a consequence so are the costs that 
we see in the health care system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is an issue that any time that we can support 
a Bill that is looking at denormalizing the tobacco use, which as 
a consequence will hopefully reduce the number of health care 
costs that we see because of tobacco-related illnesses, we would 
be in favour of. And certainly in this situation we would be in 
favour of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I know there has been some talk, as we were debating the Bill, 
about the government likes to throw out the fact that we had 
received money in donations from tobacco companies. But what 
I will say in that case is that, you know, if it helped me get 
elected to support a Bill like this, then I would thank them for 
that because that’s exactly what has done. If that money 
allowed me to become elected so I could support a piece of 
legislation like this, then I would welcome it. 
 
Well the members are laughing and are commenting. Because 
really you know it’s really quite interesting. So let’s take that 
one step further. Then the donations that that party received, the 
donations that that party received from marijuana lobbyists, 
does that go then to move them in the direction of legalizing 
marijuana? Here on one hand you’ve got a government talking 
about denormalizing the use of tobacco — you have the 
government talking about denormalizing the use of tobacco — 
and then accepting money from a lobby group to look at passing 
legislation on normalizing marijuana. Now that is so 
hypocritical. 
 
So it’s really funny how there’s certainly a lot of hooting and 
hollering from that side when I brought that up, but what they 
fail to realize is that here on one hand they’re passing 
legislation with one hand to denormalize tobacco use, and on 
the other hand they’re taking money from lobbyists for 
marijuana use in cafés and wherever else is . . . according to the 
federal leader. And it’s really quite ironic that they would be 
doing that. 
 
And they’re laughing from their seats and that’s perfectly fine. 
What they fail to realize is the hypocrisy that that shows from 
that NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I would move to move this Bill to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly . . . Order 
please. The question before the . . . Order please. Order please, 
members. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the motion moved by the 
Minister of Healthy Living Services that Bill No. 39, The 
Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. To which committee shall this 
Bill be referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, 
The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services that Bill No. 39 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill 39 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 5 — The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
to speak to this Bill, Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill changes the law so that a levy is assessed 
on all oil and gas wells and upstream facilities, not just inactive 
wells which was the case in the past. This is considerably more 
onerous on oil producers, oil and gas producers, and particularly 
those smaller companies with lower-producing wells, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A flat fee is one thing on a well that produces 30 barrels a day; 
it’s something else on one that produces three. And this Bill 
doesn’t appear to take that into account, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
only more onerous on the small oil and gas producers, but it’s 
considerably less onerous on government. 
 
And even though amendments have been made to this Act 
before, as the minister has alluded to, they have not ever been 
fully proclaimed to this point. And now having not proclaimed 
amendments that have been previously made, we’re changing 
some of the conditions again so that the level of confidence in 
the industry is likely to be faltering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s very reminiscent of the Bill that the Alberta government has 
passed regarding their orphan wells in very different 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker. They do not have a large number 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

of small producers left in Alberta, and they tend not to have 
low-producing wells like we do particularly in the Southeast in 
this province. It appears to be sort of the NDP version of 
Alberta envy and looks very much like the Alberta legislation, 
although the circumstances are not the same. 
 
It does work in Alberta but with our smaller oil companies, and 
many of them with low-producing wells, it will be very difficult 
for those companies to carry on and certainly to keep all of the 
wells in production that are now in production with an 
additional levy imposed on them. This Bill may in fact create a 
number of orphan wells right off the gun, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that the Bill needs further consultation with 
stakeholders, including small producers, and small producers 
particularly with low-producing wells; with larger producers; 
with agricultural landowners as well, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that there will be support for it and there will be opposition to it 
and it seems like an ideal situation for public hearings. And we 
believe also that more consultation is needed by the government 
with oil and gas companies in particular and this would also be 
facilitated by public hearings, Mr. Speaker. And accordingly I 
would move that the Bill go to committee for further review and 
discussion on the basis that I have received assurance from the 
minister that he and the government will support public 
hearings on this matter between now and the beginning of the 
spring session. 
 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that 
Bill No. 5, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 5, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill No. 5 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 32 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
to join in the adjourned debates regarding Bill No. 32, an Act to 
amend the superannuation amendment Act and to make 
consequential amendments to The Provincial Court Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to review the process and how this 
Bill came to being. It’s important to review the actions of this 
Assembly over the last 40 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, indexing of pensions has not been guaranteed by 
this Assembly since 1965, some 40 years, and most of the 
lifetime of most members of this House. Increases have been 
done on an ad hoc basis. And it hasn’t worked all that well over 
the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. Yes, there’s been times 
when the government has chosen to provide an ad hoc increase. 
But there have been times when superannuates, pensioners, 
have received a zero per cent increase as well. That talks to the 
failings of not having legislation in place that guarantees that 
incomes will keep up with inflation. 
 
Indeed pensioners, superannuates in Saskatchewan, have been 
falling behind for the last 40 years. So, Mr. Speaker, what do 
they do? They come to their legislature to seek redress, to talk 
to the elected members of this House. Mr. Speaker, they met 
with the government members and they met with the opposition 
members. They met with us many, many times. People like Alf 
Zimmerman and Jack Shepherd and others from across the 
province have to be commended for their tenacity, for coming 
here time after time to make their points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they met with government members, what 
did they get? Very little results. They’re the first to say they met 
with them time and time again and never were their questions 
answered. So, Mr. Speaker, like many groups across the 
province, what did they do? They met with the opposition. They 
hoped that we would take their questions, their concerns, to the 
floor of this legislature and hold this government to task. And 
that’s what we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we challenged them. We said, if you fill the galleries, if you 
bring your people here and fill the galleries, we will ask the 
questions. And, Mr. Speaker, what will happen? Either the 
government opposite will answer those questions in the House 
or they will have to answer in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker — in 
the rotunda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we asked the questions in this House. We took their 
concerns. After several meetings with that government, we took 
their concerns to this floor in the legislature. What did the 
government say? Well they said that, you know, they just said, 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

the opposition doesn’t know what they’re talking about. They 
wouldn’t answer. But, Mr. Speaker, we hear that time and time 
again from this government. There’s no basis to that 
whatsoever, but we hear that from this government. 
 
But this time the pensioners, the superannuates, they wouldn’t 
leave without an answer. So they filled the rotunda and they 
challenged the Premier to speak with them, to meet with them. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they had no choice. The Premier agreed to a 
meeting. He said that he would have a meeting in two weeks 
with that group. 
 
Well several months passed by. Still no meeting. We were just 
ready to ask the question, what happened to the meeting? And 
indeed, indeed they did have a meeting. They did have a 
meeting. They did have a meeting, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
from them that the Minister of Finance was in attendance, the 
Premier was in attendance. The Premier said he listened to their 
concerns and that he would ask the Minister of Finance to 
consult with the group, to begin a negotiation to come up with 
. . . [inaudible] . . . He told them . . . he asked them to do that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what happened? What happened in that 
case? Were there any negotiations that took place after that one 
initial meeting? From what we’re told . . . And I wasn’t at the 
meeting, I wasn’t invited to be at the meeting by the Premier or 
the Minister of Finance, although I would have been there if I 
was invited. But what happened, Mr. Speaker? No 
consultations. None whatsoever after that initial meeting. The 
Minister of Finance didn’t listen to the Premier. He didn’t ask 
the group for their opinion. So what happened, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well when they met with us, we talked to the members. We 
talked about the need for a competitive, a competitive, 
legislated increase. We talked about . . . and members on this 
side of the House, we looked at Manitoba and what Manitoba 
did. They provided 67 per cent. We said that should be a 
minimum. We recommended on this side a band between 67 
and 80 per cent. But in light of the financial situation of this 
government, it should have been towards the higher end of that 
level. 
 
But indeed, indeed, Mr. Speaker, the point of the process is that 
whatever the number is, it should be a number that was a result 
of consultations. The opposition made our suggestion, and it 
was higher than what the government had to put forward. But 
whatever the number, it should have been done in consultation 
with these individuals, and that’s the real concern that we have 
here with this legislation. It’s a step in the right direction, but 
once again we see a government that fails to communicate. 
They fail to consult. And it’s a real concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a concern because those individuals didn’t have the 
opportunity to tell the Minister of Finance and the Premier 
about what high property taxes have been doing to their 
standard of living. They hadn’t had a chance to talk about the 
effects of inflation on their purchasing power, the effects of 
inflation on the price of their groceries and the price of gasoline, 
on the price of the home heating costs and their utilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are at a point in our history when something 
has to be done. This government over the last 40 years — and 
the NDP has been in power for almost two-thirds of that time 

— has neglected this group. It’s something that certainly, 
certainly has to be done. And in light of the significant royalties 
that we have, the mountain of money that we talk about that the 
government has, it’s time, it’s time for them to do something 
about it. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we’ve had a chance to 
debate this legislation. And I’m pleased that we’ve had a chance 
as an opposition to represent this group, to allow them to come 
to their Legislative Assembly, to ask questions on their behalf, 
and for them to get their meeting with the Premier even though 
they had to challenge him in the rotunda to ensure that that 
meeting took place. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re all benefiting now from new rules in 
this Legislative Assembly, rules that I think make us more 
effective members of this Legislative Assembly, and we are 
wanting to take advantage of those rules in this case. If ever 
there was a time to make a case for a group to be able to come 
before the Legislative Assembly, come before the committees 
of this Legislative Assembly, this is the case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when this Bill moves to committee, I will be 
moving a motion in a committee to allow superannuates to be 
able to make public presentations — the superannuates from the 
Public Service Superannuation Plan, the Power Corporation 
Superannuation Plan, the Liquor Board Superannuation Plan, 
and the Saskatchewan Transportation Company Superannuation 
Plan as well as the Anti-Tuberculosis League Superannuation 
Plan. 
 
We’re going to allow this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to go to committee 
at this time. We ask that the government members, with their 
majority on that committee, allow that to happen. I must say 
that I did speak to the Minister of Finance, and he is agreeable 
to that, and I commend him for that decision. I look forward to 
that discussion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well there’s been 
precedents set where things that have happened in committee 
have been changed, but I don’t think that this is going to be the 
case. I take the minister at his word, and I’m sure he will 
consult with his NDP colleagues on the committee. 
 
And we look forward to hearing from these individuals across 
Saskatchewan, many who don’t have the ability to come to this 
legislature as often as they would like. We hope that we would 
be able to give them ample time to put their presentations 
together and to make the presentation. These are people that 
have built this province. They’re people that have served this 
province and have served this legislature very well, and I think 
it’s only fair that that be done. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I recommend that Bill No. 32 be 
forwarded to the Committee of the Economy. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 32, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would welcome the 
opportunity to move that Bill No. 32 — a Bill that for the first 
time in 40 years provides for statutory indexing of 
superannuation benefits — that this Bill, The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 be referred 
to the Standing Committee of the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 32 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
That is, Bill No. 32 stands referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 22 — The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
make some comments regarding The Legal Profession Act. This 
Bill at first blush appears to be some routine housekeeping. 
Unfortunately it’s a sort of a sad end to an NDP policy of hurry 
up and wait. 
 
A year and a half or so ago, they introduced a Bill, and we 
passed a piece of legislation which updated a number of 
provisions within The Legal Profession Act. And one would 
have thought at that time that they would have dealt with all the 
issues that were necessary to update and comprehensively deal 
with this matter. During the course of that Bill’s passage 
through the House, we contacted benchers and people with the 
Law Society, and they were quite surprised that the two 
significant provisions of this Bill were not included in the 
original Bill — for what reason no one knows. 
 
So now a year or so later, we’re going through the same process 
again: having to have yet another Bill pass through the House; 
go through the consultation process and all of the work that is 
necessary for people in legislative drafting, the members of the 
legislature, and certainly the members of the Law Society. And 

I don’t think there was any real reason it was there because they 
were fully expecting the amendments that were in the 
legislation to have been included at that point in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two significant portions of this legislation deal 
one with trust funds or remnants of trust funds and the other 
with solicitor-client privilege where there’s disciplinary 
proceedings against a lawyer. 
 
Lawyers in this province deal with very substantial amounts of 
other people’s money. Where that money is held for any 
appreciable period of time and where there’s significant 
amounts of money relating to any particular client, the funds are 
usually invested by the lawyer with the interest accruing to the 
client. The rest of the money remains in an intermingle trust 
account and in ordinary . . . [inaudible] . . . small amounts of 
money or comparatively small amounts of money for short 
periods of time. But because of the volume of work that lawyers 
do, many lawyers pass many millions of dollars per year 
through their trust account on an annual basis. 
 
The funds that generate interest on that account cannot of 
course accrue back to the lawyer. And what has happened with 
those funds is they are remitted directly by the financial 
institution to the Law Foundation of Saskatchewan, which is a 
separate entity from the Law Society but controlled by the Law 
Society. 
 
That entity uses those funds for things such as libraries in the 
courthouses. It uses it for . . . Some money goes to legal aid in 
this province, and some of the money goes to various public 
legal education initiatives that are conducted by the law 
foundation. 
 
This particular amendment deals with monies where the 
lawyers are unable to locate the clients who properly own the 
money. And what the purpose of this Act is, it will allow the 
monies to be turned over to the Law Society who will hold the 
funds and then, if somebody at some later time comes along 
seeking the funds, the funds can be returned to them. At the 
present time the funds go to the province and go into the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
And what these funds are, are usually relatively small amounts 
of money that would come from a small repayment of an 
interest, some . . . or something to a client, return on a retainer, 
and they’re often cheques of 8 or $10, $50, that were not cashed 
by the clients. The clients move, and the lawyers are unable to 
locate the clients. And at the end of a period of time — two or 
three years — the lawyer will, after their efforts to find the 
proper owner of the funds, will turn the funds over to the Law 
Society who, until recently, would have turned them over to the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
And so this will allow those funds to be used by the Law 
Society, who will in turn maintain records. And if owners come 
forward at some point in time they will be able to return those 
funds to them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a routine type of amendment. That’s 
something that exists in other provinces, and I don’t know why 
it wouldn’t have been dealt with when the first amendments to 
The Legal Profession Act came through earlier in this session. 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

But we are dealing with it now, and the minister should, when 
he wants these things to go through, make sure that he flags 
them for his House Leader to ensure that they go through. The 
minister has tried to leave the impression with members of the 
Law Society and with other members of the public, that for 
some reason this Bill is somehow being held up by the 
opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to put it forward today, and put it 
forward for the record, that the opposition is not in anyway 
holding this Bill up. And it is at the opposition’s request that it’s 
on the list to be spoken to and sent to committee today. So I 
want to make that abundantly clear. 
 
And had the minister wanted to move it forward, had the 
minister contacted us or contacted . . . But, Mr. Speaker, our 
plan is that we want to follow the normal tradition where Bills 
are introduced in the fall, voted on in the spring session. And if 
there is a exceptional or a compelling reason that it would not 
happen that way, we would certainly want to accord the people 
that were requiring Bills to be passed. 
 
I take some issue with the minister telling people that for some 
reason we’re holding it up, when it is following the normal 
path. And if he wants to deviate from the normal path, then he 
should be putting that forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other half of this Bill deals with solicitor-client 
privilege during a disciplinary proceeding against lawyers. It 
will prevent a lawyer from preventing or precluding a 
disciplinary proceeding from going ahead by saying the 
information in his records are privileged and are subject to 
solicitor-client privilege. It effectively waives solicitor-client 
privilege during a disciplinary hearing. And obviously the 
benchers and people dealing with that hearing would be bound 
by privilege as if it was their own solicitor-client file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re quite prepared to allow this Bill to be 
moved to committee at this point in time and certainly support 
the purpose of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 22, The 
Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 22, The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 22 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Therefore Bill No. 22 
stands referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 20 — The 
Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition very much 
supports the purpose and intent of this Bill. We have had some 
consultation and discussion with members of the law 
enforcement community, and it is their belief that this is a 
significant and important tool. And we want to give them every 
opportunity and every resource that we possibly can to enable 
them to better further their ability to fight crime. 
 
When this Bill was initially introduced we were troubled by 
some of what we thought were shortcomings in this Bill. It 
deals with gunshots and apparent stab wounds and gives some 
protection to the members of the medical profession who would 
contact the police if there was an issue with somebody 
complaining that their privacy rights were violated. It also 
imposes on those same people an obligation to contact the 
police if someone presents themselves with an apparent gunshot 
or stab wound. 
 
Our concern initially, Mr. Speaker, was what happens if there 
was another type of injury, injury caused by a blunt instrument 
or some other type of injury that wasn’t specifically a gunshot 
or a stab wound. In our province, traditionally the most 
common type of murder weapon is a stabbing. Gunshots are 
somewhat further down the list. But there also are a significant 
number of murders and assaults in our province that are 
occasioned by blunt instruments — baseball bats, sticks, 
whatever else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of our consultation and 
discussion, we were informed of a circumstance in Moose Jaw 
where somebody arrived at the emergency ward with a dead 
body. They placed the body on a gurney and turned and 
casually walked out of the emergency ward. The staff at the 
hospital were troubled by what their obligations were, what 
their duties of privacy were with regard both to the deceased 
individual and to the individual that brought in the victim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that they raised was, they posed a 
hypothetical. They said, what would happen if the two 
individuals had come in that had gotten apparently in a fight 
and both of them were injured; one of them expired shortly after 
the arrival at the hospital, and one of them was being treated on 



December 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

an ongoing basis. It would have left the health care providers in 
the hospital in the incredibly difficult position of treating 
somebody that they knew was very likely responsible for the 
death of a person, and in their possession was the deceased 
person that was there. 
 
And their concern would be if that hypothetical were to happen, 
what would their obligations be, what would their rights be, and 
where would they go? 
 
[16:45] 
 
Anyway, that was sort of our initial consultation and initial 
discussions. And we were thinking, this is a Bill that should 
possibly be expanded. There should be some other 
consideration given to those things. 
 
In the course of our discussions, we received communication 
from a number of people working in the health care field and 
also with . . . from the Privacy Commissioner. They raised a 
number of very serious concerns. And some of the concerns 
were that the privacy concerns of the victim would be violated 
and it may be a significant disincentive for a person that’s a 
victim of a crime to seek medical attention. 
 
And many cases, especially in cases of domestic violence, it’s 
the perpetrator of the injuries that would often carry or transport 
the victim to the hospital to seek medical attention. And part of 
the concern that arose was, would there be a lesser of a 
likelihood that a person may seek medical attention? Or that the 
perpetrator would transport or seek medical attention on behalf 
of the victim? So it was a troubling aspect for us. 
 
They also raised the concerns about the safety of the people that 
were working in the medical unit, whether they would be 
subject to threats if the people said, do not call for the police, do 
not . . . we don’t want to go any further with this. And we felt 
and feel that it’s an Act — although we very much support what 
the Act is trying to do — we have some issues and we feel that 
possibly there could be a suitable balance struck or some 
safeguards built into it. 
 
One of the suggestions that the Privacy Commissioner put 
forward would be that, where an individual’s rights to privacy 
were somewhat violated because of the operation of the Act, 
that they be given a notice afterwards that the information had 
been released or that they get some other backup. 
 
We would very much like to have public hearings on this Bill 
and feel that it would be appropriate for us to hear from the 
Privacy Commissioner, from members of the law enforcement 
community, and also health care professionals. We want to 
ensure that the Bill gets proper and appropriate discussion, so 
that we are not back here seeking to amend or patch up 
something where we’ve done a poor job on it initially. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is something that is a 
political issue. This is a practical issue for the benefit, health 
and safety of all of the citizens of this province. And we want to 
ensure that the Bill gets appropriate consideration. And to the 
extent that we can protect privacy, we very much want to do 
that. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we want to give our 
law enforcement officials and police officers every bit of help 

we possibly can. 
 
Further concerns were expressed regarding whether our local 
police officers were subject to The Health Information 
Protection Act, that they were not specifically made subject to 
that, and it may require some consequential or companion 
amendments to be made to other pieces of legislation to 
maximize or give protection to the citizens that would be 
subject to this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are at this point in time quite prepared to allow 
this Bill to go to a committee. We have had some discussions 
with the members opposite regarding holding public hearings, 
and we look forward to discussions in committee that we would 
be able to flesh out the details of how the public hearings might 
take place, and would look forward to hearing from members of 
the law enforcement community, the health care community, 
and in particular the Privacy Commissioner, and anyone else 
that feels they may have an interest in it. 
 
These are the type of things that legislators are supposed to do 
on a broad basis, and we’re supposed to do these things and set 
aside political differences. And I look forward to working with 
the members opposite, and it’s my hope and expectation that as 
we work this way through, that they set aside large “P” political 
and partisan issues and look forward to doing what is right and 
what is best for citizens of this province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly has been 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 20, The Gunshot 
and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 20, The Gunshot 
and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 20, The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory 
Reporting Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 20 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2006 

Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Addley that Bill No. 6 — The Youth 
Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Healthy Living Services that 
Bill No. 6, The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall Bill No. 6 be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy Living 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 6, The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization 
Amendment Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services that Bill No. 6, The Youth Drug Detoxification 
and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Therefore this Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, noting that much progress has been 
made this afternoon, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:50.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................668 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................668 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................668 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................668 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................668 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................668 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................668 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................670 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 

 Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................669 
 Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................669 
 Bill No. 29 — The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant 
 modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards Amendments Act, 2006 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................669 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................672 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................672 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................672 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................672 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................672 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Gradworks Program 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................672 
 Saskatchewan Party Candidate Nominated for Martensville By-Election 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................673 



 

 Community Association Hosts Forum on Gang Violence 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................673 
 Announcements and Ideas 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................673 
 Hudson Bay Primary Health Care Team 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................674 
 Climate Change 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................674 
 Benefits of Minimum Wage 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................674 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Martensville By-Election 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................675 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................675 
 Participation in Energy and Trade Organizations 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................675 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................675 
 Shortage of Health Professionals Impacts Rural Hospitals 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................677 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................677 
 Drought Disaster Assistance for the Southwest 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................678 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................678 
 Crop Insurance 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................679 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................679 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................680 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................680 
CONDOLENCES 
 Karl Frank Klein 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................681 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................682 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................683 
 Bernard Leo Korchinski 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................686 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................687 
 Joseph Clifford McIsaac 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................687 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................688 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................689 
  Hagel (transmittal motion).......................................................................................................................................................690 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................690 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................691 
 Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................691 
  Addley (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................692 
 Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................692 
  Cline (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................................693 
 
 



 

 Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................693 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................695 
 Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................695 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................696 
 Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act  
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................696 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................697 
 Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
  Addley (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................698 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




