






















































Hansard: April 12, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 12, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1141 
 April 12, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It just so happens that 
I have a petition to present again today. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Prelate, Sceptre, and 
Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are really concerned 
about Highway No. 310. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Foam Lake, 
Wadena, Kuroki, Lanigan, Kelvington, Saskatoon, and 
Mannville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
several pages of a petition of people concerned about the safety 
of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Spalding, Buchanan, 
Warman, Saskatoon, Quill Lake, Humboldt, Meacham, 
Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from the constituents of Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on the deplorable conditions of Highway No. 
5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Carmel 
and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that a portion of the 
province’s windfall oil revenue be used to reduce the 
provincial gas tax. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Davidson. I so present. 
 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A new petition concerning crop insurance premiums, 
that’s sessional paper no. 664; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 8, 12, 64, 638, and 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: at any time 
was an investigation done into contractors contracted by 
SaskPower doing work at employees’ homes and billing 
the cost of the work to SaskPower and, if so, what was the 
outcome of the investigation? 

 
I have that same question to the Minister of CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 

 
To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: at any time 
was an investigation done into contractors contracted by 
SaskEnergy doing the work at employees’ homes and 
billing the cost of the work to SaskEnergy? And if so, 
what was the outcome of the investigation? 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I have that same question to the 
Minister of CIC. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: did 
management of the department have established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or 
detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 

And I have that same question for the year 2002. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how did 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 

And I have that same question for the year 2002. 
 
In addition, I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the 
government the following question: 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2001? If so, what is the nature 
of this activity? 
 

And I have that same question for the year 2002. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitor of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 

And I have that same question for the year 2002. 
 
And finally, I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: is 
management of the department aware of any allegations of 
fraud or other illegal activity within the department or its 
agencies in the year 2001, such as information received 
from employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 

And I have that same question, Mr. Speaker, for the year 2002. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: has the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Department of Agriculture taken a 
position with respect to the UN moratorium on the use of 
the terminator gene? Has there been any correspondence 
between the department and the federal government in 
respect to the use of terminator genetics? And if so, could 
the minister table this correspondence. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: please 
indicate how much money SaskWater is spending to 
renovate and buy new office equipment for its offices in 
Moose Jaw. Please also indicate if SaskWater tendered the 
contract for the office renovations and new office 
equipment and, if so, how much was the amount of the 
successful bid. 

 
I so present. 
 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce some people in your gallery who have joined us. Two 
of them have been there before but let me introduce them again. 
Greg and Leone Ottenbreit are here from Yorkton. Greg of 
course is the nominated Saskatchewan Party candidate in the 
Yorkton constituency. And I’m just . . . I’m choked up at the 
prospect of him becoming an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], Mr. Speaker, after the next election and how well 
that community will be served. 
 
But also joining us, more importantly frankly today, are the 
young women that have joined Greg and Leone. We want to 
welcome their daughters to their Legislative Assembly. Katelin 
and Rayanne are both here. Maybe they could give us a wave. 
We welcome them here today and I’d ask all members to join 
me in doing that this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming my 
constituents to the legislature today in the Ottenbreit family and 
to say to them, I know that they’re here to observe the workings 
of the legislature and what their member from Yorkton is busy 
doing. 
 
And I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that the Ottenbreit family 
do outstanding work at our community in . . . working on the 
cancer work, Cuts for Kids. The Ottenbreits are well known in 
our community for the great work that they do. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite and to my friends 
the Ottenbreits from Yorkton, I know that Greg is not afraid of 
heights and so my intention is to keep him in the Speaker’s 
gallery in the future, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. And 
welcome the Ottenbreits. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you, I’d like to introduce six constituents of mine 
from the Porcupine-Somme area. Many of this group attended 
the legislature a week or so ago to bring to the attention of 
members here the plight of the agricultural problem in rural 
Saskatchewan, especially in the Northeast. 
 
And Mr. Wesley Black attended meetings in Ottawa with the 
minister in the last couple of days to bring to the attention of the 
federal government the need for a disaster program. I want to 
thank them personally for their work and their dedication to 
farming and their commitment to their community. And 
welcome to your legislature. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member for Qu’Appelle Valley Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a real pleasure for me today to be able to 
introduce to you and to members of the House some of our 
newest Saskatchewan citizens. We have in the gallery two 
centennial babies, along with moms and guests. We were 
supposed to have three, but unfortunately one of the babies is 
not feeling too well today so she came and got her medal but 
headed for home. 
 
Out of 27 reported centennial babies, Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley is home to three of them. And I would like to introduce 
to the House, Sofia and her mom, Teri Peters. If you would just 
. . . a little hard to stand with Ethan kind of holding you down 
there, isn’t it? And guests, Sofia’s brother Ethan and her dad, 
Jason. If you’d just give a wave, folks. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And I would also like to introduce 
baby Kailey and mom, Tamara. And they’re in the gallery as 
well, and their guest, Don Cairns. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Baby Angelina was unable to make it. 
Her mom, Amanda Parisian, and guests had to take her home. 
But they are accompanied by my constituency assistant — one 
of the most able, thoughtful, and caring constituency assistants 
in the province — Donna From. So I’d like you to welcome 
them to the gallery, Mr. Speaker. And then I have another 
introduction as well if I might. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would like to join with the member 
opposite in welcoming Wesley Black. Wesley did accompany 
the group of us on our trip to Ottawa and presented very well 
the case for the people in the Porcupine disaster area, as well as 
very clearly standing for farmers across the province and the 
country in the need for immediate funding for grains and 
oilseeds. I want to thank him for his contribution and to 
welcome him as well to the gallery or to the . . .  
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce and 
welcome two staff members to the legislature who work in 
beautiful northern Saskatchewan in the La Ronge Northern 
Affairs office. And they’re sitting in the west gallery — Scott 
Boyes, director of communications, along with Willie Billette, 
information officer with the communications branch of 
Northern Affairs. I would like all members to join me in 
welcoming them here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to members of the House, I 
would like to introduce two very special visitors in the west 
gallery. Mr. Speaker, it’s my daughters, Darcy and Tanya. 
 
Tanya lives in East Lansing, Michigan, has just recently 
completed her residency in anesthesiology and will begin work 
at Ingham regional medical hospital on the middle of this 
month, about the 17th, 18th. So it’s nice that she could come 
home before she got into work and spend some time at home 
with family. And I know we’re very pleased to have her home 
for a couple of weeks with her family. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
girls are going out tonight, so I’m very glad my daughters could 
come in town. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Citizen of the Year Dinner 
Honours Anglin Lake Residents 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday I attended the annual Citizen of the Year dinner in 
Christopher Lake. There was a large turnout for the event which 
speaks to the strong sense of community spirit that exists in the 
Lakeland area. 
 
Everyone was there to honour and celebrate Alice and Dick 
Tataryn who are residents at Anglin Lake and very active not 
only in their community but in the whole region. Alice has 
served on the Prince Albert Health District Board and presently 
chairs the Prince Albert Cooperative Health Centre. She is a 
member and past Chair of the Lakeland Fire Department and, 
along with Dick, a member of the Citizens on Patrol program. 
Alice is known to this government as a tireless advocate for 
natural gas delivery to Anglin Lake, Waskesiu, and La Ronge. 
 
Her husband, Dick, has been a councillor for Lakeland RM 
[rural municipality] for three years. He is an active member of 
the recreation board and sits on the east watershed advisory 
committee and on the Saskatchewan Association of Resort 
Communities. Mr. Speaker, the Tataryns are active in their 
church, and they are both members of the odd-job squad that 
tackles numerous projects, large and small, in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great celebration with local musicians and 
a community choir; lots of laughter thanks to MC [master of 
ceremonies] Jim Logan; a great potluck feast; numerous gifts 
and words of thanks; and a touching tribute from their 
neighbours at Anglin Lake, Ed and Shirley Haid. 
 
Congratulations to all the contributors and volunteers, and 
especially to Alice and Dick Tataryn who really exemplify what 
this province is all about — generosity, enthusiasm, energy, and 

outstanding community spirit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

2005 Melfort and District 
Chamber of Commerce Awards 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to recognize the achievements of several constituents of Melfort 
that were honoured at the 2005 Melfort and District Chamber of 
Commerce annual Mel-Bex and Citizen of the Year Awards. 
 
Before a packed house, the community honoured a very 
deserving lady, Gailmarie Anderson, as Citizen of the Year. 
Gailmarie has an endless list of community and provincial 
involvement, having served in director, president, and Chair 
capacities for the Rotarians, Canadian Booksellers Association, 
and the Melfort School Board. She’s currently serving on the 
University of Saskatchewan senate, is the owner of the Melfort 
Bookstop, and curator of the Melfort and District Museum. 
 
Others walking away with awards at Mel-Bex included 
Fouillard Carpet Sales Ltd., Meyers Norris Penny, the 2005 
provincial centennial, and the 2006 Saskatchewan Winter 
Games steering committee. 
 
The “I Am Melfort” Award was most deservedly handed to 
Peggy George. Peggy has worked tirelessly to beautify our city 
and promote our community with great pride. 
 
Neil Forer walked away with the Minor Sports Award. Neil 
reminisced with great passion and broad humour about his love 
of sports, the rewards of being a coach, and his genuine interest 
in children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join me 
today in recognizing these very deserving people from the city 
of Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Saskatchewan First Nation Winter Games 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next week thousands 
of athletes, coaches, parents, and fans from all across 
Saskatchewan will be coming to Regina for the 2006 
Saskatchewan First Nation Winter Games. Just think, Mr. 
Speaker, only five more sleeps. 
 
Since 1980, Mr. Speaker, these games have been a big part of 
First Nations sporting tradition here in Saskatchewan. First 
Nations youth from north and south, from on-reserve and 
off-reserve, gather to compete in hockey, badminton, 
broomball, volleyball, and for the first time this year, 
basketball. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the games help foster self-esteem and personal 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

development for First Nations youth, they build community and 
promote community spirit, and they showcase First Nations 
culture and athletics. This year’s well-chosen theme is Pride in 
Community and Strength in Teamwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an event of this magnitude can’t happen without 
meticulous planning and tremendous effort by organizers and 
volunteers alike. Gordon First Nation is the host of the 2006 
games and I know that the organizing committee, initially under 
the leadership of past chief Glen Pratt and presently under the 
leadership of Chief Bryan McNab, they have been working very 
hard to ensure that these are the finest games yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be attending as many of these events as I can, 
starting with the opening ceremony on Monday, and I invite all 
members of the Assembly to take the opportunity to attend 
these very special games as well. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Parkland Regional Science Fair 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, 90 students with inquiring minds 
and innovative projects from throughout the parkland region 
competed at another successful regional science fair at Foam 
Lake. 
 
All the awards, except for three, went to students from Foam 
Lake. Many in this legislature are aware of the efforts of 
Milligan biodiesel of Foam Lake to utilize canola in the 
biodiesel industry. 
 
Brittany Faye took the product of Milligan biodiesel one step 
farther and ran tests to see whether glycerine, a waste product of 
biodiesel, could replace glycol and provide another market for 
Milligan biodiesel project. 
 
Kerrie Andreas won second overall with a two-year project 
where last year she attempted to use feed wheat to make bread. 
This brick-like result was very unfavourable to say the least, so 
this year her project added gluten, and greatly improved the 
quality of the bread. 
 
Kelsey Bugera won the third overall project and studied the 
efficiency of hand sanitizers to determine if they killed as many 
bacteria as was claimed. 
 
Rikell Kowalchuk won fourth overall by designing fire logs 
made from different blends of agricultural waste, including 
barley chaff and feed grain blended with paraffin wax, and 
compared it to a Java-Log, a commercial project made from 
coffee grounds. 
 
Courtney Halldorson won fifth place overall with a study of hot 
peppers to determine whether or not they killed bacteria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these innovative students are Saskatchewan’s 
future, and I ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating them on their success and wishing them well on 

future projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Accuracy of Member’s Comments 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
incumbent upon all of us to speak accurately when making 
statements in this Chamber. Keep in mind every word is 
permanently recorded in Hansard. Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday 
the member from Carrot River Valley was speaking about STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] membership dues and he 
said, quote: 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that some portions 
thereof, of teachers’ actual STF membership fees, go to 
support certain political parties — speaking mainly of the 
socialist, NDP government. 

 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no question that no 
portion of STF fees are used to support any political party. For 
the record, the STF statement of policy and bylaws says, quote: 
 

The STF will not align itself with any political party or 
group . . .  

 
And quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation shall not enter 
into organizational affiliation with any political party. 
 

Over one week has passed and there has been no Sask Party 
correction. Mr. Speaker, Sask Party innuendo and dissemination 
of false and disingenuous information makes their credibility 
and code of ethics suspect. How does their statement and lack 
of correction comply with article IV, clause 6, of the Sask Party 
code of ethics? I would encourage the member for Carrot River 
Valley to do the honourable thing and take the opportunity to 
stand in this House and make a correction. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Congratulations to the Shaunavon Hometown Club 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, they call themselves the 
Hometown Club, aptly named as their common goal is to do 
whatever they can do to help Shaunavon. With 20 official 
members and 20 non-members who help out, the Hometown 
Club of Shaunavon is an active group. Their main project, a 
cardboard and paper recycling project, keeps them busy every 
weekday. In an effort to decrease the amount of recyclable 
material in the local landfill, the Hometown Club decided to 
collect and bundle all of that material in the entire community. 
 
This project involves a daily commitment from two to four 
members in the morning. They drive around the community, 
collect the cardboard and paper from local businesses, and then 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

in the afternoon several members man the recycling depot 
where they sort and package and stomp all that material into 
bales for shipping. At the present time they’re producing 5 
tonnes of cardboard and 10 tonnes of paper a month. All the 
monies generated from this project are given back to the 
community. 
 
Projects supported by the Hometown Club include free 
community skating and shinny, graduation scholarships, and 
donations to support different community organizations. They 
spearhead a Christmas hamper project for the needy. They’ve 
purchased benches to be placed around the town. They man the 
Christmas Salvation Army Kettles, and they volunteer when 
asked to do so at various community events. 
 
I may have forgotten to mention, Mr. Speaker, while it is not a 
requirement of participation to be a retired senior, the average 
age of the Hometown Club members is 75 years. Now how is 
that for an active senior population? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you join with me to extend a thank you 
and congratulations for the hard work of the Shaunavon 
Hometown Club. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Terriers Win Hockey Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
déjà vu again and the Terriers are moving on, Mr. Speaker. This 
year the Terriers provided the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone a lesson in hockey by defeating the Notre 
Dame Hounds. And then they also took out the Weyburn Red 
Wings, which we think might be the cause for the by-election, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The two teams, the Hounds and the Terriers, were evenly 
matched. They split the first two games, but the Terriers won 
the third game in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and never looked back. 
 
The member from North Battleford knew that this would be a 
tough series, and he suggested to me a week ago that I should 
start preparing this member’s statement, Mr. Speaker. And with 
last night’s 3-1 victory, the Terriers took the final game of the 
five-game series. 
 
I want to congratulate the Terriers’ head coach, Ed Zawatsky, 
and Chad Nehring, who scored last night’s winning goal with 
10 minutes left in the third period, and to the many players and 
the assistants who helped them win the series. 
 
The Terriers will move on now on to the Anavet Cup to face the 
Winnipeg South Blues, and the winners will go on to the Royal 
Bank Cup. And nothing would be more happier for me than to 
stand up in this House in the coming weeks and inform all the 
members of this legislature that Yorkton has won again. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to remind the Minister of 
Health that he is now in golfing season. And I would very much 
like to participate in a match which would be paid for on his 

credit card. 
 
But in the meantime I’d like to invite him and all of the 
members here to join in congratulating the Terriers as they go 
forward to win the next round against the Winnipeg South 
Blues. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Advertising Campaign for Provincial Budget 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there I was sitting in 
a television studio yesterday ready for my interview. It was an 
interview that I didn’t have to pay for by the way. And what 
comes on the monitor just before my interview starts, Mr. 
Speaker? A TV commercial featuring the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — You can imagine, Mr. Speaker, you can 
imagine how surprised I was to see the minister launching his 
leadership campaign because I hadn’t even heard that the 
Premier was stepping down. But, Mr. Speaker, I was in for even 
a bigger surprise later when I heard this minister was spending 
nearly a half a million dollars on this ad campaign. That’s 10 
times more than last year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, how can 
this minister justify spending nearly half a million taxpayers’ 
dollars to make himself and his budget look good? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that’s the nicest thing the Finance critic’s ever said to me. I 
really appreciate it. 
 
The budget that we brought down contains a number of 
significant changes in it. It contains changes that will cut 
business taxes to encourage investment in jobs. It contains 
changes that will freeze tuition. It contains changes that will 
provide new tax credit for people working in the trades. 
 
It’s a good budget. It’s a budget that we should make sure 
Saskatchewan people are aware of. This advertising campaign 
helps to do that, and it is reflected even by the comment of the 
member yesterday who said, you know, it’s a good budget and 
you shouldn’t have to sell it. Given that it’s such a good budget, 
I want to know has that member changed his mind, and is he 
prepared to support it tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I know the minister never lets facts get 
in the way of his statements, but I said a good budget sells 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

itself. And, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a good budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, once again this minister 
showed his arrogance and his complete disdain for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. A reporter asked him yesterday why it 
was necessary for the minister to personally appear in these ads 
and he said, because, and I quote, “It’s my budget.” It’s my 
budget, Mr. Speaker; that’s what he said. Well if it’s his budget, 
Mr. Speaker, maybe he should pay the half a million dollar 
advertising bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government opposite, the Saskatchewan 
Party believes that the budget belongs to all the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we don’t need a Minister of Finance 
spending half a million taxpayers’ dollars to promote himself. 
Mr. Speaker, again to the minister: why is this minister 
spending 10 times as much as his predecessor to promote 
himself and his leadership campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m quite interested in 
what the member’s asking, as I’ve already explained a number 
of new initiatives that are in the budget. I am pleased to hear 
that he’s saying a good budget should sell itself. He’s arguing 
we shouldn’t be needing to advertise; hence he must believe it’s 
a good budget. What is the argument here? 
 
As to the question, Mr. Speaker, as to the issue that he raises 
about the advertising and the fact that we are moving it forward 
through the Department of Finance, I find it interesting that he 
has not stood in this House to provide this government and this 
legislature with any information about how much money that 
party has spent advertising the latest policy hairball that they 
coughed up. 
 
There was nothing in terms of information that they provided 
about . . . What was the ad that I saw the Leader of the 
Opposition appearing in just the other night on my television 
set? Here he was for 30 seconds with his TV ad, billing it 
directly to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. What’s up with the 
difference? What makes this so much of a hypocritical 
statement on the part of the member opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, if he’s choking on his own 
hairballs, it’s not my problem. Mr. Speaker, when it’s time to 
reject the pleas to fund new cancer drugs, it’s somebody else’s 
budget. When it comes time to break the law and refuse to give 
Jack Hillson his job back, it’s somebody else’s budget. When it 

comes time to talk about people at Wascana centre lying in their 
own filth because there aren’t enough nurses, it’s somebody 
else’s budget, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes time to go on 
TV, he says it’s my budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP broke their promise not to raise 
taxes, they didn’t spend a half a million dollars on advertising. 
When they raised fees — dozens of fees, Mr. Speaker — they 
didn’t spend half a million dollars on advertising. In fact they 
didn’t tell anyone about it, Mr. Speaker. And the opposition 
NDP MLA for Athabasca said it was the opposition’s job to let 
people know, Mr. Speaker. But now with the NDP dropping in 
the polls, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of Finance ready to run 
for leader, they spend half a million taxpayers’ dollars on 
advertising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he cancel this bogus 
advertising campaign today, now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members 
opposite to table in this Assembly today the cost that they have 
billed the taxpayers for advertising the Leader of the 
Opposition’s latest campaign platform. And I would go further, 
Mr. Speaker. I would ask them to justify and explain why they 
are running election-style advertising in the Weyburn paper, 
charged to the taxpayers. 
 
I have today an advertisement which ran in the latest Weyburn 
paper where the . . . Here’s a picture, a smiling picture of the 
Leader of the Sask Party saying, quote: 
 

While voters in Weyburn-Big Muddy wait for Lorne 
Calvert to call a by-election to elect your new MLA, 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs are here to work for you. 

 
When did it become acceptable . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When did it become acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker, for taxpayers’ money to be used speaking to voters 
about elections and an upcoming by-election in support of a 
party that uses its own name in the advertising? It’s duplicitous. 
It’s not right, and the member opposite should come clean. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 
have ample time for concession speeches about the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election in late June, and he should 
wait till then before he does that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s funny. Mr. Speaker, it’s funny. 
This member is spending half a million dollars to tell the people 
of Saskatchewan how great his budget is. And, Mr. Speaker, 
you know what? He can’t even convince all his NDP colleagues 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

opposite. During the budget speech yesterday, here’s what the 
NDP MLA from Greystone had to say, and I hope the 
minister’s listening, and I quote: 
 

 . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about the impact of 
phasing out the corporate capital tax and reducing the 
corporate income tax from 17 . . . to 12 per cent. I worry 
that these tax cuts will leave . . . government short of 
revenue to fund essential . . . programs . . .  
 

Mr. Speaker, from the hon. member over there. Mr. Speaker, 
why is the Finance minister blowing half a million dollars to 
convince Saskatchewan people that this is a good budget when 
he can’t even seem to convince his colleagues that it’s an okay 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have the utmost respect 
for my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Greystone, who 
has spoken out many times in this legislature with passion about 
what he believes in. And that, probably more than anything 
else, symbolizes the difference between the party that forms the 
government in this House and the party that sits in the 
opposition. 
 
We welcome the voices of people from all parts of this province 
who are free to express their views. If only that were true today, 
we would not be having a by-election in Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
and the member opposite should know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well speaking 
passionately about issues, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put into 
perspective the amount of money the Finance minister’s 
spending on these ads. The half a million dollars is the exact 
amount that a group in the city of Saskatoon is raising to build a 
long-term addiction treatment centre. 
 
Teen Challenge has been fundraising for over a year, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re working very hard to reach a goal of a half a 
million dollars — the same amount this minister is spending on 
advertising. This is the same amount Teen Challenge needs to 
build a 24-bed long-term treatment centre for young men in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, doesn’t the minister think this half a million 
dollars would be better spent on a Teen Challenge-type 
long-term treatment centre instead of TV ads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget contains in it 
$18.2 million to assist in the Premier’s Project Hope that is 
being delivered by my colleague, the Minister Responsible for 

Healthy Living Services. This budget contains in it record 
spending for health care. This budget contains in it support for 
our most vulnerable in our communities. 
 
But I will tell the members this. What does not ring true in this 
House today is the fake approach that they’re taking in terms of 
their concern when they are prepared to spend taxpayers’ 
money advertising for an upcoming by-election, when they are 
prepared to spend money on television ads that do nothing other 
than feed the ego of the Leader of the Opposition, when they 
are prepared to simply spend taxpayers’ money and hide behind 
it and say, but we’re allowed to be political; we’re the 
opposition. That, Mr. Speaker, is simply hypocritical, and the 
members opposite know it, and they should be ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be delighted to tell 
that member not only did I not spend taxpayers’ money; I 
donated $10,000 of my own money to that cause. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — A half a million dollars to tell us this 
budget is good, well that’s not so good for Teen Challenge and 
addicted children in this province. They’ve been scraping 
together every nickel and dime they could to try and build a 
long-term treatment centre for children with addictions in this 
province. No child will be left behind if we have our choice, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — What about the half a million dollars? You 
know, is this money well spent? As for the minister’s 
commercials, wouldn’t that $500,000 have been better spent 
elsewhere? Mr. Speaker, will this minister explain to Teen 
Challenge and to this Assembly why he chose to spend a half a 
million dollars on blatantly political ads instead of giving the 
money to people who most deserve it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget contains 
record increases in terms of the support for the most vulnerable 
in our community, a budget that that member had the audacity 
to say he’ll vote against. He stands in this House and he raises 
these questions, but he will not actually vote for the budget to 
increase the spending on the most vulnerable. He will not 
support spending the $18 million that we are going to do to put 
the Premier’s Project Hope into place. 
 
Yesterday the member for Kelvington-Wadena stood in this 
House and said it was more important to have cough syrup in 
the grocery stores than to help shut down the meth labs in the 
province . . . [inaudible] . . . It is . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order. 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Funding for Treatment of Autism 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Finance is not the only person doing advertising in 
the papers this week. The Health Sciences Association has a 
much smaller budget, I’m sure, than this Minister of Finance. 
They could only afford a small newspaper ad whose headline 
says, “One more reason to move to Alberta.” It’s a very 
powerful ad. It says that preschool children with autism are not 
getting the diagnostic and treatment services they need. The 
association says the lack of treatment for preschool children 
with autism is, in their words, “One more reason to move to 
Alberta.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money spent on advertising this budget would 
have gone a long ways to help children with autism in this 
province. Can the minister tell us why these children are being 
left behind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government is very concerned about the 
individuals that are facing families that have children with 
autism. They have very special challenges that this government 
stands behind that. And this is something that has been going on 
for a number of years, the amount of money that the 
government has pledged to address this. In fact in 2004 this 
government committed over $1.2 million. Last year it increased 
to $1.65 million, and this year the commitment will grow to 
$4.15 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
reality in this province is that children are waiting up to 8 to 12 
months before autistic children are diagnosed. Once they are 
diagnosed, they have another year to wait for speech therapy 
and occupational therapy. That’s far too long. 
 
According to the association, in some parts of the province 
there is no services whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, the association 
says these waiting times are unacceptable. Members of the 
association are frustrated and overworked. These families are 
seeking private psychiatric services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just another example of two-tier health care in 
this province. Will the minister address these problems, or does 
he expect families to pay out of their pocket for services this 
government should be providing? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 

Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan and our Premier is developing and providing 
more comprehensive services for individuals with autism. Mr. 
Speaker, this $4.15 million will be provided in a number of 
departments, including Learning, including Healthy Living 
Services. And this will increase the ability for increased 
assessments, supports, and prevention programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are aware that parents and families are dealing 
with a serious problem such as autism. It is growing because the 
diagnosis is improving and people are able to get the help they 
need and earlier. We know that there are concerns that need to 
be addressed, which is why we’ve increased the budget from 
$1.2 million to over $4 million in this upcoming budget. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that this is a concern. We are working on it, 
and we’ll continue to work with families to ensure that they do 
have the help that they do need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The numbers of 
autistic children in this province are continuing to rise. It’s 
estimated that over 1,000 children — preschool and 
school-aged children — have this terrible condition. And 
they’re being left behind in this province or being told to move 
to other provinces to get treatment. That’s absolutely 
unacceptable. In a recent brief by the former president of the 
Autism Society Canada, says, “The lack of treatment negatively 
impacts a child’s right to an education.” 
 
The Minister of Health in the rotunda said yesterday, well I 
think that the Department of Health and the Minister of Health 
is ultimately responsible for everything that happens in the 
health care system. Yesterday we learned of the situations that 
were happening in the Wascana Rehab Centre that were 
absolutely unacceptable. Today we’re seeing the health services 
association advertising, telling people they have to move to 
Alberta to get the services they should get in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children waiting 8 to 12 months for diagnosis is 
absolutely unacceptable. Will the minister commit today to 
reviewing this situation and making sure that the children of our 
province aren’t being left behind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure that 
member, I can assure this House, and I can assure the parents 
and families that are challenging with autism; this is extremely 
important to me personally. It’s very important to this 
government. It’s not a matter that we need to review it because 
we’re reviewing it weekly, on a weekly basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m new to this file as of last fall, and the department has met 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

with parents. I’m meeting with parents later this month to deal 
with this issue. I know I’ve spoken to MLAs about this, Mr. 
Speaker. We have increased the funding from just over $1 
million to just over $4 million. Mr. Speaker, the parents and 
families that are dealing with this issue, they need all the 
support and the help that we can provide. And this government 
is committed to do that, and it’s something that we will 
continue to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Plans for Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, unfortunately, unfortunately the Minister of Finance’s 
new leadership TV campaign commercials that the taxpayers 
are paying for aren’t going to change the negative reputation 
that the NDP government has given our economy. Mr. Speaker, 
the Resource Investor is an online news service. It provides the 
latest news about the resource industry and to investors from 
around the world. Yesterday they posted an article talking about 
the Saskatchewan oil sands. And here’s what they said, quote: 
 

Looking at a map, one possibility burned bright, 
Saskatchewan . . .  
 
In fact, looking deeper we found historical evidence that 
Saskatchewan hosts rich oil sands . . . even richer than 
Alberta’s. The problem is politics. 
 

I’m still quoting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Saskatchewan government has been . . . closed to 
development, meaning that almost no companies have 
pursued projects [there]. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the evidence. This is the problem with this 
NDP government. It is the brand. It is the reputation they’ve 
given our province for a poor investment climate. What is the 
Premier going to do to change the negative reputation that he is 
giving to our economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the Leader of the 
Opposition and that entire caucus over there will have an 
opportunity to vote in favour of the most progressive plan to 
develop the economy of Saskatchewan, to provide opportunities 
for our young people, that we’ve seen in many a year and that’s 
in the presence of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the opportunity to travel the country. I have 
the opportunity to travel beyond the country. I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, outside of this province, investors, citizens, people of 
all sorts are looking at Saskatchewan as a province with a great 
future, a province which is holding their interest. 

Mr. Speaker, we have made considerable change, considerable 
change, but I tell you the changes we’re not about to start to 
make. The kind of changes that are being recognized or offered 
up by the Leader of the Opposition, one of which, one of which, 
is to tear away the hard-earned benefits of working people in 
this province. I’ll tell you that isn’t going to improve the 
climate here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a positive 
plan, and I invite the Leader of the Opposition tomorrow to 
stand up and support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to go very far to find 
out what the rest of the investment community in our province 
and outside Canada believes about this Premier and the business 
climate, notwithstanding his budget. In fact if you do a Google 
search on oil sands, on oils sands, the second story that pops up 
is from this resource review that says the problem in 
Saskatchewan is the political leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I too have heard from people from across this country. One 
particular entrepreneur has said, you know Saskatchewan has 
great potential. He said, it’s like Microsoft in the mid-1980s. 
But he said, the problem is we don’t much like the CEO [chief 
executive officer]. The problem in terms of investing and acting 
on it is the reputation this NDP government has given to this 
province. 
 
We’ve asked the Premier countless times what is he going to do 
for a complete growth agenda. Is his answer simply the 
simplistic approach that it’s only about tax cuts? Is that his 
plan? Because clearly that’s not the case. When will he adopt, 
when will he adopt the complete Saskatchewan Party plan to 
grow this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I think I’ve heard it all, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know for how long the Leader of the 
Opposition over there has been promoting the notion we need to 
have a more competitive, more competitive environment for 
investment. Well exactly what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. But 
then he says, well we need a bigger plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has talked about a more 
competitive environment. We’ve talked about significant 
investments in education and training for our young people, 
significant investments in research and development. You take 
the synchrotron. You take the Research Park. We talk about 
immigration, Mr. Speaker. We talk about quality of life, Mr. 
Speaker. This is how you build not only economy, you build 
society. 
 
Now he wants to talk about going onto Google. Well I’ve gone 
onto Google too, and I tried to google up a biography for the 
Leader of the Opposition. What did I find? I find a biography 
that now has seven years missing. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know, but if I’m hiring someone to do a job and they provide 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

me a biography that has seven years missing, they don’t get the 
job, Mr. Speaker. That’s the fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Premier is 
apparently becoming more proficient with the computer. He’s 
now, he’s now doing Google searches. Not too many months 
ago he couldn’t get around certain security fences or, as other 
people like to call them, firewalls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Premier doesn’t 
have to google it. If he wants to read about the biography, he 
can go to our website. And while he’s there, why doesn’t he 
download our entire plan for a growing economy for the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Why doesn’t he do that? Mr. Speaker, the 
problem with this NDP government is the mixed messages it 
sends. On one hand it says to investment: come here, come 
here, come here. And on the other hand members like the 
member for Greystone say: get away, get away, get away. 
 
Here’s his quote from his budget speech. He said, and I quote 
— this is an NDP MLA: 
 

Saskatchewan should . . . charge extra high royalties on oil 
sourced from tar sands. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let me repeat that. He said that his government’s 
going to charge extra, extra high royalties on oil sourced from 
the oil sands. Is that the position of the Premier, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, point number one. How is 
it that the Leader of the Opposition and the Sask Party don’t 
look at the facts, don’t look at the facts given to us by the Royal 
Bank of Canada who will say, Mr. Speaker, according to their 
figures, boom times are coming in Saskatchewan? 
 
Why don’t they look at the facts of real investment decisions 
that are being made today on the globe, on an investment 
decision made by Mr. Li Ka-shing in Hong Kong to present 
$2.3 billion into the province of Saskatchewan? Now that’s the 
kind of reality that they don’t want to talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I tell you what else they don’t want to talk about. They 
want to talk about the member of Greystone. I want to talk 
about the former member of Weyburn-Big Muddy. Now how is 
it, Mr. Speaker, how is it that a duly elected member of this 
legislature has to resign her seat in this legislature because she 
says she is denied, she is denied by her leader and by her caucus 
of expressing her opinions, of expressing the views of her 

constituents? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if he wants to talk about freedom of speech in a 
caucus or the legislature, let’s talk about Weyburn-Big Muddy’s 
former MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 55, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites 
Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? Is it pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, 
The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 56, The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Residential Tenancies Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Residential Tenancies Act, 
2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 57, 
The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 57, The Residential Tenancies Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the Bill be read a second 
time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006/ 
Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 59, The Education Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 60, 
The Evidence Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 60, The Evidence Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 61, 
The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 61, The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member for Melfort 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to 
raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
reply to questions, I directly heard the Minister of Finance use 
the word duplicitous. Mr. Speaker, this House well knows that 
you can’t do indirectly what you can’t do directly. Certainly 
The Oxford Dictionary and Thesaurus defines the word 
duplicitous as double-dealing, deceitful. 
 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this is inappropriate use of 
unparliamentary language and I’d like you to ask the minister to 
withdraw and apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader to respond to the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I recognize that the 
Opposition House Leader makes reference to not being able to 
do indirectly what we are not allowed to do directly. However 
it’s totally irrelevant to the matter that he raises. 
 
I heard the minister refer to conduct of the opposition as 
duplicitous. It was a reference, Mr. Speaker, to a character of 
the actions taken and, Mr. Speaker, is certainly acceptable 
within the rules of the House. It was not a direct attack on the 
character of the individual. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, on this point of order, if I 
can also raise a point of order about a behaviour or the language 
of one of the members opposite directly intended for one of the 
members of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. We just have to deal with one point of order at a 
time in this House. 
 
Members, dealing with the request by the House Leader, or the 
point made by the House Leader of the opposition, I find that I 
also heard the word. And when I take these words into context a 
lot of it is how it is used and also for the effect it has on 
disrupting the legislature. And in this case I found that the word 
did disrupt this legislature, raise the level to a level of debate 
that is not desirable. 
 
And I would ask the Minister of Finance to withdraw the word. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I was unaware of that. I 
will withdraw the word. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, I will 
reinforce the point that the Opposition House Leader made 
about not being able to do indirectly what you are not allowed 
to do directly. And it is a long-standing principle, Mr. Speaker, 
in the conduct of members of the House that we’re not allowed 
to do when we’re not on the record what we are not allowed to 
do when we are on the record. 
 
Clearly, clearly heard by many members on this side of the 
House, perhaps by yourself, Mr. Speaker, off the record — 
clearly not expressed by one of the opposition members who 
was on their feet during question period — the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena shouted, shouted across the floor, directing 

her comments I believe to the Minister of Finance, the word 
liar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is clearly, unequivocally unacceptable 
language in the House. And I would ask that you would ask the 
hon. member, Mr. Speaker, to withdraw that remark and 
apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena to speak to the point of order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I apologize. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. The apology is accepted. 
And why is the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave for introduction of guests has been 
requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is with great pleasure that I have the opportunity to introduce to 
you and to this House a Member of Parliament from BC 
[British Columbia] and our Agriculture critic in the New 
Democratic Party of Canada, Alex Atamanenko. 
 
I have to say that we were clearly well heard by members of the 
New Democratic Party, members of the Liberal Party, and 
government caucus while we were in Ottawa yesterday. And 
I’m very pleased that Mr. Atamanenko is here today. He is 
going to continue to listen to farmers of Saskatchewan, meet 
with folks from the Porcupine disaster area. Today he is 
accompanied here by his wife, Ann, and by cousins John and 
Betty Atamanenko from Saskatoon. 
 
If I might, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just give you a bit of 
background. Mr. Atamanenko is the son of refugees of the 
Russian Revolution, born and raised in New Westminster. He 
has had a variety of work experience throughout his life. He’s 
served as an interpreter during the prime minister’s visit to the 
Soviet Union in 1989 and for the Canadian Navy trip to 
Vladivostok in 1990. He brings to the parliament many gifts 
and abilities and we are thankful that he is here to help move 
forward the agenda of seeking a payment and more support for 
Saskatchewan farmers and Canadian farmers. And we ask you 
to welcome him to this Assembly. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Massey 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

Place on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to just very briefly join with my colleague, the Minister of 
Agriculture, in welcoming our guests today. 
 
And I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Alex Atamanenko, MP 
[Member of Parliament] recently in Saskatoon. And we had the 
opportunity to discuss various matters, and he clearly is a very 
experienced and well versed Agriculture critic for the New 
Democratic Party in our federal parliament. 
 
And I also would like to join in welcoming John Atamanenko 
and his partner, Betty Wanner. They were former constituents 
of mine in my former constituency and long-time friends. And 
it’s a pleasure to see them all here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to . . . Order 
please. Before orders of the day, I wish to table from the Office 
of the Provincial Auditor the report to the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan on the 2005 financial statements of CIC 
Crown corporations and related entities, dated April 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Meewasin 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Before orders of the day, I ask for 
leave to move a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state the nature of the 
motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The nature of the motion is to 
recommend that Kenneth Acton of Moose Jaw be reappointed 
as a member of the Public and Private Rights Board pursuant to 
section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure Act. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Justice. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Reappointment to Public and Private Rights Board 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise today to move a motion: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
This address will recommend that Kenneth Acton of 
Moose Jaw be reappointed as a member of the Public and 
Private Rights Board pursuant to section 6 of The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 
 

The reappointment would be effective April 15, 2006, for a 
term of five years. 
 
Mr. Acton has been a member of the Public and Private Rights 
Board since July 1, 1990, in his capacity as director of 
mediation services branch of the Department of Justice and 
more recently as director of the dispute resolution office, 
Saskatchewan Justice. Mr. Speaker, this arrangement has 
proven to be very useful. 
 
The primary function of the dispute resolution office is to 
provide mediation, facilitation, and other collaborative problem 
solving processes to assist parties in resolving disputes. The 
Public and Private Rights Board provides a dispute resolution 
process in relation to The Expropriation Procedure Act. The 
Public and Private Rights Board has the authority to review 
matters relating to the expropriation of land or the intention to 
acquire land by expropriating authorities in an effort to help the 
parties reach mutually acceptable solutions. Landowners may 
request the board to review either or both of the following: the 
root situation or design of a public improvement and the 
amount of compensation offered for the expropriated land. 
 
As a consequence of a similar action of the board and the 
dispute resolution office, the reappointment of Ken Acton as 
member of the board is appropriate, Mr. Speaker. As director of 
the dispute resolution office, Mr. Acton has extensive 
experience in dispute resolution. He is recognized by his peers 
throughout Canada and the United States for the leadership role 
he has taken in the field of dispute resolution. Mr. Acton 
recently received a centennial medal in acknowledgement of his 
leadership in mediation and collaborative problem solving. Mr. 
Acton’s experiences ensure that landowners who face 
expropriation have access to an enhanced model of dispute 
resolution. His background in administration has facilitated the 
effective administration of the board. His work with 
expropriating parties to encourage them to adopt a more 
collaborative approach has decreased the number of complaints 
received by the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 
Moose Jaw North, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That our humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, recommending that Kenneth W. 
Acton of the city of Moose Jaw in the province of 
Saskatchewan be reappointed as a member of the Public 
and Private Rights Board, effective April 15, 2006, for a 
term of five years pursuant to section 6 of The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice, 
the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, seconded by the 
Government House Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That our humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, recommending that Kenneth W. 
Acton of the city of Moose Jaw in the province of 
Saskatchewan be reappointed as a member of the Public 
and Private Rights Board, effective April 12, 2006, for a 
term of five years pursuant to section 6 of The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling answers to written questions no. 834 to 855 
inclusive. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources, the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s certainly a pleasure for me to rise today to speak in favour 
of the budget presented by the Minister of Finance last 
Thursday. 
 
And before I get into my remarks, like others I’d like to thank 
the people of my constituency, Saskatoon Massey Place, for 
allowing me the privilege to speak on their behalf in this 
legislature. It’s a responsibility I take very seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, and like all members of the House, I seek to represent 
their views and advance the interests of our province on their 
behalf. 
 
And with that I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I very sincerely 

believe that this budget does advance the interests of my 
constituents and it advances the interests of this province. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there is a theme in the 
budget very much around the issue of business tax reform. And 
of course there was a committee appointed under the auspices 
of the former minister of Finance last year called the Vicq 
committee. And it was formed to look into the question of 
business taxation, and it came up with the report. It consulted 
around the province, and it asked people: what do you think that 
we could do in Saskatchewan to change business taxes in order 
to create more investment and jobs in Saskatchewan? 
 
That committee reported several months later after going 
around the province, listening to people. It provided a report to 
the government. And in a very open and transparent way, the 
government of course made that report public. There was 
discussion about the report in the public. 
 
And ultimately the Minister of Finance, a week ago tomorrow 
— last Thursday, that is — stood up and presented his plan to 
the legislature and to the people of the province. And that plan, 
Mr. Speaker, not only included the full implementation of the 
tax recommendations of the Vicq committee — other than the 
question of harmonization, which the committee itself said 
should wait until a later time — but actually advanced the 
implementation of one of the recommendations and made it 
quicker as of July 1 this year rather than waiting two years. 
 
And some people say, Mr. Speaker, well how does reform of 
business taxation benefit the average person, because it’s a cut 
to business taxes as opposed to cuts to the . . . or benefits for the 
average people? And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I 
truly believe that these changes will benefit the average person 
— working people, business people, professional people, young 
people in Saskatchewan. Why do I say that? I say it for this 
reason, Mr. Speaker. For a long time people have been saying 
we should reform the business taxation regime to make 
Saskatchewan a more competitive place to do business. 
 
And I was looking at a report recently done by the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business. Their director, Marilyn 
Braun-Pollon, was in my office showing me the report. 
Basically it was a report of what their members, who are mainly 
small-business people, had to say about various issues. But one 
of the questions that was asked the members, the business 
people, was: if the government reduced business taxation, what 
would you do with the increased money that you would have? 
 
And I think this is very important, Mr. Speaker, because the 
business people indicated two things. The first was more 
investment in Saskatchewan which is certainly a major 
objective of the government obviously and of most people in 
the province. That was the first thing, more investment. Well 
what does more investment mean? It means more jobs. And to 
state the obvious, that is good for ordinary people, for young 
people in Saskatchewan because what people have been telling 
us is they want more opportunities for growth and jobs for 
young people in Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re trying to do. 
 
The other thing I thought that was very positive about what the 
business people said was they would use the increased financial 
flexibility they had to increase the wages of their employees. 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

And that’s very significant as well, Mr. Speaker, because one of 
the problems we’ve had in Saskatchewan I think has been that 
our business taxes have not been as competitive in some areas 
as they should be. This budget addresses that. We will now be 
one of the most competitive places in Canada, if not North 
America — a great place to invest. 
 
But the other issue we have, and I think we should recognize 
and acknowledge it, is if you’re going to keep young people in 
Saskatchewan, if you’re going to provide them with job 
opportunities, you have to have decent wages and benefits. And 
unlike some folks in the House, Mr. Speaker, as most people in 
Saskatchewan who have followed my record in politics will 
know, I am a proponent of developing the private sector as well 
as the Crown sector. I believe in the Crown corporations, but I 
believe strongly in developing the private economy as well — 
the market economy, the oil and gas sector, the mining sector, 
and so on, manufacturing, forestry, all of them. 
 
I believe in that, Mr. Speaker. I believe that we should have a 
healthy business climate. But my belief in that does not prevent 
me from saying also that if we’re going to have a strong 
economy that is attractive to people and attractive to young 
people, we have to have decent wages and job benefits. I am not 
afraid of labour standards, Mr. Speaker. I am not afraid of 
occupational health and safety. I am not afraid of minimum 
wage. I am not afraid of better wages for our people. 
 
And so to link up the budget objective of increasing investment, 
Mr. Speaker, and how it benefits people . . . When you hear 
business people saying I’m going to use some more of my 
flexibility to raise wages for working people, Mr. Speaker, that 
is something that also will contribute to the prosperity of our 
province and help people stay here. 
 
So it’s a very positive thing. It’s a positive message. It’s a 
positive budget, Mr. Speaker. It is a budget that people have 
been calling for, and the government has responded. And I 
commend the present Minister of Finance, the member from 
Regina South, for presenting that budget. I commend the former 
minister of Finance, the member from Regina Douglas Park, for 
formulating the Vicq committee which came up with the 
recommendations on the business side. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Now some will say, Mr. Speaker . . . So far I’ve tried to explain 
how I believe this will benefit ordinary people in our province 
and provide opportunities to young people — a very positive 
message. Some will say — and certainly some of the opposition 
say — well how does that differentiate you, the New 
Democratic Party, from the opposition conservative 
Saskatchewan Party? And here’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. I 
just said a few minutes ago that we want to have a strong 
business sector as well as a strong Crown sector, and we want 
people to have decent wages and benefits and working 
conditions. And when I hear, Mr. Speaker — in response to that 
positive message — the Leader of the Opposition and other 
members over there saying ah, you’re helping business out, they 
say, but you haven’t gone all the way because, they say, we 
need competitive labour laws, they say. And they say, you need 
to get government out of business, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And we need to ask ourselves what it is they mean. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think this is what they mean, and this is what I object 
to. They mean, Mr. Speaker, that they think that the 
occupational health and safety laws we have in Saskatchewan 
are maybe a little bit too burdensome. They talk about 
regulation. 
 
They don’t like the minimum wage. Every time the minimum 
wage is increased, they’re opposed to it, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t really believe in decent working benefits 
for working people. That is their record, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
well documented. I don’t have to go into it here. 
 
And I will say to people that think that way, Mr. Speaker, I will 
say to them, Mr. Speaker, this. They like to talk about 
government regulations. There was a fire, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Mosaic potash mine at Esterhazy, and 73 people were saved 
because the occupational health and safety laws of this province 
required that there be safe areas for those workers, Mr. Speaker, 
in underground mines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, that is not what they 
have, for example, in West Virginia. And when miners were 
trapped in underground mines in West Virginia, tragically, 
people died, Mr. Speaker. And the Leader of the Opposition is 
laughing, Mr. Speaker. The member from Estevan was laughing 
when I said that, Mr. Speaker. And my point is this, Mr. 
Speaker. People should remember that when the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Estevan and the rest of them, Mr. 
Speaker, say we need competitive labour laws and less 
regulation, it is that kind of thinking, Mr. Speaker, that does not 
protect — does not protect — people in the workplace. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are not going to join the race to the 
bottom of occupational health and safety. We are not going to 
join the race to the bottom of wages and benefits for working 
people. We’re going to advance the interests of the business 
community as we have in this budget. And at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to stand shoulder to shoulder with 
working people and business people and professional people in 
this province so that everybody shares the benefits of this 
budget and no one is left behind on the path to opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say this as well, Mr. 
Speaker. People should be very careful about what they say 
when the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues say they 
want government to get out of business. What do they mean? 
They say, Mr. Speaker, that they believe in the Crown 
corporations like SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy — that 
they’re not going to sell them off — and yet on a daily basis, 
Mr. Speaker, they get up and they attack them. 
 
And I just say this, Mr. Speaker. I say to the people of the 
province, that when the opposition says that they’re going — in 
addition to the business tax agenda that was very positively 
presented by the Minister of Finance — that they’re going to 
create a competitive labour environment and they’re going to 
get government out of business, be very, very cautious about 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

the fine print, Mr. Speaker. Be very, very cautious. Because this 
is basically a conservative party, Mr. Speaker, with a hidden 
right wing agenda — and we should never forget it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind people of this as well. In 
1999, Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of being the Minister of 
Finance, a position that I held for five and a half years. In that 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we presented an idea that we would 
appoint a committee — it was also the Vicq committee — to 
look at the area of personal income taxation. And indeed the 
committee was appointed, they made a report, they 
recommended the biggest reform of personal income taxes in 
the history of the country. Now the reason I refer to that, Mr. 
Speaker, is we now have this opposition — in response to the 
new Minister of Finance who is presenting another report which 
is the biggest reform of business taxation — we have this 
opposition voting against it. 
 
And I want to remind everyone that when we presented the plan 
of the biggest reform of personal income tax in the province’s 
history . . . a plan, Mr. Speaker, that no one would be opposed 
to today. No one would credibly be opposed to it. And if the 
members opposite disagree and if they say they would undo it, 
they can get up and say so. But they won’t because, Mr. 
Speaker, it is widely accepted by the people of the province as a 
good plan. 
 
And I want to say this. One of the members over there said it 
was out of their platform. They voted against it, Mr. Speaker. 
This is not credible, Mr. Speaker. They cannot take credit for an 
idea and then vote against it. Or to put it another way, only they 
would say something was their idea and vote against it. 
 
But my point is this. This is a very familiar record, Mr. Speaker 
— the people over there saying something is a bad idea and 
won’t work for the province and voting against the budget, 
which is exactly what they did in the year 2000 when the 
personal income tax plan was presented. 
 
So I have a lot of sympathy for the present Minister of Finance 
dealing with this opposition. Because you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? There is a song by the Canadian singer, Corey Hart, 
Corey Hart. And the song is about love, but he’s complaining in 
the song. He says it’s not enough; it’s never enough for you. 
And his complaint is, it doesn’t really matter what he does. The 
person he loves is never satisfied. It’s not enough. And, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you love them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I do love the opposition. I do love them, 
Mr. Speaker, because they are . . . And I’m glad the member 
from Estevan says she loves me too. And that warms my heart, 
Mr. Speaker. I love them as individuals. But the problem is, it’s 
just like Corey Hart. It doesn’t matter what you do; it’s never 
enough for them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have personal income tax reform that was 
done by this government which they had said they wanted. But 
when we did it, it wasn’t enough for them, Mr. Speaker. We 
have one of the highest rates of economic growth in the 
country, but it’s not enough for them, Mr. Speaker. We have the 
biggest reform of business taxes in the history of the province, 

but that’s not enough for them either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what the people of the province need to bear in mind is, it 
doesn’t matter what is in reality going on in Saskatchewan. It’s 
never enough. A few minutes ago we heard the Leader of the 
Opposition up in question period and he said that, you know, 
you couldn’t invest, you couldn’t do business in Saskatchewan. 
Yet the amount of money being invested this very year in 
mining exploration in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is projected 
to be $196 million — the highest it ever was in history, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But more important than that, more important than that, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to close with this message. This province — 
and this should never be forgotten by anyone every time they 
hear the members opposite moan and groan with their doom 
and gloom about how bad things are in Saskatchewan — 
Saskatchewan is, and has been since 2003, a have province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say this. To be a have 
province today — and I dare say, having talked to officials from 
the Department of Finance, into the foreseeable future as far as 
anyone can project, we will be a have province — is a dream, 
Mr. Speaker, that has been sought by governments, whether 
they were CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], 
NDP, Liberal, Conservative. That is a dream we have pursued 
for decades. And we have achieved that, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan is paying its own way in this country. We are not 
on welfare any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. When 
I was elected to this legislature in 1991, after nine years of 
government by those sorry Tories over there, Mr. Speaker, this 
province was in despair. It was in despair. It was close to 
bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today after 13 credit rating upgrades, after being a have 
province for three years now with one of the highest rates of 
economic growth in this country, we are a province that is full 
of hope, Mr. Speaker. And I am full of hope. 
 
And I want to say, last week the Leader of the Opposition got 
up and ridiculed me in this House because I used the word that I 
hoped our job numbers improved over the next several months. 
And the member from Wood River laughs about that. Well that 
is my hope, Mr. Speaker, because I will never apologize for 
having a belief in this province and for always being hopeful, 
looking at the future. And this budget, Mr. Speaker, gives me 
even more hope than I’ve ever had for the future of this 
province. And I will be voting against the amendment put 
forward by the opposition and I will be standing up and proudly 
voting for this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In the west gallery is Darcy Marriott, a 
constituent of mine from Saskatoon who also happens to work 
with us at our constituency office in Saskatoon. I think that this 
is Darcy’s first visit to the legislature. He takes a keen interest 
in politics in our province and he also takes a keen interest in 
what’s happening nationally and internationally. 
 
Darcy has recently attended SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] Kelsey Campus in 
Saskatoon. I understand he continues to further his studies there 
but in the meantime he is a huge support to Judy Gossen, our 
constituency assistant in Saskatoon Nutana and myself as the 
MLA in the work that we do on the behalf of constituents. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome Darcy to the legislature 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to stand with a response to the budget speech. But first of 
all I have a couple of points of clarification. 
 
When the member from Saskatoon Massey Place, who preceded 
me in speaking, was speaking about the tragedy at the Virginia 
coal mines and said that the Leader of the Opposition and I 
were laughing about that event, I just want to clarify that that 
was not true, Mr. Speaker. And another thing that he said that 
wasn’t really accurate was, Mr. Speaker, when he was talking 
about love. And he certainly must have some hearing problems 
over there because I never said anything like what he thought I 
did. So that member seems to be picking on me today but I just 
wanted to make those clarifications. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am very honoured to stand and respond on 
behalf of the people of the Estevan constituency. The Estevan 

constituency is a constituency of vast grain fields and oil fields 
and the people of the Estevan constituency, through the oil and 
gas fields, contribute very heavily to the government coffers. 
And the sad part of it is, Mr. Speaker, is that in that area where 
much of the revenue comes from, we don’t even have a decent 
road to drive on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my family, as you know, is involved in the 
agriculture industry and at that point I would like say thank you 
to my family, to my husband Vic, to my kids Terry, Trisha, and 
to my grandchildren for all the support they give me. And you 
know without them a person just couldn’t function properly and 
I truly appreciate the support that they have always given me 
and continue to give me. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, agriculture is a huge industry in my riding 
and the people in the agriculture sector feel that they have been 
totally ignored again by this NDP government. The Ag budget 
was cut by $166 million, Mr. Speaker, and last week, in fact on 
budget night, I was at a rural ratepayers dinner in my 
constituency and the people could not believe this NDP 
government’s total disregard for the producers of this province. 
 
Again at an auction sale last Saturday, farmers were appalled by 
this government’s action or inaction. And these farmers now 
realize that the $52.8 million that was announced — and 
ironically it was announced just before the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 
in March — that is not going to do anything to help them 
tax-wise because it doesn’t address the cost of inflation. So 
increasing mill rates are a great concern to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial Agriculture minister blames the 
feds all the time. Daily we see him get up in here and blame the 
federal government. And the way he talks about the federal 
Agriculture minister is absolutely despicable. One moment he’s 
insulting him and the next minute he’s wondering why he 
doesn’t have any influence on the federal government. 
 
And the provincial Agriculture minister says the farmers are 
going broke because of business decisions. And Crop Insurance 
and ultimately the provincial Ag minister are making many of 
these business decisions for farmers. Number one, they insist 
that farmers harvest crops that are virtually non-existent, 
costing farmers more in fuel than they harvest. Number two, 
Crop Insurance insists on producers fertilizing and spraying, 
and often spraying more than once, or they penalize them 
heavily. And number three, just recently the provincial Ag 
minister sent out registered letters through Crop Insurance to all 
the farmers insisting on payment of last year’s premium by 
March 31 or they would not be able to have coverage for the 
coming year. And, Mr. Speaker, that just goes to show how 
totally out of touch our Agriculture minister is. 
 
And yet at this point in time all of our roads have road bans on 
them so farmers can’t haul their grain to the elevator even if 
they do have a chance to do so. 
 
And I guess, bluntly put, Mr. Speaker, the people in my area are 
saying that if this government can’t support agriculture, perhaps 
that they shouldn’t even eat. And you know, they just feel that 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

they’ve been kicked pretty hard with a pair a steel-toed boots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my husband farms land that his grandfather broke 
in 1910, and at one time that farm supported a family and 
supported a community. Now that same land doesn’t even pay 
the expenses. 
 
And I don’t think the members opposite just knows how much 
input there is into growing a crop. And you know when you 
have farmers that are spending in the tens of thousands of 
dollars a day to put a crop in, you know it doesn’t take long to 
rack up $100,000 worth of expenses. And with the cost of . . . 
the price we get for our commodity today, it takes a long time 
to get it back. 
 
And my husband and I were just talking this morning, and we 
have to haul our grain to Weyburn. And when we take the semis 
of grain up there, when we haul eight semi-loads of grain up 
there, one semi-load goes just to pay for the fuel for the semi. 
So you know that is some indication. And then I . . . you could 
probably take off another load or two to pay the freight to get 
that commodity to port. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on the subject of agriculture, my 
mother-in-law was an English war bride. And she came over 
and brought her young son with her right after the war, and that 
young son ended up being my husband. But when she was a kid 
in England, she saw hunger. She was raised in the southeast part 
England, and she saw hunger over there. And Churchill said 
that hunger would never happen again over there and it hasn’t. 
Farmers with small plots of land are very wealthy people. And 
all the farmers in this country want is to be able to make a 
decent living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget focused on keeping youth in 
Saskatchewan, and last year the forecast for job creation was 
4,800. This year the NDP cut its forecast for job creation to 
3,200. That, Mr. Speaker, is a cut of 33 per cent. And I guess 
what the NDP are admitting . . . that is they’re defeated. And 
when it comes to their job creation ability, they are a failure. 
And the Minister of Immigration wants to bring in 5,000 
immigrants, and that’s wonderful. But what are these people 
going to do when they get here, when the target for job creation 
is only 3,200? And this is in sharp contrast to the targets of BC 
at 41,000 new jobs. Alberta expects to create 39,600 jobs, and 
Manitoba expects to create 5,200 jobs. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask leave of the Assembly to 
make an introduction at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for Estevan for yielding 
for an introduction. Members of the Assembly, in the Speaker’s 
gallery there are seven people which I would like to introduce at 
this time. 
 
Members may recognize some of these faces. First of all there 
is the people who are associated with our internship program. 
And first of all there are the interns who are working now with 
the member of Kelvington-Wadena and the member for 

Saskatoon Southeast, and that’s Michel Carpentier. Is he here? 
Give us a little wave. And the member for Saskatoon Eastview 
is paired with Haley Gagnon who’s also here. The member for 
Cannington has his intern, Justin Leifso who is here, and the 
member for Regina Walsh Acres paired with Stewart Low who 
is here. 
 
Now we could not conduct this legislative internship program 
without the sponsorship and co-operation of outside agencies 
beyond this legislature, and we have two of these agencies 
represented today. 
 
First of all university of Saskatoon from where the director of 
. . . academic director, that is Ken Pontikes, is here with us. And 
also representing one of our sponsors, representing First 
Canadian Title, which is a company that issues insurance 
policies with respect to real estate transactions. And this 
company, First Canadian Title, issued more than 782,000 title 
insurance policies and guaranteed services last year. It employs 
about 500 people. And their customers include more than 
11,000 lawyers and notaries nationwide, every major Canadian 
chartered bank, other lending institutions, real estate agents, 
mortgage brokers, and builders. And we’re proud to have them 
as one of our sponsors. 
 
And I would ask the members to also, in addition to the people I 
mentioned so far, to welcome from First Canadian Title, Julia 
Jones who is the regional director for Western Canada and 
Wendy Rinella, the director of government relations. So I’ll 
welcome all of these people to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I join you on 
behalf of the opposition to welcome our special guests here that 
are seated in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very happy to see that this government 
implemented the findings of the Vicq commission regarding 
corporate taxes. I must add, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 
Party was the only political party to make a submission to the 
Vicq commission, and we were happy to see that the corporate 
tax relief that was in our submission was implemented. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that was only one part of the growth agenda. 
And I find it ironic, Mr. Speaker, that this socialist government 
did the right thing regarding corporate taxes, because remember 
these are the people that the NDP government refers to as 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

greedy, corporate hucksters. And remember the Regina 
Manifesto which this government still abides by that states no 
CCF-NDP government will rest content until capitalism has 
been eradicated from this province. So this tax relief is long 
overdue, Mr. Speaker, but it is surprising that this government 
actually did something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be waiting anxiously to hear the location of 
the announced dialysis unit for southeastern Saskatchewan. A 
commitment was made to Estevan some time ago — and I 
know I’m a bit biased, Mr. Speaker — but I think it would only 
make good sense to have a dialysis unit in Estevan as it would 
serve Carlyle, Carnduff, Oxbow, and the area to the Manitoba 
border. And they would still have a one and a half hour drive, 
but it would sure beat the three and a half hour drive they have 
right now to Regina. And, you know, too many of our people 
have moved out of the community to be closer to a dialysis unit, 
and unfortunately some of those people have passed away 
waiting for something like this to happen. But you know, they 
haven’t had that accessibility up to this point, and I certainly 
hope that the future bodes well for them. 
 
And I was sorry, Mr. Speaker, that our senior citizens were left 
out of this budget, and they are wondering too if they don’t 
count. The government has $1 billion in oil and gas revenues, 
and that is $1,000 for every man, woman, and child in this 
province. And so for an average family of four, of course that 
would be $4,000. And all those families just have to ask 
themselves, how did you do with this budget? Are you any 
better off? And you know, all the while, Mr. Speaker, the 
province went deeper into debt. According to the summary 
financial statements, we now have $288 million in added debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney was in my 
constituency just a short time ago, and he did an interview with 
Lifestyles newspaper. And it says here, and I’m quoting, Mr. 
Speaker, that “Yates said they will significantly invest in 
education, so that young people receive adequate training.” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the increase that SIAST received 
in their budget. Finally this government is taking action to 
reduce the long waiting lists for our trades programs in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, a constituent of mine . . . you 
know, we brought it up in question period yesterday, but this 
young lady had applied to take training for the medical 
radiological technician program. And she received notification 
stating that although — and they being SIAST — were unable 
to predict precisely when she could expect to begin her studies, 
she could anticipate a wait of possibly 15 years. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was talking to this young lady’s father, he said 
that he wished he’d have put her on the SIAST waiting list 
when he enrolled her in the kindergarten program and that way 
she would only have another two years to wait. So as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, I am glad that some movement was made on that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I almost want to quote another item that the 
member from Regina Dewdney said when he was in Estevan. 
And it says here, quote: 
 

Our potential is . . . unlimited . . . The only thing that 
stands in our way is our willingness and ability for us to do 
it. 

 

And that again was said by the member from Regina Dewdney. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s stopping them? The member states 
willingness and ability. So I do agree with them that the thing 
that’s stopping them is that this tired, old, socialist government 
doesn’t have the willingness or the ability or, as a matter of fact, 
the credibility to do anything about that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess in closing I can’t believe that this 
government would spend a half a million dollars advertising 
this budget. And if it’s so great, it would sell itself. And I can’t 
imagine those people who are paying for their own Avastin feel 
that this government can blow $500,000 on the Minister of 
Finance’s self-glorification and they won’t give one red cent to 
those in desperate need of this medication. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will not support the budget. 
However I will support the amendment put forward by the 
member from Saskatoon Silver Springs. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview, the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure this 
afternoon to get up and talk about a budget that’s the 13th 
consecutive balanced budget in the history of our province. It’s 
also a pleasure to get up after my friend, the member from 
Estevan, as she has laid out some of the things that some of her 
members have tried to say about this budget. 
 
But I think what we need to talk about in this province is about 
hope and opportunity and about positive things that we can do 
as members of this legislature to make sure that the economy 
grows, that our people are able to find good jobs here, and that 
we can all work together to make a better place to live. And 
that’s my goal, and that’s what I want to speak about a bit this 
afternoon. 
 
[15:15] 
 
This budget has $7.1 billion in operating spending. It’s 
allocating over $100 million for reduction of our debt, which 
means over the last couple of years we’ve reduced the debt by 
$450 million. We have health spending of $3.2 billion which is 
almost a 10 per cent increase and the largest health budget that 
we’ve ever had. And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, I’m very 
proud of the work that the people in the health care system do. 
And we are pleased to be able to provide these resources that 
they continue to provide services for the individual patients and 
clients right across this province. There’s education spending of 
one and a half billion, a 5 per cent increase . . . education 
spending that will assist in all aspects of our education system 
in the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, for two months now I’ve been the 
Environment minister, and there are many positive things in this 
budget that relate to my portfolio. And I would like to take 
some time this afternoon to explain those things for the public 
and for the members here so that they can understand what 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

important things we’re able to do as we move forward. 
 
This year’s budget includes an overall increase for the 
department of $14 million or seven and a half per cent. So the 
total departmental budget this year is $202 million. That 
represents an investment of $202 million to promote and protect 
the environment and its natural resources as part of this 
government’s commitment to a green and prosperous economy. 
While the green strategy has not been fully finalized yet, this 
budget lays a firm foundation for its implementation once it is 
approved. 
 
And I would like to take a couple of minutes to share some of 
the significant initiatives funded by the Environment budget. 
The year 2006 marks the 75th anniversary of the provincial 
parks in Saskatchewan, and I can assure you that we have much 
to celebrate. Our provincial park system plays a complex and 
important role in the life of this province. They are a 
cornerstone of tourism. They provide recreational and cultural 
opportunities, and they preserve significant ecosystems, natural 
features, and resources. They attract over 2.3 million visits 
annually and contribute $129 million a year to our local and 
provincial economies. 
 
I’m delighted to tell you that this budget provides $3 million in 
parks capital funding to enhance our parks and the experience 
of parks visitors. This is initiative under the green strategy, and 
this money will be used to illustrate the effectiveness and the 
value of green technology. 
 
Projects will include solar heating of swimming pools, the 
development of enviro campgrounds, and — I know this will be 
of practical value to everyone — the installation of cleaner, 
more modern washroom facilities with low-flush or composting 
toilets. In conjunction with the plant educational interpretive 
programs, these projects will give visitors the opportunity to 
learn more about energy and water conservation, green power, 
and the use of innovative technologies to address day-to-day 
requirements. 
 
There will be 75th anniversary celebrations in our parks 
throughout the summer, and I encourage all of you to come out 
and join us. And in this area, we have many fine Saskatchewan 
people who will provide the services in the parks and manage 
the parks. And I would really want to say thank you to those 
people for the work they’ve done, and I look forward to all of 
us enjoying their hospitality as this year unfolds. 
 
This year’s budget also provides the resource to establish 
funding arrangements for the urban parks in Weyburn and the 
Battlefords. Our urban parks provide close-at-hand outdoor 
recreation and relaxation to urban residents, especially those 
who cannot get out to our regional and provincial parks. The 
Battlefords River Valley Park and the Weyburn’s Tatagwa 
Parkway will join Wakamow Valley in Moose Jaw, Pêhonân 
Parkway in Prince Albert, Wascana Centre in Regina, 
Meewasin Valley in Saskatoon, and Chinook parkway in Swift 
Current as all-season getaways for over 50 per cent of our 
residents. 
 
This budget also includes new funding to support new 
economic opportunities while ensuring the sustainability of the 
environment and our national resources. This year, the 

department is doubling the number of staff who will review oil, 
natural gas, and mining exploration and development proposals, 
and monitor the activity in this area. 
 
In 2004 the department reviewed almost 5,000 proposals worth 
$2 billion in new investments. We anticipate receiving many 
more than that in 2006. Madam Deputy Speaker, in this area it’s 
not often realized how crucial it is for the future of our province 
that we have clear regulation as it relates to the environment, 
which will assist businesses to know that they’re coming to a 
province where people are welcoming of the work that they do, 
provided that it’s done in a way that enhances our community, 
our environment, and the future of our province. And so we say, 
let’s work together with these people. And that’s what we plan 
to do. 
 
Two new conservation officers will be located in Pinehouse and 
Stony Rapids. And they will also assist in the day-to-day 
enforcement activities and those activities as well as working in 
the mineral exploration field. Adding more staff in the oil and 
gas and mineral exploration areas is a reflection of growing 
exploration and development activity. 
 
Enhancing our review process directly impacts on industry 
productivity and the perception of Saskatchewan as a good 
place to do business, all the while ensuring protection of the 
environment. The new staff and funding for oil and gas and 
mineral exploration permitting and monitoring are an 
acknowledgement of strengthening our compliance and 
enforcement capabilities which is a key piece in the foundation 
of our green strategy. 
 
Our budget this year also provides $26.8 million in capital 
funding for our wildfire management strategies. Our fire 
management and forest protection branch works hard to keep 
our forests healthy and to protect the lives, communities, and 
businesses that rely on the forest. 
 
We are continuing the aerial fleet renewal with the scheduled 
arrival of two Convair C580A aerial fire tankers this spring, and 
two more aircraft next spring. 
 
This year’s budget will also provide funding for the 
construction of additional fire towers, increased wages for 
emergency firefighters, and the renewal of agreements with 
northern communities and First Nations for sustained 
firefighting crews. 
 
While there are many questions about what the future holds for 
the forest industry in Saskatchewan, I am confident that this 
budget means that Saskatchewan Environment is well 
positioned to ensure that our northern forest remains healthy 
and vibrant. 
 
In this year the department’s budget also contains $1.35 million 
for a new Forestry Secretariat. The secretariat, led by my 
colleague, the hon. member from Prince Albert, will provide an 
opportunity to address the various challenges facing the forest 
sector in this province. Saskatchewan Environment will remain 
responsible for the management of the forest resource in the 
province. The department and its staff will play a pivotal role in 
the work of the secretariat. 
 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

Water, one of our most precious natural resources, is essential 
to sustain human life as well as the health and sustainability of 
our environment. The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority has a 
mandate to protect and manage our water supplies including all 
surface and groundwater. This year’s budget includes the 
continuation of $2.6 million in Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority capital to fund 24 projects including Lac La Ronge, 
upper Qu’Appelle rehabilitation, the Blackstrap North dam, the 
Lac La Plonge dam, and Gardiner dam. 
 
The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority will also initiate a 
water conservation action plan which will provide increased 
support to watershed plan implementation and coordinate 
development of an integrated water management strategy as 
part of the green strategy. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to at this point 
acknowledge the very good work that’s been done by the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. And in January 2006 my 
predecessor, now the Minister of Labour, released a report 
which is called the State of the Watershed Reporting 
Framework. And it’s not something that has received wide 
publicity, except for in those areas where people are especially 
concerned about water — which means in a interest group right 
across this country and right across North America. 
 
What this watershed reporting framework does is it provides a 
outline of how we are going to continue to monitor the 28 
watershed authorities that we have in this province by 
measuring some very specific things in the health of all of these 
watersheds. And, Mr. Speaker, this framework allows for then 
the development and affirmation of the work of the watershed 
authorities right across the province. 
 
This morning I was pleased to be part of a launching of the very 
first of the source water protection plan which was completed 
by the lower Souris River watershed. Now for those of you who 
are wondering where the lower Souris River watershed is, it’s 
that part of the province which is located right in the southeast 
corner. So it includes communities like Carnduff, 
Gainsborough, Redvers, up to Maryfield, Fairlight, Wawota, 
Kennedy, and all the way up to Moosomin and Wapella. So it 
includes a number of areas. 
 
And in this particular watershed area there are three different 
groups of community members who have been working with 
scientists, with local people, with the community, to set out a 
plan for how they can make sure that the source water for their 
everyday use in residences, and also the source water that may 
be used in industry, agriculture, or any other areas — recreation 
I’m sure — will have the best water possible for the coming 
decades and centuries. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re especially pleased as the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority to have this plan done 
because we also know that there are a number of other parts of 
the province that are following right on their heels, including 
the Moose Jaw area and a couple of other areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what this says for all of us in this province is 
that we have a plan. It’s a good plan. It’s based on science, it’s 
based on evidence, it’s based on community involvement, and 
it’s going to allow us to be ready to deal with any issues that 

we’ll have in the watershed area. 
 
Now the interesting point that has arisen as we’ve developed 
our framework for reporting about watersheds is that other 
provinces and territories in Canada have been contacting the 
policy people who’ve been working on developing this work, 
and they are asking questions. On a national basis, one of our 
goals as the country of Canada is to have a watershed planning 
framework for the whole country. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m fairly 
confident that the work that we’ve done here in Saskatchewan 
will contribute greatly to the setting of national standards about 
how we protect our watershed. So that’s something we should 
all celebrate. 
 
It’s facilitated by the dollars that are in this particular budget. 
The specific dollars that are going to be helping this year will 
be to allow these new watershed authorities to actually 
implement their plans. And we’ll be having dollars available for 
local people to be hired to monitor what’s going on and work 
with the committees. So this is all a very positive thing that is 
happening primarily in the rural and northern parts of our 
province and we’re very pleased about that. 
 
Another area which I want to emphasize is the fact that the 
Great Sand Hills regional environmental study is taking place 
right now. And this budget provides $1.6 million for the final 
year of this particular study. This Great Sand Hills regional 
environmental study represents a truly comprehensive approach 
that will guide our planning to protect the environment while 
enabling sustainable economic development in this truly unique 
ecosystem. 
 
And once again I encourage people in appropriate ways to go 
and experience some of the parts of this particular characteristic 
landscape in the southwest part of our province. But also 
remembering that it’s a fragile area and we need to be working 
very carefully to make sure that it stays as a treasure for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Another area that is receiving some specific funding in this 
budget relates to recycling. Recycling is an important activity 
because it reduces our impact on the environment and it 
provides new economic opportunities. It’s also important 
because it’s an activity that each and every one of us can do as 
individuals and it allows us to participate in doing some of these 
things. And in fact earlier today we heard a member’s statement 
praising some of the work that was done in this area in the 
Shaunavon area. 
 
With this budget we’ll be increasing the funding for 
SARCAN’s recycling programs to $11.3 million. And as many 
of us in the legislature know, the SARCAN operations right 
across the province are crucial for the local communities in that 
they provide jobs for quite a number of people, but also that 
their activities will make sure that there’s recycling available. 
 
This year SARCAN will be able to expand the collection 
activities to include waste paint — and that was announced and 
is now in effect as of April 1 — and people are encouraged to 
take their waste paint to any of the 70 SARCAN sites across the 
province. We’ll also be coming soon with a plan of how we’ll 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

be able to manage our e-waste, or our electronic equipment 
waste, which will provide a place for computer terminals and 
cellphones and other devices like this so that they can be 
recycled in a sustainable way. 
 
The Saskatchewan Environment budget represents an 
investment in the park system. It allows us to celebrate this 75th 
anniversary. It allows us to continue to manage our forest 
resources in this province to make sure that they’re healthy and 
vibrant, and it allows us to deal with the environmental 
management issues in the oil and gas and mining industries. 
And these are some of the specific new investments from this 
year. 
 
But also in the budget of the Saskatchewan Environment, we 
have the total . . . over $200 million also funds many ongoing 
activities which have been provided by many capable civil 
servants and others to make sure that our air and our land and 
our water and our wild plants and our animals, and all of these 
things, will allow Saskatchewan to remain one of the most 
attractive places in the world to live and work and raise a 
family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when one 
talks about the future and about the hope for ourselves, for our 
children, and for our grandchildren, one talks about what it 
means to be somebody from Saskatchewan. And I think that the 
types of choices that have been made in the budget this year 
makes some strong statements about where this government 
intends to go in leading the development of our province for 
many, many years to come. And what we need to recognize and 
celebrate is some of the strong assets that we have. 
 
Many of those are natural resources, the agricultural land, the 
fertility of the soil that we have here. But I always return to 
recognize that the one true great asset that Saskatchewan has is 
the people that live here and serve here, and also those people 
who are part of our community who have gone to serve in other 
parts of the world. And we need to make sure that we include 
everybody in what we think about when we talk about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular budget speaks to the 
future. It speaks to our families, and for that reason I’m going to 
be voting against the amendment and I’ll be voting for the 
budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure today to rise in the House to speak on the budget and 
to represent the people of my constituency in Saskatoon 
Northwest which has both an urban and rural component. It has 
been a delight over the last two years to hear from my 
constituents on both the positive and negative of what’s going 
on both in this House and in our government and in our 
economy. I spend an inordinate amount of time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, dealing with my portfolio which is social services, or 

DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment] issues in my constituency and those of most 
constituencies in Saskatoon. 
 
You know I heard a lot of going on, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
from previous speakers. And I want to quote from one: 
 

 . . . I just read an article . . . [and] it’s very clear . . . [that] 
what I’ve described over the last few minutes that Brad 
Wall, the current Leader of the Opposition, not only knew 
but participated in these activities. 

 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, they’re accusations. And I 
wonder what Andrew Thomson, when he was assistant . . .  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the 
member to keep in mind that members are addressed by the 
constituency they represent and not by personal names. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I’ll give you the direct out of Hansard from 
the other member, from Dewdney, that called the Leader of the 
Opposition on three occasions, Brad Wall. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. A member is not to do 
indirectly what they cannot do directly in the Assembly. So I 
ask the member to take that under advisement and keep it in 
mind for the rest of his address. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Two sets, so I guess that’s okay. 
 
What I’m going to do today is to take my time to talk about two 
separate functions within the budget. One is on the business and 
the economy side. And then I’d like to take some time to talk 
about DCRE and that side. 
 
I seem to note in the minister’s reply, the Minister of DCRE — 
and I want to give him credit for speaking on DCRE — and he 
said a whole 20 words. Here’s the minister that had one of the 
largest increases in his budget, and what did he have to say 
about DCRE? Twenty minutes. Let me quote. Twenty words: 
 

Now when we talked about the Aboriginal commitment in 
this budget, whether it’s SIIT or help through the SAP 
[program or] . . . TEA increases or whether [we’re] talking 
about pavement . . .  

 
Twenty words about the budget and about social service issues. 
Wow. Must be pretty proud of that budget. 
 
Let me talk a little bit on the business side. I just had the 
opportunity to be back in Saskatoon yesterday and to meet with 
a group of business people and to talk about the budget. To the 
person at the table, when I asked what they thought of the 
budget, they said the business tax things were great but they had 
no trust in this NDP government. They had no trust in the 
mismanagement of this NDP government. 
 
They go back to tell the story of the nationalization of the 
potash industry and how that affects worldwide investment. 
You know today people offshore remember this. They 
remember how this government nationalized an industry. They 
also remember . . . And there are people in Calgary today who 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

remember the raising of the royalty rates on investors in the oil 
and gas industry, who drove them out of this province and then 
started SaskOil, and it was that government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — The Minister of DCRE says that’s right, 
very proud of that, that they’re driving business out of our 
province. This is a minister that can say a whole 20 words on 
his portfolio. Should be proud of that, very proud of that. 
 
You know the NDP government and its Crowns continue to 
compete with small- and large-business owners around this 
province who try to start businesses. The NDP treats investors 
such as those who invested in the potato industry with disdain. 
The minister in this House never told the truth for months on 
the potato industry. And then what’d they do with those poor 
people . . .  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member, and I 
think he’s well aware of the Speaker’s earlier request not to 
impugn wrong motive to members of the Assembly, and so if 
he would take his remarks and withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — . . . accurate information for six years. You 
know, how does this NDP government and the Premier prior to 
the last election tell the public that there’ll be no new taxes. 
And then what happens? We have a raise in the PST [provincial 
sales tax]. Again they didn’t portray accurate information. And 
again the business community has a long memory in this. The 
business community, and certainly the business community in 
Saskatoon, understands that in order to do business in this 
province you have to have a government that’s stable and 
continues to hold its policies and programs year after year after 
year. 
 
How about the Premier stating that nuclear fuel is the dirtiest 
form of fuel? I believe he said it came out of a tailpipe. I was in 
the office of the president of Cameco the day after that event 
took place, and he said to me, people are calling from all over 
the world, Ted. They want to know, is the product safe? Are 
they going to nationalize the industry? 
 
What this NDP government has to understand is that we’re in a 
global market and comments travel throughout the world in 
seconds. And still today the question is asked by those in the 
nuclear industry, is the product safe? Are they going to 
nationalize it? So why would the business community have 
faith in this government delivering on its promises? 
 
You know, Madam Speaker, what happened just after the last 
election was something that came out, called most available 
hours. This government, even in meetings with business and 
industry, said there would be no new labour laws. And what 
happened? The most available hours, the job-killing monster 
was born. And if it wasn’t for businesses, cities, universities, 
and people rising up to tell this government that that would kill 
jobs and move people out of this province, it would have 
happened. 
 
And the business community is leery; they’re waiting. They’re 
waiting for the son of most available hours. They know it’s 
coming. Then the universities and the cities are waiting. They 

know it’s coming. They know it will be under a different name, 
but they know it’s coming. And why do they know it’s coming? 
Well they know it’s coming because this government received 
from unions around the province $285,000 in the last election 
for their MLAs — $285,000; that’s 30 fully funded campaigns. 
And somehow that has to be repaid. 
 
You know, Madam Speaker, the Sask Party had two union 
candidates in the last election. One was the president of SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]. The other was a member of 
the media. When they went to their unions and asked for 
financial support the answer was zero — zero. Funny how you 
can give 285,000 to one side and not a nickel to the other side. 
Wow. 
 
You know, the Minister of Industry and Resources comments 
frequently, in this House, refer to the opposition leader, that he 
wants to set up a committee to tell him how to run the economy. 
And what’s his fix? Well he does this through the Vicq 
commission and through things like ACRE [action committee 
on the rural economy]. You know, what is the difference? I 
don’t understand. The business community don’t understand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nobody understands. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Nobody understands. Nobody is sure what 
is coming. The member from Silver Springs was the first to 
present to the Vicq commission and presented the 
Saskatchewan Party plan. The government tried to ridicule him, 
laughing about his presentation. 
 
It’s evident that not one member on the other side read his 
submission, for if they had they would have congratulate him 
for his efforts. It’s evident that not one of them attended his or 
possibly any presentations of the Vicq commission, although 
our member from Silver Springs or a representative was at them 
all. 
 
The current NDP reported that the Saskatoon business 
community — and this is the one that truly bothers him — were 
what? Greedy corporate hucksters, greedy corporate hucksters. 
How does you think this makes the business community feel? 
These are the men and women who sits on boards of NGOs 
[non-governmental organization], CBOs [community-based 
organization] and who raise countless of millions of dollars for 
those less fortunate than others. Who is it that’s working to 
build a children’s hospital in Saskatoon? Who is it that’s raising 
the money for a cancer centre for women? Who is it that 
supports the food banks around this province? The greedy 
corporate hucksters. You know you can’t call somebody a 
greedy corporate huckster and then expect them to come to the 
table and be a partner. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Larry Hubich, the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour, said at Christmas that businesses only donate to 
charities to get their name in the paper. How insulting is this to 
the hard-working business people in this province who give 
back to their communities on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why this budget will not work. You can’t 
tell someone to buck up and then expect them to trust you on 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

matters as important as the economy. 
 
This province has invested our hard-earned dollars in business 
investments that have lost over $1 billion, from Channel Lake 
to SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] to dot-coms to the Meadow Lake pulp mill. You 
know the Minister of Industry and Resources says this was a 
Conservative venture. So was Rafferty-Alameda dam, but I 
don’t hear him telling about how that one filled up. I seem to 
think they said that will never fill up. He says this was a 
Conservative effort. Who’s been managing that effort for the 
last 14 years? It certainly hasn’t been the Tories. 
 
And there are many, many more. Why would the business 
community now say, oh the leopard’s changed its spots? This 
government doesn’t have the confidence of the business 
community or the majority of the people of this province. 
 
On the social services side of the budget, Madam Speaker, you 
know I was just astounded when I read the Hansard from the 
Minister of Community Resources. Fascinating, he spent the 
majority of his time talking about agriculture. You know I’d be 
the first to admit that I don’t know a lot about agriculture, but I 
can guarantee you what he knows, you could put in a thimble. 
You know he spent a whole 20 words on his portfolio — 20 
words. You know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Maybe he 
does know more about agriculture than he does about social 
services. 
 
He said to the foster families, in his ministerial statement, that 
foster families was close to his heart. Well you know, Madam 
Speaker, they got a 2 per cent increase in the budget. I’m sure 
that they were glad that they were close to his heart because 
they sure weren’t close to his pocketbook. 
 
You know, we increased rates for the most vulnerable in the last 
budget by a whopping 33 cents a day — 33 cents a day in the 
previous budget. In this budget, Madam Speaker, I believe it’s 
around $1.32 a day, not enough for a cup of large coffee at Tim 
Hortons. You know we’ve been pushing this government on 
these issues for two years. And I’ve been here, and I’ve heard 
them say things that, you know, why does this have to happen? 
 
We’ve recommended to index the amount of social service 
assistance for food. We’ve recommended to raise the amount of 
the tax level so these people don’t have to pay taxes. And why 
all of the sudden, Madam Speaker, are they rushing to this aid? 
It’s because, Madam Speaker, they have let it deteriorate to a 
point of crisis. Over 10 years, they gave a whopping ten dollars 
last year . . . should be proud. And the minister can’t even get 
up and talk about his own portfolio. 
 
You know, I was reading the paper last night and looked at the 
situation with, you know, the child sex offenders. And I want to 
read for you a quote, and this quote comes out of today’s paper, 
I believe: 
 

These are . . . most vulnerable youth, and still . . . a real 
bureaucratic nightmare to try to get services for these kids. 
We’re talking . . .  

 
This is pretty funny. You should listen. It’s real funny. 
 

We’re talking about 13- and 14-year-old kids here. It’s 
easy for us to get a kid into treatment the first time, 
because we don’t have to go through the bureaucratic 
process. But the second time, the kid has to have a drug 
and alcohol assessment and . . . addictions worker, and by 
the time we get [through] . . . that . . . we lose them. 
 
An all-party committee created by the provincial 
government several years ago to study the addressing of 
children’s sexual exploitation spent hundreds of thousands 
of taxpayer dollars and made some 50 recommendations 
for action, but provincial officials seem to have carried out 
only the ones that were easiest to accomplish, such as [the 
amended] . . . Highway Traffic Act so johns’ cars can be 
impounded. 

 
You know, the Premier was the one who closed the White 
Spruce Treatment Centre, an addictions centre that was state of 
the art in the 1980s, 1990s. The people really appreciated that. 
And now we have project no hope. You know we didn’t put $1 
into long-term treatment even though we know that it works. 
The NDP didn’t. 
 
You know, we need to look at how we deliver programs and 
how we treat people. You know, people aren’t files. They’re 
people. We need to stop clawing back every time someone tries 
to get ahead and is pushed back into the system by the unfair 
clawbacks of this government. If you make a dollar and you 
lose a dollar on clawback, how much further are you ahead? 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ll close by saying how 
disappointed I am that the Minister of Community Resources 
couldn’t even take a portion of his time to talk about his file. 
How proud is he of that? And on that note, Madam Speaker, I’ll 
wrap up. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. Madam Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to stand 
and speak today in favour of this budget. It is a tremendous 
budget. Of course I will not be voting in favour of the 
amendment. With such a tremendous budget, Madam Speaker, I 
think we have a great future in front of us in this province, in 
every area. 
 
I want to just comment on some of the immediate reactions that 
I had to the budget from some of those who had an opportunity 
for a preview. The first folks that I spoke to as I arrived in the 
Legislative Building on budget day were some members of the 
Regina Chamber of Commerce. And they just said, Mark I want 
to tell you that is a great budget. And I was pleased to hear that 
from these members of the chamber who have really been 
working hard to try and build the economy in the area, people 
that we work with regularly. 
 
After the budget when I walked out into the rotunda, I was very, 
very pleased to run into a member from . . . or pardon me, Peter 
Gilmer who is with the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry. And 
Peter of course has been lobbying very hard for many years on 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

behalf of poor people — not just in Regina, but across the 
country — and doing a tremendous job for those folks. 
 
And Peter said to me how pleased he was, that this was the best 
Saskatchewan budget that he had ever seen. And I was thrilled 
to hear that because one of the things that our Premier said to us 
when he was running for the leadership of the party — and he 
has continued to say to the people of Saskatchewan — is that in 
order to have social progress, we must have good, strong 
economic progress. And my hearing of what he has been saying 
. . . says next, but we must not have economic progress without 
social progress. And, Madam Speaker, in this budget those two 
concepts are inextricably linked. And I think that is part of the 
strength of this budget, not only that it provides funding for 
business and motivation for business to come and operate in 
Saskatchewan which is clearly the best place in the world to 
live and to work and to do business and to raise our families, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
And this budget and the cuts that were made for business 
provide them with the opportunity to help strengthen their 
sector and to pay wages which are certainly competitive with 
wages anywhere in the world, especially for people who are 
living in a place like this with such a low cost of living. 
 
Madam Speaker, as well, the other part of that was really 
clearly providing funding for people in need, increasing the 
social assistance payments, increasing payments to people who 
are in need all across the spectrum. 
 
And I want to then with those words move into the issue of 
agriculture, an area that I am very pleased to serve and an area 
where there is also much need and where this government has 
clearly responded to that need, and responded by listening to 
what farmers were saying, listening to what farm 
representatives were saying, that the education portion of 
property tax was a very onerous burden and needed to be dealt 
with. 
 
Our Premier said a couple of years ago the status quo wasn’t on. 
We moved immediately to put some funding into the property 
tax area — about eight per cent a year. And now, Mr. Speaker, 
the impact of that for this year for farmers is $67 million. And 
when you consider what this province, the people of this 
province and this government have been putting into agriculture 
to add to the budget this year — $67 million — to help provide 
relief for farmers in Saskatchewan, I was very, very pleased that 
we could hit this number one priority item and hit it that hard 
and provide support for our farmers. 
 
I recognize clearly that that is not the be-all and the end-all 
however. There is significant need in this industry. For our 
province, I am proud of the way that we have come to the table, 
pleased with the per capita spending that we do in 
Saskatchewan. It far outstrips what any other province is doing 
including Alberta next door to us with their huge dollars. 
Saskatchewan on a per capita base is putting significantly more 
into the agriculture sector. And I can say I am very thankful for 
colleagues who are concerned and who back that kind of 
spending for this industry which has been hurting over many 
years. 
 
And so with that, I would also like to say that when we look at 

the overall picture of our Saskatchewan budget, $555 million in 
new spending . . . The resource funding that has come in we are 
using to help build and strengthen the very fabric of this 
province so that no one, no one will be left behind on the path 
to opportunity. 
 
I’m very proud of the work that has gone into building this 
budget where agriculture receives funding, a portion of this new 
funding, second only to health almost . . . Just over 9 per cent of 
the new funding is going into the agriculture sector, and I am 
thankful for that commitment of my colleagues. 52.8 million 
new dollars this year in property tax relief for farmers — this is 
a good spend, a spend that will help people who today are in 
dire straits. 
 
When combined, as I said earlier, the total relief for this year is 
almost $67 million — no small amount when you consider our 
overall commitments to agriculture where, on a per capita basis, 
we are paying $700 per capita, $700 million last year, $1.32 
billion over the last couple of years. 
 
You know I hear the opposition trying to take potshots at this 
government around our commitment to agriculture, but the 
numbers do not lie, Mr. Speaker. The numbers are clear. The 
funding that we are putting into agriculture is far more on a per 
capita base than any other province and on a real dollar base 
more than most, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very, very pleased about 
that commitment. 
 
We also as a government clearly have acknowledged that 
historically the federal government has made decisions that 
have pulled significant dollars out of the province. And I do not 
and I will not apologize for the numbers of times that I speak in 
this House and that I speak publicly challenging our federal 
government to come to the table. It’s not about throwing blame 
outward. It’s about doing our part, coming to the table with 
$700 million last year, $1.32 billion over the last couple of 
years. 
 
Doing our part and then calling the federal government to be 
accountable, that’s what it’s about. It’s not about trying to pass 
the buck, Mr. Speaker. It’s about clearly, clearly calling on the 
federal government to provide the similar level of support to 
what other federal governments around this world are providing 
for their agriculture sector. 
 
With that kind of support, this industry and this province and 
across this country can be very, very effective in providing the 
goods that are needed and in making sure that the primary 
producers get the return that they want. 
 
That’s the kind of support I’m hoping that we’re going to get 
from this new federal government. And I can tell you, reflecting 
on yesterday’s meetings, that we were well heard in Ottawa 
when we met with members of the opposition caucuses. They 
heard clearly what the need is in this province. And I can tell 
you as well that with an extended meeting with the federal 
minister where we get along — I just need to say this for the 
opposition’s benefit — we get along very well. We were well 
heard at that meeting, and we have some hope that this new 
government is going to respond positively to our ask which 
would be for 575 million new dollars, emergency dollars to 
flow into Saskatchewan — 1.6 billion across the country for 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

grains and oilseeds. That is a reasonable ask, Mr. Speaker, an 
ask that needs to be responded to positively. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I can tell you, coming home we have greater hope than we 
did when we left because of the respectful listen that we got all 
across the political spectrum from government members, from 
opposition members. And I am thankful for that responsive ear. 
And I think our Saskatchewan MPs are going to do everything 
they can, whether they are Liberal or Conservative. They’re 
going to do everything they can to try and make sure that 
Saskatchewan gets this payment. And I’m thankful for their 
responsiveness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we know over many 
years that we have been dealing with a mentality in Ottawa that 
has been pushing a 60/40 split of agriculture programs on the 
people of this province and on the provinces in total. And I can 
tell you that there is not a province, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t 
looked at that and said this is unaffordable. 
 
Now if the other provinces are saying that a 60/40 split is 
unaffordable, then, Mr. Speaker, in a province where we have 
43 per cent to 45 per cent of the arable agricultural land, and we 
have 30 per cent of Canada’s cattle herd, clearly, clearly 60/40 
is not fair for the people of Saskatchewan. And we need a 
change in that formula, and we will continue to press for a 
change. And I will not apologize. And I expect, Mr. Speaker, 
that the people sitting across from us agree that 60/40 is not 
right and that we need to push and challenge on that front on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the changes in property taxation, with the 
support that we have been providing over these past few years, 
we know that this province is coming to the table to support our 
farmers, and we are calling for significantly more from our 
federal government. But we will continue to be there and fulfill 
our commitments and go beyond those commitments in this 
coming year. 
 
We have moved the agenda ahead on CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] quite significantly, and we’re 
quite sure that we will still have CAIS pretty much unrevised in 
the upcoming year. 
 
But we’ve moved the agenda ahead by fully funding CAIS ’05, 
announcing that full funding in the third quarter of last year. 
And in moving that agenda ahead, there has been a clear 
commitment from our Finance minister that we will not 
backtrack, that we will be announcing our funding by the third 
quarter of this year. And I can tell you that that has provided 
significant relief to farmers to know that they will be hearing 
well ahead of what they were previously about the funding for 
these programs. 
 
We will also be funding fully our commitments to the crop 
insurance program, and I might add that we will also be paying 
down the debt in crop insurance and continuing to try and 
construct a crop insurance program that will meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan producers. 

In addition to the $200 million that we provide to CAIS and 
crop insurance, we also provide an additional $107 million for 
topping up the ’03 CAIS program, 75 million for topping up the 
’04 CAIS program, and 80 million, as I said, which we 
announced in the third quarter of last year, to top up the ’05. 
This is far over and above what the federal government said we 
would be compelled to pay to support this program; 
nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has come to 
the table, has provided the funding that’s necessary, and made 
sure that we do not shortchange the farmers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have committed also to review the CAIS 
program, to work hard to get a program that is responsive. 
There are farmers from this province, there are experts from this 
province, officials who have been working hard on the national 
CAIS review committee to try and develop a program that will 
work. 
 
We don’t know, Mr. Speaker, whether we will have the CAIS 
program a year or two from now. The federal government is 
doing some rethinking about what they said to us at the 
federal-provincial conference, and we may end up with 
something new. Mr. Speaker, if something new is put on the 
table and that something new will work better than CAIS, and if 
it will provide for farmers the support that is needed, it will be 
affordable, it will work in a timely manner, it will be WTO 
[World Trade Organization] green, Mr. Speaker, if there is a 
program that is put on the table like that, I can tell you that this 
government will be behind it. 
 
But today we have said very clearly we don’t want the baby 
thrown out with the bathwater. Anybody that would say that we 
are in favour of CAIS today would be sadly mistaken, Mr. 
Speaker. We are in favour of revising radically what CAIS is so 
that it responds to the concerns that farmers have raised, so that 
it deals with the issues of inventory valuation. But whatever the 
changes are that are made, and whenever those are made, I have 
no doubt, given our past experience, that this government will 
fully fund what is our commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been there for producers in the past. We 
will be there in the future. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we 
recognize this vitally important part of our economy and, Mr. 
Speaker, because we care about the people who are out there 
farming the land and providing at the base level, at the primary 
production level, this wealth-producing commodity, this 
wealth-producing part of our economy. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will be there for them in the years ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Through our unprecedented support 
for agriculture, we are helping to address farm income shortfalls 
due to currency appreciation, high input costs, damaging 
international subsidies, and low commodity prices. We are 
working with our federal government to try and make sure that 
these issues are addressed so that our farmers will be able to 
compete against the farmers in the US [United States] who are 
so heavily subsidized in the main commodity areas that we are 
producing in and the farmers in the EU [European Union] who 
are also heavily subsidized in those areas. 
 
But I can tell you that, working together with our provincial 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

ministers, working together with the other provinces and our 
federal government, we will fill the needs for our producers, 
Mr. Speaker. And this budget, where we have come to the table 
with 67 million new dollars for farmers through the relief on the 
education portion of property tax, indicates that we will not 
abandon the farmers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building an agriculture industry that is 
strong. We are building an agriculture industry that will have a 
future, and that future will be appealing to young people. We 
are doing that through our continued funding of research. 
Research has shown that we can build a stronger and stronger 
industry, and for every dollar that we invest in research and 
development there is a $40 return. That, Mr. Speaker, is a 
tremendous return and has impact on where farming is going in 
the future and where this industry will go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Through research we are keeping pace and in fact leading our 
competitors on many fronts. We are introducing new varieties. 
We are introducing new commodities. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
can be and we will be competitive. 
 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food budgets more than $12 
million annually to ongoing research support. And when 
combined with funding for individual research projects, that 
figure climbed to over 17 million in 2005. That is the highest 
level in six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to believe that agriculture plays an 
important role in building the new economy through 
value-added activities and initiatives such as our expanded meat 
processing initiatives. This budget includes 3.5 million for the 
meat strategy, including 400,000 for the food centre in 
Saskatoon — such a vital part in the link of developing new 
products — 400,000 for the food centre and 1.1 million new 
dollars for the toll processing centre which, Mr. Speaker, again 
is a vital link in helping bring new product to market. It brings 
this product to market as CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency] approved so that it can be sold not just provincially but 
can be sold anywhere in the nation or in the world. And this, 
Mr. Speaker, clearly is a good investment in our meat industry 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that as we build this industry, we will see more 
value-added development. We will feed and finish more cattle, 
more hogs, more chickens, more livestock overall in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, that will be a benefit to all farmers 
and all people of Saskatchewan, and I’m thankful for the 
investments that have been made through this budget. 
 
Across all of government work continues on capturing the 
benefits of green energy — biofuels that can be produced from 
the crops we grow to meet the world’s hunger for clean and 
dependable energy resources. Mr. Speaker, we have people who 
have invested thousands and hundreds of thousands of dollars in 
these biofuels industry, in research and development. We have 
farmers who have invested heavily in them. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this government works with those people as we seek to continue 
to build the biofuels industry, and we will continue to provide 
that support. 
 
We’ve seen the effect of that support in the new ethanol factory 
at Weyburn, the NorAmera factory there which is producing 

ethanol. And we will also see soon on line the 130- to 
150-million-litre facility that Husky is building at Lloydminster. 
 
Irrigation also brings us high-value crops and a different type of 
crop that can be valued-added — $5.2 million in our 
Agriculture budget for irrigation and also a commitment to 
work with the people to develop new infrastructure, new 
opportunity, and to help clarify the kind of crops that can be 
used to help strengthen agriculture. Our new irrigation 
development branch will create a link between irrigation and 
value-added opportunities, including livestock expansion and 
higher-value crops. 
 
We also very clearly value the organic industry. We have put 
150,000 new dollars into new organic development funding. 
This is an industry where we see, in terms of the markets, 20 
per cent growth every year in the European market, 20 per cent 
growth or slightly under that in the American market. The 
demand is there for organic products and in Saskatchewan we 
have a growing organics industry. We’re investing to make sure 
that that industry can keep growing. 
 
And we’re also working with our Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership to make sure that those people who are 
producing organic products have the vehicle by which they can 
also market those products into the world where there is 
continued demand. 
 
We will work on nutraceutical development where we’re taking 
portions of these grains and oilseeds and that we’re using those 
to help provide functional foods and nutraceuticals also which 
are in huge demand in the health food sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many positive things that are going on 
in terms of agriculture research and development. But where the 
link is broken and what is so important is that we get the 
support we need from our federal government so that the 
primary producers can keep going, so that there is a desire to 
stay on the farm, so that there is a desire amongst young people 
to take over the farm. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that with our 
provincial commitment if we get corresponding levels of per 
capita commitment from the federal government, that I tell you 
it will make a huge impact on this province. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan is paying four times the federal per 
capita amount to try and sustain agriculture. And I can tell you 
that if the federal government came to the table at the levels that 
this province is at the table, we would see unprecedented 
growth in support in this industry. And we will continue to 
press unapologetically for further support from our federal 
government. We need it; the producers of this province need it. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people who are in 
place in the federal government are understanding more clearly 
how vital this is to the whole economy of Canada. And I believe 
that we will see greater levels of support in the months and 
years ahead, support that really will help the farmers of this 
province and every province in Canada find a sustainable 
industry that provides a profit for them. 
 
We’ll continue to work with farmers to make sure that that 
happens. We’ll continue to work with the federal government to 
make sure that happens. And we will work with our provinces 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

across this nation. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we know this is 
a vital part of our economy and we are committed to providing 
the necessary supports. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This budget provides new 
support in terms of $67 million, and for that $67 million I am 
very thankful and I know that it will help many farmers. It’s not 
the overall solution by any means. We know that there is much 
more needed. But at $700 million last year from this provincial 
budget, at 1.32 billion over the last couple of years, we’ve been 
there. We will be there in the future and we will build and 
strengthen this industry together. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I will be voting in 
favour of the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that was without a doubt the most amazing 
speech I’ve heard from an Ag minister in this province for a 
long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And I almost — almost — went to sleep 
when I keep hearing these same numbers, Mr. Speaker, and the 
minister say that the numbers are clear. 
 
Well let’s talk about numbers, Mr. Speaker, because in the 
budget itself, in the budget address, they talk about this budget 
provides $98.8 million for base funding for CAIS. Let’s talk 
about CAIS for a minute. And the minister can contradict these 
numbers if they’re wrong, but I believe they’re right, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Last year there was $98.8 million for CAIS program but then 
there was also additional money put in later in the year. Some 
years it’s the 11th hour; it’s at the last minute. Last year I 
believe it was halfway through the summer before they put it in, 
but there was another $154 million put into CAIS funding from 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see this current Ag minister 
today show me in the budgetary Estimates book where the 
additional funding is, because if I’m reading these numbers 
right — and the minister can correct me if I’m wrong — but the 
amount of total spending on agriculture from the provincial 
government, this NDP government, is $264 million. Now that’s 
away less than last year. Last year it says here it was 424 
million. 
 
Well that’s about $150 million less than last year, but that’s 
about 350 less than the minister just said. The Minister of 
Agriculture just said his government is spending $700 million 
on agriculture. That is the farthest thing from the truth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I have ever heard. 
 

And the farmers of Saskatchewan won’t fall for it. At a time of 
need when the CAIS program is not working for farmers but it’s 
the only program they’ve got, we need this government and we 
need that minister to come to the table for farmers. And what do 
they do? Remembering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government had a $1 billion windfall from oil and gas, at a time 
of huge amounts of money, mountains of money to spend, what 
did they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They cut the agriculture 
budget for the farmers of Saskatchewan to the tune of $166 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is amazing, Mr. Speaker, in a time of need for 
rural Saskatchewan and farm families in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers are going to the bank right now and 
they’ve been going to the bank trying to arrange operating 
loans. How on earth do they get an operating loan from their 
banker when their provincial government won’t even fully fund 
their share of the CAIS program, won’t even come close to 
funding their full share? 
 
And what I found amazing is that the minister was just down to 
the federal government asking for help for Saskatchewan 
farmers, which they desperately need, Mr. Speaker. And the 
farmers of this province were relying on that minister to go 
down there. But I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, how that minister 
could go with a straight face asking the federal government to 
put additional dollars into agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan when he just finished cutting the budget in 
Saskatchewan for agriculture by $166 million. That is one of 
the most hypocritical things I have every seen this NDP 
government do, and they’ve done a number of them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Farmers in Saskatchewan are up against the wall right now and, 
in fact in many cases, are having a hard time paying their power 
bills, their gas bills, and being able to buy groceries for their 
families, Mr. Speaker. And we have a provincial government 
that sees fit to slash the Ag budget in the province of 
Saskatchewan to the tune that it’s never been done before in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
For that minister to get up and say we’re spending $700 million 
— that government is, on agriculture — is a complete myth, 
Mr. Speaker. Because right here in their budget, their estimates 
for 2006-2007 is $264 million. And the Ag minister hollers over 
that we don’t understand it. 
 
Well the auditor for the province understands this because I’m 
using numbers from him for last year. These are audited 
numbers; 2000 and 2005 revised estimates for the province of 
Saskatchewan, 424 million. And what do we do? We’re 
spending $160 million less for the farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
What that tells you, Mr. Speaker, is that government and that 
minister really don’t care about rural Saskatchewan, really don’t 
care about farmers in Saskatchewan. In fact, I believe they wish 
farmers would go away so we wouldn’t even have to deal with 
them, and we could just have the cities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t stop there with the CAIS program and 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

fully funding the CAIS program. What they’ve done to crop 
insurance is another thing, Mr. Speaker. We go on in last year. 
The minister has been bragging about them spending $100 
million for the crop insurance program. Well let’s compare that 
number to last year’s numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year the province of Saskatchewan put $112 million in for 
the crop insurance program. So again we see a cut to the Ag 
budget for the province of Saskatchewan to the tune of another 
$12 million. And, Mr. Speaker, I would think when the 
budget’s being drawn up that the cabinet ministers around the 
cabinet table each have to lobby for the people that are under 
their leadership. And the leadership coming from that minister 
has fell far short of what we need for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For a minister, when there’s a $1 billion windfall in gas and oil 
money, to come away from the cabinet table with $166 million 
less for the area that he represents shows that he is a complete 
failure when it comes to supporting farmers and supporting 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The crop insurance program — let’s go a little further with that. 
It wasn’t long ago we were asking the minister to delay the 
premiums that were due from last year. And all this does is 
really show how farmers are really up against it in the province 
of Saskatchewan and couldn’t pay their premiums from last 
year. 
 
So what we asked the minister to do, Mr. Speaker, to maybe do 
a few things that could help farmers in Saskatchewan, one of 
them being . . . is delaying the premium to be paid for say two, 
maybe three months, to give them time if possible to find some 
of that money to pay their crop insurance. And what did that 
minister say? Absolutely no way because it’s not fair to the rest 
of the farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, farmers in this province are up against the 
wall and need help. And this was an option that wouldn’t cost 
the NDP money, something they don’t like to spend in rural 
Saskatchewan. They don’t like to spend on agriculture. And the 
minister, knowing full well this wasn’t a cost measure but it 
was something they could do out of the goodness of their heart 
to help farmers, and said no — can’t do it. In fact a letter from 
the one farmer I got here and it’s from Crop Insurance. And it 
said that if you don’t make arrangements to make this payment 
by March 31 your crop insurance contract is cancelled effective 
first 2006. 
 
Well isn’t that something. Doesn’t that show compassion from 
this provincial government, Mr. Speaker, when there’s 
something they could do that doesn’t cost money and that could 
actually help farmers. And what they’re doing is actually 
putting the last nail in the coffin of farmers out there. Because 
it’s not just that crop insurance premium, Mr. Speaker. It’s also 
a cash advance that farmers can take out in the spring. But if 
you’re not in crop insurance you’ve no need to even apply for 
the cash advance because you can’t get it. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that you can’t do, is you can’t go 
to the bank. Because if you don’t have crop insurance, the first 
thing the bank is going to say, you’re not in the crop insurance 
program; I’m not lending you any operating money for the year. 

So in essence, what this minister and that government’s actually 
done is taken about the 1,500 farmers that haven’t been able to 
make their premiums, pay their premiums, they, number one, 
don’t have crop insurance. They don’t get the cash advance. 
They probably don’t get an operating loan. So, Mr. Speaker, 
here we go again. Another nail in the coffin of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the minister keeps hollering over: what about numbers? 
Well we saw how the minister deals with numbers when he said 
they’re spending 700 million on agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s lucky if it’s even a third 
of that. And he knows full well, and the Finance minister 
certainly knows because he was the guy that drew up his budget 
— his own personal budget that he drew up that he’s trying to 
take credit for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan cannot afford this 
government for any longer. They’ve gone for 15 years under the 
leadership of this NDP government and they’re at a time when 
they have no room left to go. They’re right against the wall. 
There’s farmers declaring bankruptcy. There’s farmers going 
under. And what a time when they need help from their own 
provincial government — and the federal government, I might 
add; I’ll agree with the minister on that. But at home, the things 
that we could do like reinstating spot loss hail, helping these 
guys with their premiums, Mr. Speaker, and the list just goes on 
and on and on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, due to the shortage of time, I’d just like to 
take a minute or two to talk about this budget when it comes to 
constituents of mine. And I was listening very attentive that day 
to what the Finance minister was saying and I was thinking, 
now what does this budget do for the people in my 
constituency, the working families out there? In many cases the 
husband’s working, the wife’s working, trying to raise a young 
family; both paying income tax, both paying all kinds of tax out 
there. Where was the break for them? 
 
And I am thinking of . . . in my constituency I have two mines 
out there. The Esterhazy mine’s out there where there’s fairly 
good wages paid but very good taxes also paid from these 
employees. Where was the break for these people, Mr. Speaker? 
Where, when this government has a $1 billion windfall of gas 
and oil money, where was the break for these people that have 
been paying these high taxes for the last 15 years? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no break for RM employees, for 
town employees, for everyone out there in my constituency and 
for that matter across this province that pay taxes. Where is the 
break for these people? At what point are they going to get a 
break, Mr. Speaker? How many billions of dollar windfall 
before we actually see them get some benefit out of this 
government? And these are the same people, Mr. Speaker, at 
the same time there’s no tax break for them, the waiting lists 
stay as long for health care. 
 
All of the things that they deserve out there should be addressed 
in this budget and are not addressed, Mr. Speaker. So the cuts 
just keep going on and on and on. And, Mr. Speaker, I could 
add a lot more. 
 
One thing I’d like to talk about is highways, Mr. Speaker. I look 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

at the condition of highways in my constituency and then I look 
at the budget to see how it’s going to address the situation out 
there. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to the Highways minister 
about the possibilities of closing highway depots and satellite 
shops out there and we’re still not sure what they’re doing. The 
Minister of Highways made a commitment that under his 
leadership and as Minister of Highways none of these things 
would be closed. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be contrary to what a study 
that they’ve done and a projection that they’ve done that they 
are closing these depots. And I hope the minister will stick to 
his word because our highways — especially in my 
constituency and many of the members on this side — are in 
atrocious condition. They’re falling apart. We bounce home on 
them every weekend. Now when the legislature sits and the 
spring of the year, this is without a doubt the worst time for 
highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that after three or four deficit 
budgets and now we have a windfall of $1 billion, that the 
average person in my constituency sees absolutely no benefit 
from this budget, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure you will 
understand by my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 
supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to say how pleased I am to be joining this 
budget debate. And I want to begin by saying some thank yous 
to some people who I owe very much to, and that’s the people 
of Prince Albert Northcote who have sent me here again. And I 
want to thank them for that. 
 
I want to tell them how much I do respect the work that they do 
to make our community a strong and a healthy and a vibrant 
place. And I also want to tell them that I know we’re going 
through some difficult times with respect to Weyerhaeuser’s 
decision to close the pulp mill in our area. But I want to 
encourage them, and I want to say to them that we’ll get 
through this and we’ll come out with a healthy forest industry 
and again we’ll be creating thousands of jobs in that forest 
sector in our province and other provinces around northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity last night to attend to our 
annual business award celebration, the Sam McLeod Business 
Awards. And I want to say how encouraged I was as I passed 
through the crowd with the Deputy Premier, and met with 
business leaders in Prince Albert, their response to this 
provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the comments that we’ve been seeing from 
the Saskatchewan Party during this budget debate — and 
occasionally they’ll speak to the budget in question period — 
the people of Prince Albert are very optimistic. And they’re 
very thankful that the economy has allowed us to deliver the 
largest corporate tax cut in the history of this province. And I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, I along with them am very proud of 

what this province has been able to achieve. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that it’s not universally 
approved. I’m told by members of the Saskatchewan Party that 
they’ll be voting against this budget. And that’s unfortunate, 
Mr. Speaker, because this is one of the — in my opinion — one 
of the best budgets that this province has ever delivered for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 20 years that I’ve been in this legislature, I 
will have to say that there are two budgets that really do stick in 
my mind and two budgets that I’m extremely proud to have 
been a part of. And I want to refer to the first balanced budget 
under this government in 2002, one of the first of 13 
consecutive balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. And how proud all 
of us in this province need to be for what we’ve achieved — on 
top of balancing our budgets, to be able to continue to pay down 
on an annual basis our debt. And so I want to say to them, thank 
you for their sacrifice. Thanks for their work that allowed this 
to happen. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And so that brings us, Mr. Speaker, to this year’s budget. This 
is a result of many, many years of work. It’s a result of many 
decisions made by this administration over the years. It’s a 
result of the foresight that was shown in terms of tax reductions. 
And we’ve gone through a list of them. 
 
And we have made this a very competitive province. We’ve 
made this a very good place to invest. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that this budget adds to what we have done in the past. 
But more importantly, it’s a result of the foresight and the 
economic planning and the planning that we have done in 
previous years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that Saskatchewan people are 
hard-working. It’s no secret that Saskatchewan people are 
willing to share and want to see a fair distribution of wealth. 
And I want to say, more than cutting business taxes this budget 
showed support for the poorest in our society in a very major 
way. And so I think it really does speak to what Saskatchewan 
people and who Saskatchewan people really are all about. 
 
I indicated that last evening I attended to the Sam McLeod 
Business Awards in Prince Albert. And every year there’s a 
Legacy Award and last night one of the business families in our 
community was given that award. And I want to say how well 
deserved the award is. 
 
It’s a family business that I’m referring to, Mr. Speaker. Ed 
Tash and his family were recognized for 26 years of service to 
our community. And I thought what a wonderful legacy these 
people are leaving for their children who are now involved in 
this business, as they’re nearing retirement. Their family is all 
engaged in working in our province and creating wealth, 
generating job opportunities for other people. And isn’t that 
what Saskatchewan really is all about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Having been part of the 
small-business community all of my life, Mr. Speaker, my son 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

and daughter-in-law are now operating a business in Prince 
Albert that’s a result of the third generation in our family. My 
father started that business in 1970, and we’ve operated 
continually in that province — myself and my wife, and now 
my son and his wife — and 36 years of generating jobs and 
working with our community to make it a better place. I had 
some pride in what the Tash family were able to achieve. It 
meant very much to me last night. 
 
What I want to say though is this is a result of hard work. Their 
success didn’t come by accident. It came by good planning. 
And that’s the same kind of success that this budget is going to 
deliver for our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just about 
business taxes. Obviously this budget has looked in so many 
different areas: increased money for education, increased 
money for health care, increased money for highways. And I 
will say a few words about the Department of Highways, one of 
the responsibilities that I have. 
 
The largest budget in the history of this province allocated to 
the Department of Highways — a 17 per cent increase over last 
year — and, Mr. Speaker, that money won’t fix all the roads. 
And I recognize that. We recognize that. But certainly it’s a 
good base to create that economic tool for our province, and I 
think it’s a darn good start, and I’m quite proud of what the 
department officials have been able to achieve. And I’m pleased 
with the allocation that came from the Department of Finance 
and the new Finance minister. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I said it’s not all about business. This is 
about working people as well. My colleague, the member from 
Regina Northeast, has been a tireless advocate of support for 
tools of the trade for working people who have never been able 
to write them off as small-business people do or as large 
corporations do. These people have to pay, in many cases, 
thousands of dollars in order to have the tools that they need to 
do their work, to perform their work. And for the first time ever 
in Canada, they’re now able to, as a result of the work done — 
by primarily the member from Regina Northeast — they’re now 
able to use those as a taxable expenditure, an exemption from 
tax. 
 
And so I said, Mr. Speaker, the group of people who have been 
working on the government side to put this budget together can 
all be proud of what they’ve been able to achieve. 
 
So where did this money come from, Mr. Speaker? It came 
from oil and natural gas. And that’s occasioned obviously by 
the high price of crude oil, but it’s more than that because if the 
drilling activity and the production capacity hadn’t been there, 
the money wouldn’t have flowed. And if you look at the 
revenue that’s come as a result of our other resources, some of 
our other resources, from potash and from uranium — record 
activity. Record investment I believe will come in a few years 
to ensure that we remain the world’s largest producer of potash 
and that we remain the world’s largest producer of uranium. 
And I want to say that working with my colleagues to ensure 
that we’ve got a good and a positive investment climate gives 
me a great deal of pride. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say as well a few words about some of 
the criticisms made by members of the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition. Mr. Speaker, unlike the business community that I 
referred to in Prince Albert, these people have not had a 
positive word to say about this budget, with the exception of the 
tax changes that Mr. Vicq, Jack Vicq and his commission 
recommended which they have the audacity, they have the gall 
to take credit for. 
 
Mr. Vicq, Mr. Speaker, didn’t need them to make his 
recommendations to government. Mr. Speaker, he understood 
the nature of this economy. He understood what it would take in 
terms of making us more competitive, just as he did when he 
made recommendations to government in other tax-related 
matters some years ago. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hear the former leader of the opposition 
chirp from his seat. And he’ll have his opportunity to speak, I 
would assume, in due course. Mr. Speaker, he is . . . and will 
choose obviously to vote against this budget because he has 
never had anything positive to say in his political career that I 
know of. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll set that to the side because I 
want to speak about the good things of this province and the 
good people of this province and what they’ve allowed to 
happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say how it is quite defining when 
you listen to their criticisms and when you listen to their 
defence of past performance of themselves and of their caucus. 
And I’ve just heard one of the members stand up here today and 
talk about indexing social assistance wages and cheques. And I 
find this really interesting because it was he and his colleagues 
who were advocates of a $50 million cut to those very same 
people in the last provincial election, led by that member right 
over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so they can chirp from their seats, Mr. Speaker, but the 
facts are the facts, and you can’t hide from them. Those are the 
realities. And that’s what, Mr. Speaker, these people were all 
about. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, this is for the business community, 
this budget. And it’s for those of our families who are on our 
social assistance programs, on SAP [Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan] and TEA [transitional employment allowance]. But it’s 
also for students, Mr. Speaker: another two-year freeze on 
tuition. And what a signal that is for our young, bright people 
who are attending post-secondary facilities and who are getting 
their education here in this province. Here you are recognizing 
the increasing costs of getting an education, and this budget 
recognizes that by freezing for two years the tuition. More 
funding seats, Mr. Speaker, in our educational institutions, 
32,000 university seats, 34,000 training spaces, new seats for 
the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, it is an obviously balanced approach 
to delivering a budget. And the members opposite . . . there was 
a rant just recently here with respect to our farm families — 
$97.3 million in revenue sharing to municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s an awful lot of money. The reducing education property 
tax on agricultural land by 67 million, Mr. Speaker; $98.8 
million for base funding of CAIS; $100 million, Mr. Speaker, 
for crop insurance. And these members, Mr. Speaker, it’s never 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

enough. It’s never enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that farm families are appreciative of the 
changes that have been made with respect to the education tax 
on agriculture. Even if that’s not the message that these 
members opposite put forward, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
you and I want to say to all of the people of Saskatchewan that 
this budget is very much a support budget for agriculture. 
 
The comments that my colleagues have made span sort of 
across the piece. I want to close, Mr. Speaker, just by saying a 
few words with respect to the new forest secretariat that has 
been established to deal with the changes in our forest industry 
occasioned by Weyerhaeuser’s announcement that they will be 
selling a pulp mill. It’s not only my hometown of Prince Albert 
that’s impacted, Mr. Speaker. This goes across the province. It 
goes from Meadow Lake through to Big River. Towns like 
Glaslyn, Meath Park are all impacted. There are companies that 
are outside of our area that will be impacted in a negative way 
by these actions, Saskatoon as an example. Saskatoon 
Chemicals, a 100-and-some people working at that facility, they 
will be impacted as well. So it’s important that we do what we 
can to help to facilitate the development of a Weyerhaeuser sale 
process in a positive way. 
 
And I want to thank the people in the different communities 
who I’ve spoken to from Big River to Meadow Lake to Carrot 
River and through Hudson Bay. And I do appreciate the impact 
on all of those families who are impacted. 
 
But I want to say, unlike members on the other side, we’re 
optimistic that we will work with Weyerhaeuser and we will 
find a solution, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll find a positive benefit to 
these changes. I’m convinced that we’re going to position this 
province with a renewed forest industry that will create jobs and 
support families and ensure that they too will be part of the path 
to opportunity and that the forest sector workers will not be left 
behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is I think pretty much what I want to say 
about the budget initiatives. I want to say that I appreciate the 
positive reaction that the general public has had towards this 
budget. I want to say that there is no way I would be supporting 
the opposition’s amendment to this budget. 
 
I will be voting for the budget with pride, Mr. Speaker, because 
that’s what the people of Prince Albert Northcote would expect 
me to do. They see a positive budget. They see a path towards 
future economic development. They see this province putting 
together a future for their children, just like the Tash family. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the naysayers on that side can 
be where they are, and they can sit in their comfortable pew in 
opposition where you criticize everything and nothing ever 
works right because that’s the kind of folks they are. They 
deserve to be there, Mr. Speaker. I promise you this. After the 
next election, the people will give them the same opportunity 
they have right now, and that’s to sit and chirp from their seats 
from the opposition benches because they’ll never be over here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support this budget with pride, and I want to 
thank the people of Prince Albert Northcote for allowing me to 
do so. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 
looking forward to this opportunity to enter the debate on the 
most recent budget brought down by the NDP. And at my first 
glance of the budget I thought, how is this going to affect the 
people that I’ve been sent here to represent, the fine people of 
the Rosetown-Elrose constituency? 
 
So of course, Mr. Speaker, being on the west side of the 
province, the part of the province that has helped this NDP 
government generate more revenue than they ever dreamed they 
could have generated because of the oil and gas sector, a large 
part which comes from the riding I represent, I expected to see a 
drop in the PST, Mr. Speaker because I knew that the NDP had 
got themselves into a jam a few years ago and they had to raise 
the PST, they said, to balance the books and get themselves out 
of the mess they created. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Well here the fine folks of Rosetown-Elrose helped them out of 
that mess, and did the NDP government show any appreciation, 
any thanks and lower the PST? Not a chance, Mr. Speaker. 
They are enjoying a gravy train on the backs of the people that I 
represent, and they weren’t about to lower the PST and 
particularly help people on the west side of the province. 
 
I looked at what this budget has done for agriculture, and it’s 
not very much, Mr. Speaker. I see that almost $200 million less 
are being spent on agriculture projected in this current fiscal 
year as opposed to what was spent last year. I find that CAIS is 
not being fully funded under the budget that was brought down 
by the Finance minister the other day. 
 
I see in the budget that crop insurance is receiving fewer dollars 
to the tune of about $12 million less this year than crop 
insurance received last year. There’s no strengthening of the 
program. There’s no return to spot loss hail, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course we know coverage has been reduced in the past number 
of years, so there was nothing positive for me to take back to 
the fine people of Rosetown-Elrose when it comes to 
agriculture. 
 
I looked to see what was happening in highways, and we’ve got 
some real concerns about highways in the riding that I 
represent. And I looked to see whether they were going to 
widen and to put passing lanes on Highway 4 going through the 
South Saskatchewan River valley through the South 
Saskatchewan Landing Provincial Park, something that’s 
certainly been overdue for a long time. Didn’t see anything in 
the budget. We know that the government, the Minister of 
Highways, has the power to put that in place to protect lives, to 
protect the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. He 
refused to do that. 
 
I looked to see whether there would be some commitment to 
maintaining the highway depots in the budget, but, Mr. Speaker, 
there was none. And in fact what the budgeting and the 
department led by the Minister of Highways is doing is draining 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2006 

resources, pulling resources away from these highway depots so 
that, while they may exist as a shell, the services that are 
required from them are not being provided. 
 
I looked to see whether anything was going to happen to the 
Riverhurst ferry to improve it. Nothing in the budget. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I looked to see generally what they were going to do to 
increase the quality of our roads and our highways in 
Saskatchewan, some of which are becoming dangerous to drive 
on — saw nothing in the budget. 
 
So I thought, well we’ve seen the NDP strike out with 
agriculture. We’ve seen them strike out with highways. Now 
let’s look at health care. And I looked in the Finance minister’s 
budget to see what he was going to do to make sure there were 
more registered nurses to meet the health care demands in our 
province. The registered nurses have said that we needed 600 
additional positions filled. 
 
I saw nothing in the budget. So when I talked to health care 
people in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, unfortunately I 
cannot bring them the good news that they were hoping to hear, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was hoping that the construction of the Outlook hospital 
would be accelerated instead of seeing the project dragged out 
and the costs increase and the officials from Health going back 
to the community and asking for more and more money. The 
last time I spoke with the fine folks in Outlook, they told me 
that the government was demanding that an architect be 
contracted with to check the work of the other architect who 
had done the drawings for the building. 
 
So we had architects doing the work of architects who had 
probably done the work of engineers. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that due diligence needs to be done, but the people of 
Outlook were frustrated at the lengthy and complicated process 
which was adding costs to the project that they would have to 
bear at the local level. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was hoping that we would see a 
commitment by the Health minister to move away from two 
tiered health care, but instead we’re seeing the opposite. We’re 
seeing in fact two-tier health care and the refusal to fund 
Avastin, a cancer drug. We also see two tiered health care in 
Rosetown-Elrose because the costs of ambulance services are 
not fully covered by our health care system. 
 
And so those folks who happen to live outside of the major 
health care centres are indeed forced to pay much more for their 
health care, particularly emergency health care required from an 
ambulance, than are other people in the province of 
Saskatchewan that are closer to those facilities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, then I thought, well is there something here 
for long-term care? Because as you know, I’ve mentioned many 
times I have constituents that require long-term health care and 
they are forced into a dingy basement in the Rosetown facility. 
And that community has been pleading with the Minister of 
Health to do something about it. That community has been 
crying for some compassion and for some decency from the 
NDP government, but it is not forthcoming in this budget. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I looked at education. And I see that in spite of 
a commitment from the prior Education minister to fix the 
foundation grant, there was nothing in this budget, and we’re 
going to be back to zero-base budgeting for the large district of 
education that exists in my constituency. 
 
We are seeing a potential of forced school closures. As a result 
we’re seeing a starvation of funding for the education system in 
the part of Saskatchewan that I represent. And it’s of course 
compounded by the fact that we’re seeing the province as a 
whole be depopulated by the wrong-headed policies of the NDP 
government, and thus we’re seeing the loss of teachers as there 
are fewer students attending these schools. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s hard to be optimistic about a budget when we see no 
commitment to reverse the depopulation trend in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought it was rather humorous that the 
government made a commitment to immigration — which by 
the way I strongly support and would like to see more of — but 
their commitment was to bring in 5,000 immigrants into 
Saskatchewan on an annual basis. And yet their own job 
projections in the budget only predicted that 3,200 jobs would 
be created in this province. 
 
In other words, they want to bring people into Saskatchewan to 
be unemployed because their wrong-headed policies are not 
creating the jobs that are required to employ people already in 
the province, let alone others who would come into the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the NDP created quite a mess. Not much good news in this 
budget for the people of Rosetown-Elrose and certainly not 
much good news in the entire province. So what did the 
Minister of Finance decide he was going to do about it? 
 
Well he decided, I’m going to spend more money advertising 
this budget and promoting this budget than we’ve seen in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. He said he’s going to 
spend a half million dollars, get his mug, face on the . . . get his 
mug, pardon me, on the television, his face — Mr. Speaker, I 
know you want me to be clear on that — on the television 
trying to cosmetically make the budget look better than it really 
was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his attitude ran away with him. And he got in front 
of the television cameras in a scrum, and he started talking 
about the budget and why it was this way and why it was that 
way. And he said, well because it’s my budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the arrogance of the Finance minister to think that 
in dealing with billions and billions of dollars in this budget that 
they are somehow his and he can dispense with them as he 
pleases in the way he wants without being fully accountable and 
without being at least a little bit humble, realizing the labour, 
the sweat and toil that has been undertaken by the people of 
Saskatchewan, the taxpayers who have to fork out this money. 
He can stand up and say, it was my budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a sign that that government is far past 
its due date, and it’s time to go. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know. I hear rumours that that Minister of Finance has 
aspirations to replace the Premier. I understand that there’s a 



April 12, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

little coup going on, a little bit like the some of the fellows in 
Alberta that are trying to work behind the scenes to oust 
Premier Klein. And I understand that the Minister of Finance 
may be heading up one of those large teams to oust the current 
Premier. 
 
But I’ve got to admit he really did his campaign damage when 
he got in front of television cameras and bragged about, my 
budget, Mr. Speaker. In fact when I look at this NDP 
government, there’s a lot that reminds me of the 1980s. You 
know these folks on the NDP side, they will just not let the old 
Devine government be buried as it should be. It was a 
government of the past just like the Blakeney government was a 
government of the past, and Douglas and all of those . . . 
Thatcher, all of those. But they’ve got to keep trying to dig up 
the old Devine government. 
 
Well when you look at the Devine government, they ran 
deficits. They ran deficits, Mr. Speaker, just like the Getty 
government did in Alberta at the same time. The Peterson 
government in Ontario did that. Mr. Speaker, federally, the 
Trudeau and the Mulroney governments were running up 
deficits. Of course the NDP, not to be outdone, ran up huge 
deficits in British Columbia. Dave Barrett was a deficit minded 
premier. And plus he had the Bingogate scandal — you know, 
some things that make Devine’s administration look pretty 
tame. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, then there was Bob Rae. He was the 
man of the ’90s that was trapped back in the ’80s. And he ran 
up one of the hugest deficits that any Canadian jurisdiction has 
ever seen. In fact that’s why Mr. Rae only lasted one term and 
they booted him out and they’ve never talked about voting NDP 
in Ontario since. 
 
Well I thought we kind of buried those administrations. I 
thought, you know, we’re going to put Bob Rae and Grant 
Devine and Getty and Dave Barrett and all those people, we’d 
leave them to the historians. And those of us who are worried 
about today’s problems would look for today’s solutions. But 
not the NDP folk across the way. Mr. Speaker. They’re right 
back in the ’80s. 
 
And we had a briefing, and I sat in on that briefing when we 
switched our accounting system to summary financial 
statements. And I remember, Mr. Speaker, not only the 
Provincial Auditor but members of the Finance department, 
staff of the Finance department in briefing us said, lookit, do 
you want to know what the financial status of the province of 
Saskatchewan is? Do you want to get it in a nutshell? Those 
officials said, well you turn to the summary statement of 
changes in net debt. You look at that page in the budget and 
that’ll tell you all you need to know. Now this is the minister’s 
own staff, his own staff, that are telling us this. 
 
And so that’s what I did when the budget came out. The first 
thing I turned to was that line that says net debt, end of year, 
and also decrease, increase in net debt. And lo and behold, Mr. 
Speaker, lo and behold, the increase in the net debt according to 
the minister’s own budget numbers — the minister’s own 
budget numbers as we were directed to look by the minister’s 
own staff — show an increase in Saskatchewan’s debt of $288 
million. Welcome back to the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are 

back to their old tricks. They’re trying to outdo the old Devine 
government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the rest of the world has moved on and 
realizes that those are mistakes. Except for the NDP. They’re 
right back there. They’re 30 years out of date, Mr. Speaker. 
They just don’t get it and they’re hurting the province of 
Saskatchewan as a result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan deserves much better than this 
budget. We will grant that we needed to see the reduction in 
business taxes, but that was only a portion of what was 
required. We need a budget that helps Saskatchewan citizens, 
that helps the farm families of the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency, that helps the construction workers and other 
industry workers across this province. 
 
We’re looking at what’s happening in northern Saskatchewan 
with a loss of hundreds, I would suggest even thousands of jobs 
on the closing of the Weyerhaeuser plant. I remember just a few 
short years ago, the NDP promised to create 10,000 jobs in the 
forestry sector. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, their problem was they had a number, but 
they didn’t have a plan. They thought they could bring in 
negative legislation. They thought they could bring back the 
agenda of the 1980s and still create 10,000 jobs in the forestry 
sector. We look, Mr. Speaker, at the latest statistics and we see 
that Saskatchewan is currently losing jobs. 
 
They are losing jobs under an NDP government that is back in 
the ’80s that has buried its head in the sand with a lava lamp 
shining off in the horizon, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are still stuck 
in the days of shag rugs and the Bee Gees, Mr. Speaker. And as 
a result, Saskatchewan struggles. 
 
We see the other provinces around us. They’re in the next 
century. We look at Manitoba. Even with an NDP government 
Manitoba is creating jobs. NDP Manitoba doesn’t have 
uranium, doesn’t have the potash resources, the oil, gas 
resources that we have in Saskatchewan, and yet Manitoba’s 
economy is outstripping Saskatchewan’s because this is the 
most outdated, awkward, out-of-touch government in the 
province of Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s simply the reason why I cannot 
support this budget, but I’m very pleased to support the 
amendment. And I hope the members on the other side who 
have also spoken some concerns about this budget might 
reconsider their blind obedience to the NDP Party and consider 
voting with the Saskatchewan Party on that amendment. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being very near the hour of 5 o’clock, 
this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . This House stands adjourned until 
10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1142 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Wartman........................................................................................................................................................................1143, 1153 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1154 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1159 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Citizen of the Year Dinner Honours Anglin Lake Residents 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 2005 Melfort and District Chamber of Commerce Awards 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Saskatchewan First Nation Winter Games 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Parkland Regional Science Fair 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Accuracy of Member’s Comments 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Congratulations to the Shaunavon Hometown Club 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Yorkton Terriers Win Hockey Championship 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1146 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Advertising Campaign for Provincial Budget 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1146 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1146 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
 Funding for Treatment of Autism 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
 Plans for Economic Growth 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
 Bill No. 56 — The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
 Bill No. 57 — The Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
 Bill No. 60 — The Evidence Act/Loi sur la preuve 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1152 



 

 Bill No. 61 — The Evidence Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1153 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1153 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1153 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1153 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1154 
MOTIONS 
 Reappointment to Public and Private Rights Board 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1154 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1163 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1165 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1169 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1173 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




