
















































Hansard: November 16, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 14A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 425 
 November 16, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, this morning before we proceed to 
petitions, I wish to table the 2005-2006 annual report of the 
Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A petition to present on 
behalf of the residents of Whitewood, Cowesses, and 
Broadview regarding dialysis in the Broadview area. And I read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to implement a strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills 
concerned about the condition of Highway 18. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Consul. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
too to present on behalf of citizens from around the province 
regarding the drug Avastin. And it’s amazing how many 
petitions and how many people have actually signed these 
petitions as they’ve been presented day in and day out for the 
last number of months. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just ask members to be as 

concise as possible. When we’re presenting petitions, we want 
to make sure that we are not entering debate. I recognize the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let me get right to the point. The prayer 
reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Carnduff, 
Carievale, Alida, Antler, and Gainsborough. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present this morning on behalf of a constituent from 
Carnduff. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Saltcoats, Carnduff, Glen Ewen, Gainsborough, Carievale. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Kelvington, 
from Okla, from Nut Mountain, and from Lintlaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned with gravel highways. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

gravel portion of Highway 99 between junction 6 and 
Craven. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Craven, Quinton, Southey, and Earl Grey. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise today 
with a petition of citizens that are concerned with the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the signatures demonstrate how well 
travelled this highway is. They are from Blaine Lake, Warman, 
Naicam, Saskatoon, Prud’homme, Humboldt, Meacham, 
Craven, Cut Knife, Colonsay, Wadena, Quill Lake, Canora, 
Viscount, and Bruno.  
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand to present a petition on behalf of the people in my 
constituency that are very concerned with the future of the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, 
Bienfait, as well as other places in Saskatchewan. I so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
stand today and present a petition from the citizens from 
Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
highways employees that would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens of the 
town of Watrous and Simpson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House again to present yet another petition regarding funding of 
Avastin. I too will get directly to the point and read the prayer 
for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens throughout 
Saskatchewan. I so present on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on Highway 36. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by the good people of 
Coronach and Moose Jaw, and I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 
 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Once again I recognize 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how many offenders have 
attended a program through the prostitution offender 
intervention program in Regina for the years 2002, ’03, 
’04, and ’05? 

 
And I also give notice that I shall on day no. 19 ask the 
government the following question. 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how many offenders have 
attended the program through the prostitution offender 
intervention program in Saskatoon for the years 2002, ’03, 
’04, and ’05? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many people are currently 
on the waiting list for long-term care facility attached to 
Davidson Health Centre in Davidson? 
 

I also have a similar question for long-term care facility in 
Wynyard, also a similar question for a facility in Watrous, also 
for the Heartland Health Region, a similar question for Silver 
Heights Special Care, and long-term care facility in Raymore, 
and also for another facility in Imperial, and also for the 
Nokomis Health Centre. 
 
And I also give notice that I shall on day no. 19 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are the current vacant staff 
positions at the Davidson Health Centre? 
 

Also a similar question for the Watrous Hospital, also the same 
question for Wynyard Hospital and also for Golden Acres 
facility, and also a similar question for Nokomis and also for 
Long Lake and also for Raymore, and also for another one in 
Raymore. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

give notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
children ran away from the Red Willow Centre in 
Saskatoon for the year 2004? 

 
I also give notice that on day 19 I shall ask the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
children ran away from the Red Willow Centre in 
Saskatoon for the year 2005? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
children have run away from the Red Willow Centre for 
the year 2006? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how long was 
each child gone when he or she ran away from the Red 
Willow Centre in Saskatoon for the year 2004? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how long was 
each child gone when he or she ran away from the Red 
Willow Centre in Saskatoon for the year 2005? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how long was 
each child gone when he or she ran away from the Red 
Willow Centre in Saskatoon for the year 2006? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance: in 2005 how many times has SGI 
extended insurance coverage for vehicle owners with 
expired insurance, and what was the total amount paid on 
those claims? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, through you and to you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I would like to introduce to you the members of the 
SaskTel Aboriginal Employees Network that are seated in the 
west gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SaskTel Aboriginal Employees Network is a 
network of proactive Aboriginal employees who work 
collectively towards a workforce within SaskTel which 
represents Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal population. It also seeks 
to promote and encourage a work environment that values and 
supports Aboriginal employees. Its members act as 
ambassadors, promoting and encouraging SaskTel as an 
employer of choice among Aboriginal employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the gallery is elder Walter Lavallee, Gerry 
Ruckaber, Patrina Freidel, Gord Kuhn, Kevin Denouden, Val 
Krumenacker. Also seated with the members are two former 
SaskTel employees who now work for the Minister of First 
Nations and Métis Relations, Mr. Speaker, and that is Marmie 
Poitras and Angie Merasty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SaskTel Aboriginal Employees Network is 
having a meeting here in the legislature to sign a new 
constitution between SaskTel and the employee network. At 
lunch the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations and the 
Minister of Northern Affairs will have an opportunity to join 
the members of the network. I regret I won’t be able to because 
of prior commitments. 
 
[10:15] 
 
But I would ask that all members join with me in welcoming 
the members of the First Nations and Métis Network here and 
Aboriginal Employees Network here to the legislature and 
congratulations on their continuing good work in this area. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome 
the SaskTel Aboriginal Employees Network. It’s great to see 
you here. I know that you do do great work and we thank you 
for all of that. So welcome to your Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview, the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 22 students from Sheldon Williams Collegiate in 
Regina Lakeview. They’re students who are participating in the 
social studies 30 class of grade 12. And they’re accompanied by 
their teachers, Mark McKeen and Dale Girodat. I ask all 
members to welcome them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Louis Riel Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, today is a significant day for Métis people and for 
all Canadians. It is Louis Riel Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very special time to remember and to 
celebrate the contributions that Métis people have made and 
continue to make in this country. Louis Riel played a key role in 
ensuring that the voices of Métis people were heard and 
respected across Canada. He led two resistance movements to 
preserve and to protect Métis rights and culture. He also played 
a very significant role in the political process that led to the 
creation of the province of Manitoba in 1870. 
 
Riel was a complex and controversial figure in our history, even 
bringing him to conflict with law and Canadian authorities. But 
his legacy even today is an inspiring and visionary leader who 
saw and foresaw the Métis as one of Canada’s founding 
peoples. 
 
Riel’s unique and historical role in the development of the 
Confederation has contributed to the rights and interests of all 
Western Canadians. We also recognize the deep pride that he 
generated amongst his people. That pride continues to burn 
brightly today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

The Hokey-Pokey 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, well, well, well, I see the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] is having its convention this weekend. 
Mr. Speaker, we have an NDP party that has to go into this 
convention as a government in the sunset of its life. And that 
sunset is caused not by advancing age by rather by diminished 
capacity. 
 
Political incontinence and political senility have now given way 
to delusions of grandeur. The poor socialists that will come out 
and actually pay money for this tragic spectacle will probably 
get good value for their money. They will no doubt get a 
rousing lesson in creative financing, shell games, and 
miscounting from the Finance minister. 
 
Speaking of counting, I hear that the Health minister and Justice 
minister are planning a debate on who can miscount the best — 
the one that can’t count police officers or the one that can’t 
count nurses. I wouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if the 
convention winds up with a giant group game of horsey that 
they learned on the Premier’s bus tour last summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to say that the party is led by a group of political 
cadavers is an understatement but it reminds me of another 
story about death. With all the sadness and trauma going on in 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

the world at the moment, it’s worth reflecting on the death of a 
very important person which went almost unnoticed last week. 
Larry LaPrise, the man who wrote “The Hokey-Pokey,” died 
peacefully at the age of 93. The most traumatic part for his 
family was getting him into the coffin. They put his left leg in 
and then the trouble started. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

New Democratic Party Candidate Nominated 
in Prince Albert Carlton 

 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
night at a very well-attended nomination, the Prince Albert 
Carlton NDP elected Chad Nilson to represent them as their 
NDP candidate for the next election to succeed you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Chad was born and raised in Prince Albert and 
area. He’s 27 years old and is very committed to his city and 
province. Chad has worked for the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment, the Prince Albert Youth Activity 
Centre. He currently teaches political studies for the University 
of Saskatchewan and conducts research for the Prince Albert 
Co-operative Health Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to his various work experiences, Chad 
has an impressive education credential set. He has obtained a 
diploma in policing from the Lethbridge Community College, a 
Bachelor of Science in criminal justice, a Master of Arts in 
criminal justice from Radford University in Virginia, a Master 
of Science in political science from the University of New 
Orleans, and he is currently finishing the final stages of his 
Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in political science from the 
University of New Orleans. 
 
Chad’s appreciation for community leadership and civic 
involvement is the driving force behind his run for public 
office. He is inspired by the work of Tommy Douglas and he 
feels that the role of government in society should be to 
advance the liberties of individuals while also ensuring that no 
one is left behind. Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, Chad is 
strongly supported in this endeavour by his lovely wife, Amy, 
and their two children, Zach and Tazana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud to welcome Chad, his youthfulness, 
his vision, and his experience. And we look forward to having 
another Nilson on the government side of the House working 
hard for the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Responses From Premier 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
hypothetical question for the members opposite and our 

listening audience. If one would write a letter to the Premier of 
our province, a full-page letter talking about the most 
vulnerable children in our society — children who are being 
sexually exploited — and further in that letter ask questions and 
give suggestions and alternatives for helping those children, 
what should one expect back from the Premier of our province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did write a letter and I guess it was naive to 
expect to get more than a three-sentence letter from the Premier 
saying, I got your letter and I gave it to somebody else to deal 
with. Is that what the government considers a response? 
 
Well on this side of the House we call it passing the buck. It’s 
the same response that the grieving widow, Crystal Bonderud, 
got when she went to see the Premier and she was told to go to 
the Ombudsman. Once again we see the Premier passing the 
buck. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have the right to expect their 
Premier to take responsibility for the actions of his government 
and its members. This Premier has been given the responsibility 
to be the leader but instead of showing true leadership he hides 
behind his position and passes the buck. 
 
The Premier said, go to the human resources committee, go to 
the Ombudsman, go anywhere but don’t bother me. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as soon as this Premier has the strength of character to 
call the next election, the people of Saskatchewan will tell this 
Premier to go get another job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes . . . Order. 
Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Regina Coronation Park. 
 

Transitional Housing Project 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March of last year, a 
community research project of transitional housing services 
identified a need for more second stage housing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I am pleased to rise in the Assembly today and say that just a 
couple of days ago I had the opportunity to participate in the 
official opening of a new second stage housing complex for 
women and children fleeing domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan women and children deserve the ability to live 
safely with dignity, respect, and as independently as possible. 
 
This project is going to make a very positive change for women 
and children on their path to a safe and respectful future. This 
exemplifies HomeFirst, our provincial strategy of creating more 
choices, and ties into our long-term vision of making life better 
for today’s families and building a future here for our youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Wichihik Iskwewak Transitional House 
project was carried out by the Touchwood File Hills 
Qu’Appelle Tribal Council Safe Shelter Inc. and supported by 
the federal and provincial funding. I thank all the partners 
involved for their efforts on behalf of Saskatchewan women and 
children. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Mouseland Revisited 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
resident of the constituency of Batoche recently put her own 
spin on the NDP bedtime story of “Mouseland.” She begins by 
pointing out that she believes the mice or NDP are currently 
trying to disguise themselves as cats with a rash of new 
announcements and early holiday giving. 
 
The author made a note of how cats are smart, independent, and 
do not take kindly to abuse. And in a line which sounds more 
reminiscent of Saskatchewan people in their regard for this 
NDP government, she writes, “Once you have lost their trust 
you will never regain it.” Do you think this might be what 
happened in Tommy Douglas’s Mouseland? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know the mess that mice can create 
when left to their own devices. They chew through things. They 
burrow into things and are not really constructive critters. The 
author of this new take on Mouseland seems to agree and 
further sums up the behaviour of the mice by writing, “Instead 
of encouraging our people to become healthy, beautiful and 
independent cats, we drive the cats away and discourage foreign 
cats from [coming] . . . in.” 
 
This analogy perfectly suits this tired, worn out NDP 
government and a Premier that has overseen population loss in 
every year since he took over the office. The author of the letter 
sums up her feelings and those of many others in the province 
who have become fed up with this stale NDP government by 
writing, “If this Mouseland fantasy is the basis of the current 
ruling ideology, our troubles have only just begun.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Party View of Canadian Wheat Board 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, until yesterday there may 
have been some question in some people’s minds as to where 
the Saskatchewan Party loyalties truly lie — with the people of 
this province or with their federal Conservative counterparts. 
 
But when the members stood, the members opposite stood in 
this Assembly yesterday and voted against the government 
motion supporting the single-desk marketing power of the 
Canadian Wheat Board and the democratic right of farmers to 
decide the wheat board’s future, they made it clear beyond all 
question and all doubt that the only real loyalty the 
Saskatchewan Party has is to right-wing ideology and the 
philosophy that fat cats come first. 
 
But that’s not our philosophy, Mr. Speaker. And when the 
members opposite say that the wheat board is not our business 
we say, as the social democratic government of this province, it 
is our business because the wheat board matters to every citizen 

of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s vote was predictable. The members 
opposite stood in their places and voted against the wishes of 
the majority of Saskatchewan farmers. They voted for an end to 
the Canadian Wheat Board and the service it has provided 
farmers for over 60 years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s vote was also historic. Because 
by voting to end the Canadian Wheat Board the Saskatchewan 
Party opposite ended any hope they ever would have had of 
winning the next provincial election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. Order. Let’s all go at once here. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
for years now the NDP has had this imaginary fund called the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. There was no actual money in this 
so-called fund. The Provincial Auditor called it an accounting 
mirage. 
 
But that didn’t stop the NDP from using this so-called fund to 
try to make the budget seem balanced or to go on a spending 
spree if an election was on the way, Mr. Speaker. All the while 
the NDP defended its use of this imaginary fund and the fact 
that it contained no actual money. But all of a sudden today, 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government did a huge flip-flop. They 
have decided to put real money, nearly $900 million, in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why this sudden reversal? And isn’t it a clear 
admission that the NDP government was wrong all along? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I love getting financial advice from the 
members opposite. And there’s lots of it. There’s lots of it. On 
any given day you can get the advice that we should be cutting 
taxes more, or we should be paying pensioners more and 
increasing the debt, or we should be spending more on any 
number of different programs. The one thing you never actually 
hear them say is, you should balance the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in the mid-year financial 
statements we presented today, we provided for a balanced 
budget. We’ve increased transparency and understanding. 
We’ve changed the way the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is dealt 
with. We’ve increased the fuel tax; we created The Fuel Tax 
Accountability Act. We brought in an infrastructure fund. These 
are changes Saskatchewan people have asked for. We’re happy 
to be in a position of financial stability to be able to provide it. 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

And I would expect the members opposite will finally support 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s funny how 
the NDP polling numbers go down, the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund goes up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years the NDP said, we don’t need money in a 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Then all of a sudden today they say, 
we do need money in the fiscal stabilization. We need a lot of 
money. We need $900 million. What changed? Well it’s pretty 
clear, Mr. Speaker. There’s an election coming. There’s an 
election coming next year. And the NDP is dropping like a rock 
in the polls, Mr. Speaker, and they need to set up a huge slush 
fund to try to buy the next election. Mr. Speaker, isn’t this what 
it’s really about? Why is the NDP setting up this $900 million 
election slush fund on the eve of an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well yesterday he was accusing us, 
just a minute ago, he was accusing us of this being an imaginary 
fund Now he’s accusing us of it being a slush fund. Its number 
hasn’t changed any between what we presented last year and 
what we’re presenting now. The same amount of money is 
available. 
 
We’ve used the cash on hand to provide a better, more 
transparent way of dealing with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
This is providing us with the ability to make sure we’ve got a 
simpler, more understandable approach to dealing with it. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, he should understand 
this about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund: it is the savings account 
for the government. Once that fund is spent, it’s gone. And so 
he should maybe be a little bit more circumspect in terms of 
what he’s calling on to be dealt with out of that fund than he 
and his colleagues have been in the last few weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the Finance 
minister that there was a referendum on that budget. It was 
called the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty, pretty basic, 
pretty basic NDP economics. The polls go down. The slush 
fund goes up. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the NDP’s 
money; it’s taxpayers’ money. And the NDP shouldn’t be 
building up a mountain of money on the backs of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers just to try to buy themselves an election. 

Mr. Speaker, when the 2006 budget was tabled, the NDP was 
already planning on spending $520 million in their election 
slush fund for 2007. Mr. Speaker, could the minister please tell 
us how much of the $900 million election slush fund does he 
plan to spend in next year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well let’s just recap where we’re at, 
Mr. Speaker. Since this House came in, we have cut the sales 
tax. We have cut income taxes. We have cut small-business 
taxes. We have continued with our cuts to corporate taxes, the 
capital taxes. We are continuing to rebalance the finances of 
this government. At the same time we found new money, $300 
million worth of new money for social programs and 
infrastructure. At the same time, we have increased the 
transparency of the finances in this province. 
 
Now I know that the members opposite don’t like transparency, 
and God forbid we ever talk about accountability. I know that 
those members also never like to talk about the debt which, by 
the way, we have been continually paying down. The members 
opposite need to square their ongoing demand for more 
spending on everything from health care to social policy with 
their increased demands for cuts to taxes, with their increased 
demand for debt reduction. What is the policy of that member 
opposite and that party opposite when it comes to balancing this 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says he is 
setting up this election slush fund to create transparency. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a good description because Saskatchewan 
people can see right through this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — They know that this NDP government is 
going to use this mountain of money for this election slush 
fund. They’re going to try to buy themselves the next election. 
Now the NDP is trying to tell us that it’s good public policy. 
That begs the question, Mr. Speaker, why weren’t they doing 
these things before? Why weren’t they cutting taxes before, Mr. 
Speaker? Why weren’t they creating more training spaces 
before? Why does the NDP only seem to do these things on the 
eve of an election? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is truly interested in transparency, 
will he tell us how much of this election slush fund he will try 
to spend on the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — None. Very simply put, none. The 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund is there to help deal with revenue 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

shortfalls and changes in revenue. We’d predicted that we’re 
going to need to draw on it over the next couple of years to help 
pay for the business tax reforms, until those kick in, so that we 
can make sure we’ve got the growth going on. 
 
He might want to just tap the shoulder of the guy who sits in 
front of him and ask him if we were actually going to spend this 
on electioneering, why we wouldn’t be doing the hundreds of 
millions of dollars worth of new spending that he’s calling for? 
Tap the shoulder of the guy who sits just behind you and ask 
why we’re not spending more in terms of the forestry sector. 
Tap the shoulder of the guy that sits over from Saskatoon 
Southeast who is calling on us to fully fund the pension 
liabilities. 
 
That member can ask any member of his party for new ideas in 
terms of spending. What he cannot do is come up with an 
answer as to how they would continue to balance this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Litigation Regarding Department of Highways’ Contract 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s another 
example of NDP government incompetence where someone 
with a long history of criminal activity goes unnoticed and 
receives work from the NDP government. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Highways minister: why didn’t his 
department do the proper due diligence regarding the 
contracting of Titan Excavating? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, back to the future, in 
estimates last year, that member asked questions with respect to 
the process: how the tenders are let, how due diligence is done. 
I can tell you and the House, members of this House, Mr. 
Speaker, that those questions have all been answered. He 
understands quite clearly what happened. He understands that 
the government has, the department has tightened up the 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people who do business in this province 
sometimes who are not what we would, I guess, all want to see 
and that is ethical business people. This was an unfortunate 
circumstance that was created by a rather unscrupulous person. 
And I would want to say that the minister, I think, handled it 
very well. I’m very comfortable with the work that they’ve 
done. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, this unfortunate circumstance 
was caused by the government’s incompetence. Mr. Speaker, 
this all began when the Highways minister did not do his 
homework. His department never checked to make sure a bond 
was legitimate. Now Gerald Aalbers is out $50,000 because the 
Highways minister did not manage his file properly. Mr. 

Aalbers has been forced to sue the government to try and get his 
money back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister allow this situation to get out 
of hand? Why did he not do his homework in the first place, 
instead of forcing this man to sue the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, that member knows 
full well that there was a fraudulent signature that led to this 
whole circumstance. He also knows that those who should have 
been compensated were compensated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say this. Why doesn’t that member stand up and talk 
about the competence of the people who are running this 
department and talk about the good things that they’re doing 
with the new $90 million of money that’s going into this 
budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, his leader talks about money falling off 
of the back of a truck to pave roads and to fix highways. He 
talks about money falling off of the back of a truck to create 
training spots for young people in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
those people should get with the program. 
 
What we’re doing is putting money back into the hands of 
people of Saskatchewan who deserve the benefits for all of the 
things that they’ve helped to create in terms of strengthening 
this economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you, I’m 
going to continue to support the people within the Department 
of Highways and Transportation for the good work that they do 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. That member can ask 
all the questions he wants in estimates, and we’ll be glad to 
answer them again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister knows 
full well that not everyone was properly compensated. Mr. 
Aalbers tried and tried to get his voice heard. He spoke 
personally to the Agriculture minister and then sent a letter on 
March 19, 2005. Mr. Aalbers used to be that member’s 
constituent, Mr. Speaker. He even called the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. And not once did Mr. Aalbers ever 
receive a letter or a phone call back from those members, and 
now nothing from the Highways minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government ignoring Mr. Aalbers 
and his request to be heard? Why wouldn’t they at least meet 
with him before he had to sue the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, that 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

members opposite I think have some first-hand experience with 
fraud. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. The tendering process that we 
have in place here allows for good people who want to do 
business in this province to manage these portfolios. I want to 
say that we have changed some of the process with respect to 
checking the legitimacy of bonds and bonding agencies when 
we’re dealing with an unfamiliar contractor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened here was there was a signature that 
was fraudulently representing a bond. And I want to say that the 
minister handled it, I believe, very well. I want to say that the 
deputy minister handled it very well, and the department 
handled it very well. Mr. Speaker, we have a process that I 
think allows for legitimate business people to do business in an 
efficient way with this government, and we’re going to continue 
to improve on that process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Documentation Concerning Oyate Safe House 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, 63 days ago the Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate 
released his report on the Oyate Safe House. And I invite the 
Minister of Community Resources to turn to page 37 of that 
report. On that page you will find recommendations 14(06). It 
calls for the development of a shared vision and common 
service delivery principles within 60 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure, given all the controversy that has been 
written down about this issue, I would ask the minister: will he 
share with this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan this 
mystical document? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I table the mystical 
document. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have not been presented with all the minutes from the meetings 
between the department officials and the safe house board. The 
only minutes that have not been seen are the minutes when the 
minister was in attendance both in March and May. Mr. 
Speaker, on November 7 the deputy minister of Community 
Resources promised to search for any record, what . . . 
[inaudible] . . . of those meetings. I ask the minister: what has 
been found, and will he table those documents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minutes of that 
meeting are mystical, Mr. Speaker, because there was no 
meeting. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated in the past, we have 
primarily advised the Oyate Board that the advocate and the 
auditor were going to be engaged in the process, and we 
instructed them very clearly to co-operate and to be fully 
accountable to the process, Mr. Speaker. Again I’ll point out, 
I’ve said this many times, and I stand by my answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the minutes provided by his 
deputy minister — the outlines of the minutes with the Oyate 
Board — stated clearly that in March and May, Minister 
Belanger met with the Oyate Board. He’s just stood and said in 
this House that there was no meeting. Mr. Speaker, who’s right 
on this? Will he table those minutes, and why is he hiding 
them? Why is he covering this up? Why won’t he share with 
this House the minutes of those meetings which could be 
critical to get to the bottom of this cover-up. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this has got to be one of 
the worst critics I’ve met in my entire life, Mr. Speaker. He 
doesn’t get it at all, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll say again: there was no 
meeting at all, Mr. Speaker. We primarily advised the Oyate 
Board directors that the advocate and the auditor were engaged 
and that they should fully co-operate with their work, and they 
should certainly be fully accountable through the process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what is beginning to surprise me, Mr. Speaker, is the 
constant attack on First Nations people from the party opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. It is constant. Now I’m going to ask that member, 
what in the world do you have against First Nations people 
being actively engaged with the care and the development of 
First Nations children, Mr. Speaker? What is fundamentally 
wrong with that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It has always been negative, negative doom and gloom when it 
comes to First Nations people. Enough of that, it’s 2006, not 
1960s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister is 
good at throwing out the personal insults. I think his first 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

comment was the big, fat mirror. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly prepared to admit the big, fat mirror is correct if he’s 
prepared to admit he’s incompetent because both of them are 
fairly obvious to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, his department sent an outline 
of all the meetings with the Oyate Board as requested. It shows 
two meetings with this minister. He’s now saying they didn’t 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who’s wrong? Somebody is not telling the truth 
on this issue. It’s on a paper document. Will he provide those 
minutes to this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, our government has been 
very co-operative on this file. They have asked for information. 
We have submitted two big binders of information. Everything 
that our staff ever wrote, Mr. Speaker, on official meetings were 
certainly put forward in those documents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again I’ll point out to the member and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, what that member and that party does not want 
to do is talk about the progress we made on this file, Mr. 
Speaker. It is an exciting opportunity to finally find some 
solution to deal with the children who are being sexually 
exploited on Saskatchewan streets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll point out again to the people of Saskatchewan: there 
was no official meeting. We primarily advised the Oyate Board 
that the advocate and the auditor were engaged. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that they also met with the 
opposition. Was there minutes of their meeting, Mr. Speaker? 
Was there minutes of that meeting, Mr. Speaker? The Oyate 
Board met with the opposition, Mr. Speaker. What are they 
hiding, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, Mr. Speaker, first they wouldn’t 
allow the former deputy minister to speak; they gagged her. 
Then the current deputy minister that provided a document that 
showed very clearly that there were two meetings — one in 
March, one in May — with the minister and his assistant, that 
those meetings happened. He is now saying they didn’t happen. 
He’s now saying there’s no minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to get to the bottom of this. We need the 
former deputy minister to tell her story. Why is she being 
gagged, and why won’t he produce those minutes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this has got to be 
the worst critic in the history of the Assembly. Well he just 
simply doesn’t get it. Mr. Speaker. There was no official 
meeting. There were no minutes at this gathering, Mr. Speaker, 
in my office. I primarily told the Oyate Board that the advocate 
and auditor are going to be engaged and that they should both 
be fully supported, co-operative and certainly accountable. I 
know that after our meeting we had in my office, which is an 
unofficial meeting, they went off to meet with the opposition. 
Now did they have minutes of that meeting, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I tell the people of Saskatchewan is that all we have over there 
is doom and gloom, fear, Mr. Speaker, no plan. They are 
anti-First Nations in my opinion. On this side of the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan, we have progress. We are going to 
implement and are going to really help these children by 
reaching out to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Leadership and Political Futures 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thanks very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Partly because of answers like that, the Premier of this 
province is having a pretty tough fall. And we’re worried about 
him, Mr. Speaker. The Premier had to quell some infighting in 
his caucus here not long ago. He had some MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] advocating that someone no less than 
Dwayne Lingenfelter return from the oil towers of Calgary to 
lead the party. We know the Premier’s got a convention coming 
up, Mr. Speaker, and we know there’s some leadership review 
mechanism that may be activated there. We’re worried about it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question for the Premier is this: has he spent enough 
taxpayers’ dollars? Has he made enough announcements to save 
his political career at this convention? We’re worried about 
him. Will he be back on Monday morning, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this session and 
particularly this past week has not been very good for the 
Leader of the Opposition or the Sask Party, and it’s pretty 
telling, Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty telling in the line of questions 
we have from him today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just review the circumstance here. You know 
before we came into this session that party and that leader was 
saying the biggest issue facing this legislature, facing the 
people, was the matter of youth retention and building a future 
for our young people. 
 
Well that’s a cornerstone of our Throne Speech, and they voted 
against it. But you know what, Mr. Speaker, it took us about 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

three weeks into the session before the Leader of the Opposition 
stood in this House and even mentioned the issue of youth 
retention. And how was that? He got up, read his paper that 
morning, came to this House and said, well here’s a good idea 
from Manitoba; why don’t you introduce that? That was, Mr. 
Speaker, a week after he released some kind of a plan — that 
nobody listened to — down here at the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce, which plan didn’t have that same idea in it. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker — get this — the Leader of the Opposition 
goes out into the rotunda here, goes out in the rotunda, and says 
one thing out there that caught my eye. He said, you know 
what, we were just saving this, Mr. Speaker, we were saving 
this for an election. I . . . [inaudible] . . .a little more to say 
about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — This morning we heard pretty clearly how this 
government is setting aside for its own political purposes, an 
election slush fund. About $1 billion they’re going to set aside. 
It’s not their money. It belongs to the taxpayers of the province 
of Saskatchewan, but they’re setting it aside for an election 
slush fund. 
 
I want to ask the Premier this, how many lessons does he need? 
How many lessons does he need before he and his government 
learns. Because you know what? There’s a new member sitting 
— from Weyburn-Big Muddy — right in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, today because of a lesson unlearned from this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Premier tried to buy the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy with their own money in a last-ditch 
promise. Will he please assure this House that he won’t pursue 
that folly again, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when will this Leader of 
the Opposition and when will this party learn that you can’t say 
one thing here and one thing out there and one thing somewhere 
else because, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to get caught. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was asked by 
the press out there the other day, why it is that this NDP idea 
from Manitoba that he brings into the House wasn’t in his own 
plan introduced a week before . . . . [inaudible] . . . Why is that? 
Well he said, Mr. Speaker, he said, note these words, well to tell 
you the truth, he says, to tell you the truth — I’m quoting the 
Leader of the Opposition — to tell you the truth . . . which begs 
the question when was he not telling the truth. But he says here: 
to tell you the truth, we’ve been working on it for some time 
with a view towards looking to the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s all exposed. They are only concerned about 
their political future, not about the people of Saskatchewan. 
Here’s a government investing in the young people of 

Saskatchewan, investing in training opportunities, a government 
who cares about the people of Saskatchewan. We have an 
opposition that cares only about the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to understand why 
members of his party attending their convention this weekend 
have some real concerns about that Premier’s leadership and 
about the direction of this government. 
 
We still have the longest surgical waiting list in the country. We 
have nurses saying the government’s failing with respect to 
recruitment and retention. We have a Minster of Community 
Resources who puts politics ahead of kids, Mr. Speaker. We 
have another Minister of Finance who’s setting aside for his 
political purposes an election slush fund, Mr. Speaker. We have 
a caucus over there that’s not united, one that was actively 
trying to get a leader to come back from Calgary to replace this 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question for the Premier is this: has he learned any lessons 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy? Has he learned any lessons from 
how the people of this province feel? 
 
The theme of their convention this weekend is called, can you 
Feel the Energy, Mr. Speaker. That’s the theme of their 
convention. Mr. Speaker, if the Premier doesn’t change his 
ways, the next convention theme will be can you feel the pulse 
because the party will be finished, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can we expect him back on Monday? Will he survive his own 
political convention this weekend, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this, this, this is just too 
much fun. Mr. Speaker, today we had, we had one of the 
members over there demanding some minutes from some 
meetings. 
 
Well you know, this week the Leader of the Opposition and his 
Finance critic were announcing to the whole world they’re 
going to have a meeting, a meeting, they said, with the Minister 
of Finance of Canada, and they’ll make the Saskatchewan case. 
Well I’d like to see the minutes from their meeting. I’d like to 
see the minutes from this meeting. 
 
You know what I’m told, Mr. Speaker? I’m told there wasn’t 
really a meeting. I’m told the Leader of the Opposition went off 
to the Conservative Party fundraiser, and they got together over 
the cocktail hour. That’s what I’m told. Over some Harvey 
Wallbangers or something and had a meeting. Well I’d like to 
see the minutes of that meeting. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, he talks about returning from Calgary. 
Well listen to this. This is in today’s paper, a letter from a 
citizen of Saskatchewan to the Star Phoenix reflecting on the 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

Leader of the Opposition’s visit to Calgary recently. He says: 
 

[I] was . . . [interesting] to hear [that] Saskatchewan Party 
Leader Brad Wall’s lavish thank you to “King Ralph”. As 
I stood there, a question kept running through my mind: 
why would Wall publicly be thanking the ex-premier of 
Alberta for “what he has done for Saskatchewan?” 
 
I truly felt embarrassed . . . 
 

Well we are embarrassed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order 
please. Order please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Mid-year Financial Statements 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to rise in the House today to share with the 
Assembly the mid-year financial statements and to outline some 
of the decisions that we’ve made to increase transparency in our 
finances and at the same time build a better future for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
I am very pleased to announce that our strong financial position 
continues and that we are forecasting a $402.3 million 
improvement in revenues over budget this year. As a result of 
the growing economy, personal and corporate tax revenue is up. 
This is a result of the fact businesses are more profitable and 
more people are working than ever. 
 
It is this fact, the strength of our overall economy, that has 
allowed us to cut the PST [provincial sales tax] by 2 points to 5 
per cent. In so doing, Saskatchewan businesses and families are 
receiving an immediate and an ongoing benefit from a strong 
and growing economy. For the average family this means tax 
savings of over $300 a year. Businesses and municipalities will 
save over $175 million in purchases this year. These are 
significant savings that are possible because of our growing 
economy. 
 
Our improved revenue position has also allowed us to cut the 
income taxes by indexing the brackets and credits to the rate of 
national inflation, saving Saskatchewan residents another $28.1 
million next year. These changes build on our commitment in 
this budget of ours to cut property taxes for farmers. It’s 
allowed us to implement further business tax changes on top of 
the 190 million in savings that will be realized through the 
business tax reforms announced in the budget. 
 
We’ve been able to introduce changes to the dividend tax credit 
and small-business rate that are providing 5.3 million in 
additional tax savings. It’ll help our economy grow and provide 
even more career opportunities here for young people. 
 

In total, we have significantly rebalanced and reduced our 
business and family taxes in this province. Our cuts to corporate 
taxes, capital taxes, income taxes, sales taxes, small-business 
taxes, and property taxes mean that this year alone we have 
announced ongoing tax cuts of more than half a billion dollars 
for the benefit of Saskatchewan businesses and families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this builds on the fact 
that since this Premier took office, taxes have been cut by more 
than three-quarters of a billion dollars a year. This has been 
possible because we’ve been responsible in our approach to 
balance the budget, to reduce our debt, and to make changes 
that have stimulated job growth and a stronger economy. 
 
We have also been mindful however, Mr. Speaker, of the need 
to strengthen our social programs and invest in our 
communities. This mid-year report outlines that in addition to a 
significant reduction in taxes, we’ve made significant new 
investments in infrastructure, in education and training, and in 
our health care services. This includes $324 million more in 
additional program and infrastructure spending at mid year. 
 
In addition to this, I am pleased to announce that we will 
establish a cash fund, a $100 million infrastructure fund for 
multi-year use. Money in this fund will be used over the next 
three years to support the building communities program. This 
initial $100 million cash commitment will allow the building 
community fund to address targeted cultural and recreational 
needs for communities throughout our province. 
 
In the coming weeks my colleague, the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, will outline the criteria and objectives 
for this fund and will announce the initial projects to be funded 
under the initiative. We are anticipating about $20 million will 
be spent this year alone to enhance our cultural and recreational 
infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Other spending increases identified in 
the mid-year report relate mainly to items and initiatives already 
announced by the government. These include funds to deal with 
the nursing shortages in the health care sector; more funds for 
highway work, including the winter works program that we’ve 
announced; additional funds for labour market initiative; and 
this, a significant increase in the number of seats available for 
Saskatchewan students in our training system. We’re also going 
to provide more capital money for the education and training 
system. 
 
This mid-year report includes provisions to fully fund the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program for 2006 
and to replace the water bomber that we lost this summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — With respect to the increased spending 
in this mid-year report, I want to indicate that we have 
continued to be mindful that windfall revenues are not 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

necessarily recurring revenues. As such, outside of the tax cuts, 
we have ensured that almost 80 per cent of the new spending is 
one-time spending only. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, fiscal responsibility is 
important to Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan NDP. 
And we will continue to keep the finances on track and our 
budgets balanced. People will know that when they elected us, 
the province’s finances were a mess. We campaigned at that 
point on a platform for creating more open, honest, and 
accountable government. We’ve kept that promise and we’ve 
increased accountability and transparency. 
 
To that end, I am pleased to announce today that we’ve decided 
to change the way we deal with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. In 
particular, we’ve decided to fully cash fund it and in doing so 
we are going to improve the transparency and the 
accountability. 
 
In summary I can say we have done what Saskatchewan people 
have asked of us. We’ve listened to what they had to say. We 
have learned from what they had to say. And we are now today 
prepared to lead by cutting taxes to stimulate growth and to 
provide benefits to the families; by increasing our investments 
in infrastructure through increased spending on highways and 
community facilities; by increasing opportunities for young 
people by expanding access to our education system; and by 
simplifying and improving the transparency and accountability 
of our finances through initiatives like the gas tax accountability 
Act, the new multi-year structure fund, and changes to the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Quite simply, there has never been a better time to live in 
Saskatchewan than today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, our debt/GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratios are at a 20-year low. Taxes are at their 
lowest rate in decades. Record numbers of people are working, 
and we have an unemployment rate that is at a 30-year low. 
 
We all made a lot of changes and a lot of sacrifices in the 1990s 
to pay off the excesses of the 1980s. And we are all finally in a 
position to see the benefit of that work, to enjoy the strength of 
a growing economy, and to know that together we really are 
building a better future for Saskatchewan families right here. 
With that I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s an 
interesting day. The Finance minister says that he’s learned. 
He’s learned that the way they were doing things for the last 10 
years are wrong. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you, he 
hasn’t learned very much. 
 
He hasn’t learned what the message was from the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy by-election. You can’t buy an election, Mr. Speaker. 
You can try to buy an election. The NDP tried that in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. What happened? What happened, Mr. 
Speaker? The people of Weyburn-Big Muddy spoke in a 
decisive manner, and that’s why that member is sitting on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see more of 
that from this NDP government. They call this the NDP 
imaginary fund, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. There is no 
money in this fund — none whatsoever. 
 
The Provincial Auditor called it an accounting mirage, but that 
didn’t stop this NDP government of trying to balance the 
budget, trying to make it appear that the budget was balanced, 
Mr. Speaker. Well what did the auditor have to say about that? 
What did the auditor have to say about the last 16 budgets from 
this government? Seven were deficits; nine were surpluses. And 
they were wrong to say that they’ve been balancing the budget 
all along. 
 
Now they say that they’ve learned from this, Mr. Speaker. I 
would suggest that it’s too little, too late. All of a sudden today 
we see this huge flip-flop on behalf of this NDP government. 
They’ve decided to put some real money into the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund — $900 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
money. 
 
Won’t people be interested to read their paper tomorrow or 
watch the news tonight or listen to the news today to realize that 
this government has a $900 million savings account? Wouldn’t 
that be nice if Saskatchewan people could participate in that 
money, Mr. Speaker? But no, no, they’ll have to wait. They’ll 
have to wait till the very eve of an election to find out what the 
NDP government will do with that money, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
sad situation, Mr. Speaker, that’s for sure — all at the same 
time of this province losing 4,500 individuals in the last year. 
 
They talk about their savings account. They talk about their $1 
billion. They’re proud that they’re sitting on this mountain of 
money. At the same time, since this administration started, 
18,000 people have left this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
inexcusable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that the polls aren’t favourable to the 
government right now. What do you do when you’re in a panic 
mode? Well I would suggest you’re in full election mode. You 
maybe have to start a little bit earlier, but when you’ve got a big 
gap to try to erase, that’s what you do, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what you do when you put the politics of the NDP ahead of the 
treasury of the province, of what should be happening in this 
province where the people of Saskatchewan should be 
benefiting from that money — where a signal could go out to 
those 4,500 that left, that 18,000 that left, that there is a plan to 
do something here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We haven’t seen that plan from this government, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re waiting. We’re waiting. All that we’ve heard so far, so 
far of this $900 million, is that 520 million of it will be spent in 
2007 on the election slush fund. Well I would suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, there won’t be one penny left in that fund by the 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

time these guys are done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the population turn around? I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. I 
doubt it. From what we’ve seen from this government, they can 
continue to take their best policies from people on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we congratulate them 
when they do the right thing. They have the money, they have 
the money to do these things. But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have 
the interests of the people foremost in their minds. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to comment on 
this even though I didn’t get any information from the minister. 
It seems to be the continuing theme from these guys. You 
know, first of all they don’t like consultation and they certainly 
don’t like to consult at all with the opposition. They just like to 
steal our ideas. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before orders of the day, it is my pleasure to submit 
supplementary estimates accompanied by a message from His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Would all members . . . Order 
please. Order, order. Would all members please rise for the 
message from His Honour: 
 

[Dated November 16, 2006.] The Lieutenant Governor 
transmits supplementary estimates-November of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007 and recommends the same 
to the Legislative Assembly. [Signed by] Dr. Gordon L. 
Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Thank you. Please be seated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today and talk on this subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to get on the record one more time that we 
agree with the all-party committee report to set up a safe house 
for sexually exploited children on the streets of all cities in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, let’s also get on the 
record that we believe that there needs be an Aboriginal content 
component to this treatment. Let’s also get on the record that 
there are also children out there that are not Aboriginal that also 
need a program that should contain a faith-based component. 
 
Let’s get on the record that we believe that the current Oyate 

board has failed over the last three years and needs to be 
changed to a new board of Aboriginal leaders that will give this 
safe house the leadership and attention it needs. Let’s get on the 
record that the Oyate board has not done the job that it was 
contracted to, that the existing board had three years to bring to 
light the issues that have been brought to light by the press, the 
auditor, and the Children’s Advocate and members of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
When I asked the deputy minister to quote me one good thing 
this board had done, he said and I quote, “built a house.” With 
nearly $750,000, Mr. Speaker, the only thing he could say is 
that they built a house. Not one thing about any program or one 
success of any one child; not one child success story in nearly 
three years. 
 
Why is the minister and the NDP government so resistant to 
allowing another Aboriginal group to bid on this contract — a 
new group that could bring traditional and conventional 
Aboriginal healing methods to this centre? Why would we not 
consider sending these young girls to a reserve setting that 
elders and healers are readily available to offer both traditional, 
spiritual, and conventional healing methods to help healing 
these most vulnerable children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s start from the beginning as why do I oppose 
the extension of this agreement with the minister and the Oyate 
Board. First of all, we’ve been unable to get the original 
proposal. We’ve been unable to get copies of the tender 
documents as to who was included and who was excluded. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that an opening ceremony from the former 
minister from Moose Jaw and the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] was cancelled. To date we have 
received no explanation of why. 
 
We do know that an employee was accused of misconduct and 
that employee had a criminal record, was allowed to be 
involved in this program. We also know that criminal checks 
were not done. We had never seen or heard of any program 
development done by this board or by DCRE [Department of 
Community Resources and Employment] or by the minister, 
that would’ve helped these vulnerable children. 
 
Let’s talk about what we do know. We know that Oyate was 
awarded the contract with no prior experience dealing with 
sexually exploited children. The board met several times 
without a quorum and on many occasions without a solicitor. 
The board members received honorariums which was against 
the contract. There was a lack of criminal checks done on staff. 
We know that nepotism was going on in the facility. We know 
there was financial irregularities. We know that employees that 
were paid, but not there. We know that the board met only once 
during 2005, even when the facility was closed due to concerns. 
 
When the kids were put at risk, why was the minister from 
Rosemont not asking questions? Why was the minister not 
demanding a board meeting with her officials and Oyate? Why 
were there no DCRE members on the board for three years? We 
may never know the answers to these questions because the 
NDP blocked the former deputy minister from testifying. 
 
It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the former minister from 
Rosemont voted in favour of having her former deputy minister 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

attend as a witness and answer questions, and then on the day 
before the meeting the minister informs me that the former 
deputy minister is sick and will be unable to attend. Well the 
former deputy minister did attend, but the former minister did 
not attend to vote with the other NDP members to squash Ms. 
Young from answering critical questions. It’s interesting the 
former minister would be absent. Is it because she disagreed 
with the strategy not to allow Ms. Young to be a witness and 
tell the truth on this matter? 
 
[11:15] 
 
Why did the board not notify police and DCRE when a young 
girl was let go from the Oyate Safe House with other young 
girls? They were not stopped by a staff member, even though 
they were warned that this was a bad situation to put this young 
child in. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 13-year-old girl was robbed and 
beaten, with two broken ribs and a fractured skull. 
 
Did the Oyate Board call the police? Well no one will answer 
the question. The Oyate Board Chair would not talk to the press 
about this case, even on the day the minister announced he 
would stay the course. Why would she not answer these critical 
questions? The minister won’t answer this question, as he says 
he wants to hide behind privacy issues. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what about the child? Who defends her 
rights? Who will defend her right to be in a safe facility that the 
ministry and the minister have the ultimate responsibility for? 
 
You know, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member from Nutana 
told me to get over it and move on. Would the member from 
Nutana like to say that to that little girl? Get over it and move 
on? That statement unto itself tells a story, a story of cover-up 
and mismanagement by this NDP government. If you don’t like 
it, get over it and move on. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, where is this 
comprehensive plan that they continue to talk about? Well, 
Madam Speaker, if some of the children had gotten the care that 
they were promised, the care that was outlined in the tender, the 
care that the minister and the board were responsible to provide 
them, then maybe they could have moved on. Three years later 
they may have had a very different life. Some who were 13 and 
14 will now be 16 and 17, and may now have been back with 
their families and had a very different lifestyle. Madam 
Speaker, what about those young children? They can’t get over 
it and move on. 
 
Madam Speaker, where are the missing minutes of the two 
meetings between the current minister and Oyate Board? I have 
asked these questions on several occasions, Madam Speaker. 
What is the minister hiding? Madam Speaker, if the minister is 
so confident in this board, produce the minutes and copies of 
the agreement. 
 
Madam Speaker, training results in June of this year showed 
that six out of eight people in the program failed the test. These 
are supposedly the new recruits for Oyate. 
 
So where are we today, Madam Speaker? The board has failed 
these children. They’re back in the care of the minister, the 
minister that failed these children; back with the same board; 

back with the same minister and failed again. What has 
changed? Same old players, same old song. 
 
Madam Speaker, there’s a cycle in every city in our province. 
We saw it in the health report last week about children in the 
inner city of Saskatoon. Yes, that’s right in the Premier’s own 
riding. We know kids not in school — approximately 1,500 in 
the city of Saskatoon alone — children facing severe health 
issues, children dying, and extremely high suicide rates. Madam 
Speaker, child prostitution is a product of these issues, and 
they’re not being addressed at any stage in the process. If the 
NDP government had worked on the root problem, how many 
of these children would have been saved? Where is the NDP 
plan to address these issues? 
 
The Premier said he was surprised about the issues on his own 
street in his neighbourhood. It’s a wonder he has not taken any 
action on Oyate if he was oblivious to that. He continues to 
defend the indefensible — his own minister’s incompetence on 
Oyate and more importantly the sexually exploited children and 
their future. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believe that we need to work together 
with Aboriginal leaders, mayors, churches, community-based 
organization, and a government that is committed to come with 
a comprehensive plan based on experience and results. Madam 
Speaker, we have said on more than one occasion in this House 
and outside of this House, we agree there needs to be an 
Aboriginal component to this. We believe that there has to be a 
sensitivity issue. We also believe that there has to be an 
organization and a group in this province who can come 
forward and provide both the cultural sensitivity and the healing 
methods of traditional Aboriginal culture. 
 
Madam Speaker, in summary, this minister continues to cover 
up and try to deflect the real issue, his desire to continue on 
with the Oyate Board as if they were the only Aboriginal group 
in the province who has the ability in saving these unfortunate 
children. Madam Speaker, let’s re-tender this and allow other 
Aboriginal leaders and elders to come with solutions, both 
traditional and non-traditional. Let’s not continue to look at this 
as if it’s in isolation or with blinders. 
 
Madam Speaker, we have debated in this House since the 
opening day on the Oyate issue. Madam Speaker, we have 
asked questions. We have tried to get to the bottom of it. We 
have tried to understand how we can help these children, how 
we can get them back, how we can change their lives. We need 
to understand that in the three years that Oyate has been open, 
we don’t have one success story to talk about, not one child 
that’s been saved, Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal. We cannot 
point to one person that’s been through that facility who’s now 
back in school or back at home with their parents. 
 
Madam Speaker, this is a tragedy. It’s a tragedy that didn’t need 
to happen. It’s a tragedy that’s been there for three years. And it 
would still be there today if it hadn’t been brought to the 
attention both by the press, the auditor, the advocate, and the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The minister continues to want to make this a racial issue. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I stand here in the House today to say 
this is not about race. This is not about anything but children. 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

And we need to take that into account. I have never heard the 
minister once stand in the House and talk about the children that 
are in this facility that are not Aboriginal — 30 per cent. Why is 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to work with all groups 
collaboratively to make sure that these children receive the 
specialized, individual care that they need. These children can’t 
fit into a box in a generalized program. Each one of them needs 
to be assessed for their needs, their ability, their education, their 
cultural needs, their spiritual needs. And we need to design the 
program around the child, not around the agency. 
 
It has been shown time and time again, when asked, that the 
Oyate Board cannot produce one program that was designed or 
done. I heard the minister speak frequently about we’re 
designing new and innovative programs. Well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I went out to BC [British Columbia] and found they’ve 
been doing this since the year 2000. They’ve already had one 
report back on it and are creating a second report on how to do 
this, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the minister wouldn’t want to pick up the phone and call 
and ask what other jurisdictions are doing. He wants to 
advocate and do his own program. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
surely there are other Aboriginal leaders in this community and 
around this province who could do this job. 
 
And it’s interesting that we only speak about Regina’s safe 
house. We had asked in the committee meetings that we have a 
review of all facilities. And the government called it a witch 
hunt. Well you’d think you wouldn’t have to ask. You’d think 
with what went on there, with a conscience you’d want to make 
sure that that wasn’t happening in any other facility in this 
province when it comes to dealing with children. But no, we 
want to stay fixated and focused on the Oyate Board. 
 
So what the minister is telling me that there is no other 
Aboriginal group in this province who’s interested in fixing the 
problem. I don’t believe that, Madam Deputy Speaker. I don’t 
believe it for a minute. I know there are a lot of elders out there 
— and I’ve met with them this week and last week — who say 
they can provide traditional care which will be spiritually good 
and help these children. And why would the minister of DCRE 
not want that to happen? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government and the 
minister of Community Resources and Employment for 
not acting properly to protect vulnerable children at the 
Oyate Safe House based on evidence that operational 
practices put these children at greater risk of harm. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest and seconded by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government and the 

minister of Community Resources and Employment for 
not acting promptly to protect vulnerable children at Oyate 
Safe House based on evidence that operational practices 
put these children at greater risk of harm. 
 

I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
absolutely honoured to join in the debate today. I look forward 
to seconding the motion, but I’m also very impatient and 
waiting with anticipation to hear how the backbenchers of this 
incompetent government can justify the actions of not one, not 
two, but three ministers who dealt with the children on the 
street. 
 
This week we heard it described . . . This government was 
described to us as a government so incompetent they can’t even 
do socialism right. I’m seconding the motion of my colleagues 
from Saskatoon Northwest who has tried since last March to 
make this government recognize their responsibility for their 
actions in dealing with the most vulnerable children in our 
province — the children who are at risk. 
 
I said children, not young adults, because so many of the 
children on the street have addictions to drugs. Being addicted 
to drugs makes one incapable of controlling one’s actions and 
mentally incapable of making responsible decisions. This 
government either believes this too or last year, when they 
introduced the youth detoxification Bill, they did it to get the 
rest of the Saskatchewan Party off their backs and out of the 
media. They supposedly said the necessity of involuntarily 
admitting kids into drugs is important because kids were at risk. 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, the kids at Oyate were at risk. 
 
My colleague has described very well the events around Oyate 
and I won’t repeat them. What I want to speak about is the 
reason Oyate came into being in the first place. The reason we 
in the Saskatchewan Party are disgusted and outraged about this 
situation is simple. We asked for, we cajoled, we argued, we 
begged, and we forced the government to taking action on this 
whole issue of children being sexually exploited. 
 
In 1997, a then member from Humboldt, Arlene Julé, talked 
about this issue and she was relentless in badgering the 
government to deal with it. And I think it was interesting that 
the day before yesterday when the minister talked about it, their 
press release talked about the work they had done in 1997. That 
was started only because of the work that was done by members 
from this side of the House. 
 
The then deputy minister, Dwain Lingenfelter, came over and 
tried and talk to her in a way that only Dwain Lingenfelter 
could manage and said that we should have an all-party 
committee. Ms. Julé at that time had to fight to be Co-Chair or 
this government would have taken credit for the whole 
committee. 
 
This committee interviewed 35 witnesses. It travelled around 
the province to 11 different sites. We looked at best practices at 
11 different jurisdictions. We hammered out resolutions and we 
had dozens of committee meetings. 
 
There was one recommendation, I believe it was 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

recommendation no. 22, to have a secure safe house for 
involuntarily admitting children. That recommendation was not 
looked at. So instead, recommendation no. 25, the voluntary 
safe house, was looked at — with much needed Aboriginal 
input. That’s the way we put it. We know the importance of 
having Aboriginal input. And it was discussed at length. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after that report was adopted we on this side 
of the House never heard a thing about the actions on the report 
except an occasional release of the number of johns’ cars that 
were seized. 
 
Once or twice when I have met with the FSIN women’s 
commission, they told me they were going to ask for the 
all-party committee to be reinstated. There was deafening 
silence from that side of the House. I knew the issue hadn’t 
gone away because I had spoken many times to front-line 
workers and police who talked about the children who were still 
on the street. But it wasn’t until last winter when CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] broke the story that we 
knew this government, this socialist government, had failed 
again. 
 
We knew the government failed business; we knew that with 
the SPUDCO issue. We knew they failed health care; we knew 
that with the waiting lists. They failed justice; we knew that 
with the crime stats. They failed agriculture because we hear 
that from farmers all the time. They failed people needing help 
through no-fault insurance; we hear that all the time. But, Mr. 
Speaker, these so-called guardians of the needy also failed our 
children. They failed the children who had been failed by 
everyone all their lives. 
 
And as the facts leaked out a few at a time, the people of this 
province and those of us on this side of the House knew we’d 
been duped once again. We put our misguided trust and faith in 
this government that they would do what they said they were 
going to do — go above and beyond to help the children at risk 
— and they had again failed, and we were misled. 
 
[11:30] 
 
In fact yesterday it all became really clear when it was said on 
the other side of the House that we should just get over it and 
move on. It became clear there was just another sad act in the 
story of a party playing at becoming government. Mr. Speaker, 
when the minister from Nutana said, get over it and move on, 
she was basically not just saying that to us, she was saying that 
to the children on the street. She was saying, we failed, we 
screwed up but we’re . . . got to move on. 
 
The tough part . . . But really for those kids that’s the same 
government that’s writing a script for the next action of their 
play at government. They are just playing at government, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. They’re paying for it with tax dollars 
and expecting people to continue watching their play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this safe house was set up for failure. Any one of 
the three ministers . . . Madam Deputy Speaker, any one of the 
three ministers who would have thought about this safe house 
for more than two minutes would have known that and so 
would have the Oyate board. 
 

Oyate was given $300,000. Think about this. It was given 
$300,000. It was to be staffed 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. 
It was to detox, assess, stabilize, protect, educate, feed, provide 
entertainment, provide mentorship, provide leadership, provide 
cultural perspective, nurture, and give a home to children up to 
the age of 16. Oh, and by the way, they were also supposed to 
write reports, attend meetings, and draw up rules and 
regulation, and then write some more reports. And did I 
mention this was all supposed to be done for $300,000? 
 
Now for the Wall Street geniuses on the other side, I want to 
tell you that 24 hours a day times 365 days a year is 8,760 hours 
at $20 an hour is $175,200 for one qualified person to run that 
house. That’s for one person. Saying that person didn’t think 
they could do the job full-time, all day long, every day of the 
year, they might have to have somebody else. 
 
Let’s say they thought they might need some help like the other 
institutions like Ranch Ehrlo or some of the other ones. All of 
these . . . All of these have had minimum requirements. Perhaps 
they’d need three staff members a day. So let’s say that we’d 
have to . . . And the member from Walsh Acres said, maybe our 
people should have OH&S [occupational health and safety] 
regulations. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, those people there deserve to have 
some respect for the job they were doing as well. So we know 
that we need at least a half a million dollars to do the job, and 
that’s beside getting somebody to help them with detox and 
education. Yet this NDP government for three years, through 
three ministers, never saw a problem and they never stood up 
and said, hey we screwed up. And if it isn’t criminal it’s at least 
the stupidest thing I ever saw this group do. 
 
Yesterday Minister of Community Resources finally admitted 
they failed Oyate. I believe he called it, reached beyond their 
limits. Now they’re supposedly giving Oyate another chance. 
Well maybe they’ll succeed, but because they are playing with 
different rules, comparing apples to oranges. They are no longer 
expected to detox, stabilize it says. We’re not sure exactly what 
they are expected to do but I’m willing to bet today that Oyate 
will get compensated. And they’ll get compensated in much the 
same way as the residential school victims are compensated 
because when government screws up and they wreck the lives 
of somebody, then they’re going to get paid for it. 
 
And in fact the Minister of Community Resources talked about 
residential school victims and now he, being the Aboriginal rep, 
is paying. Money will not buy back the loss of reputation of the 
First Nations people that lost their reputation. It will not help 
the . . . [inaudible] . . . character of the First Nations. 
 
Oyate took the fall and the blame for an incompetent 
government and I believe that the people of this province and 
the children in this province deserved more. It’s the height of 
hypocrisy and ignorance. Using the minister’s words, the 
member from Nutana was saying, get over it, move on. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, what about the kids? Who is going to do what 
with the kids? Mr. Speaker, this is the only issue that we should 
be talking about is the kids. The minister opposite says, where 
are the kids? That is their responsibility to know. If they don’t 
know where the kids are, then you have failed. You have failed 
badly. 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

Madam Deputy Speaker, there is nothing we can say to the 
members in this House to make us believe or anybody believe 
they care about anything about the politics of their job. And I 
don’t think that anybody wants to listen to them any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, at the conclusion of my 
remarks I’ll be making an amendment to the motion that was 
put forward by members opposite. 
 
But I want to begin by laying out some of the basic issues with 
respect to Oyate and the larger question of meeting the needs of 
children who have had the misfortune of being sexually 
exploited on our streets. Let me say to begin with, let me just 
clarify first of all that Oyate is closed and has been closed since 
April of this year, Madam Deputy Speaker. I don’t want the 
impression to be left that this safe house is still open, and 
members opposite haven’t made reference to that. 
 
Second, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it is important to 
acknowledge that there are clearly problems that were identified 
with the operation of Oyate. And these have been clearly laid 
out in a special report prepared by the Children’s Advocate for 
the province, and on behalf of government I want to thank the 
Children’s Advocate, the Child Advocate, for the excellent 
work that he did in preparing this document. 
 
And third, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to point out to 
members opposite and to members of the public who may be 
listening that the Government of Saskatchewan, under the 
leadership of the minister of Social Services — now called 
Community Resources — made it very clear that all of the 
recommendations in the Child Advocate’s report were going to 
be adopted and followed and an acknowledgement that the 
problems that were identified by the advocate needed to be 
addressed. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I wanted to just put 
those things clearly on the record. 
 
Now significantly in terms of how we move forward, I want to 
make the following points. First of all, it’s clear that a new 
relationship needs to be established between . . . a new working 
relationship between the Regina Treaty Status Indian Services 
— in other words the tribal council that serves the Regina 
region — and the Government of Saskatchewan around services 
being provided to these children. 
 
And I want to make the point that the issue is the relationship 
between the tribal council and our government. And what we 
are clearly saying to members opposite — although they 
obviously don’t agree — is that this is the organization that 
represents First Nations people in the Regina region, and we 
intend to continue working with this organization on behalf of 
Aboriginal children at risk here in the city of Regina. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister of the Department 
of Community Resources has made it clear that there needs to 
be a new approach taken to stabilization and assessment for 
children in Regina who are at risk on the street. And so, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, the decision that has been made is that Ranch 
Ehrlo is going to be significantly involved in this whole process 
in a working partnership with Oyate and in a working 
partnership with the tribal council in the Regina region. And I 
think that is a very positive decision on behalf of this 
government and on behalf of the Minister of Community 
Resources. 
 
And the roles, Madam Deputy Speaker, are going to be as 
follows: Ranch Ehrlo will take responsibility for assessment 
and stabilization of youth, including addressing issues of 
detoxification. And those services will be delivered at Ranch 
Ehrlo. And Oyate will have responsibility for residential care 
after youth have been stabilized, Madam Deputy Speaker, and 
after the initial detoxification concerns have been addressed. 
 
So residential care, ongoing residential care after stabilization 
and assessment will be done by Oyate, but assessment and 
stabilization will be done by Ranch Ehrlo. And then, Ranch 
Ehrlo will work with the staff at Oyate in terms of delivering 
the residential program. And I think this is going to be a good 
combination, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this is a very positive move on the part of government and it 
speaks to establishing a well-developed working relationship 
between government and the organizations that are delivering 
services to children who are being sexually exploited on our 
street. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, let me also point out that there 
are other initiatives this government is taking to strengthen the 
relationship that it will have with Oyate as residential services 
resume. And those services will only resume when all the 
recommendations that have been put forward by the Children’s 
Advocate are actually fully implemented. But at that point, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there will be two staff persons from 
the Department of Community Resources who are placed on the 
Oyate board on an ongoing basis. And I think that again is 
exactly what’s needed to ensure that there is a common vision 
and a common working relationship between the Department of 
Community Resources and the tribal council and the Oyate 
board. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to, I want to say a word 
about the new funding initiatives that were announced by our 
government this week, because one of the important decisions 
that has been announced is that we will be putting another 
$350,000 a year of additional funding into supporting 
community-based organizations that are providing services to 
youth at high risk on the street. This will be additional financial 
support to organizations that deliver outreach services to youth 
and additional financial support to organizations who provide 
youth and their families with services that help young people 
find alternatives to street life. 
 
In addition to that, Madam Deputy Speaker, we announced that 
we were going to put additional resources into policing because 
clearly deterring sexual predators has got to be at the foundation 
of our strategy for stopping the sexual exploitation of children. 
 
And our government has done a great deal in this area with the 
introduction of tough new legislation, four new Bills that have 
been brought in over the last five years, Madam Deputy 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

Speaker, all of which have made significant steps forward in 
terms of giving police the tools they need to deter sexual 
predators. 
 
What we announced this week, Madam Deputy Speaker, was 
another important addition in terms of responding to the 
recommendations of the special committee, and that is 
additional financial support for new police officers who will be 
dedicated to working on stopping the sexual exploitation of 
children on the streets, so two new officers in Saskatoon, two 
new officers in Regina, and one new officer in Prince Albert. 
And I think this is a very positive measure. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, let me also remind members opposite 
that we have implemented The Emergency Protection for 
Victims of Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act and that that Act 
is allowing police and child protection staff to apply on an 
emergency basis to a Justice of the Peace for an emergency 
protection intervention order. And those orders, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, are specifically designed to take children, to protect 
children who are believed to be at risk on the street but there is 
not enough evidence yet to file criminal charges. But, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, what is being done is that an intervention order 
is being applied to the suspected predator and if that predator 
reappears in the stroll area or is seen at all with the child, there’s 
a fine of $25,000, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve also passed new laws that prevent sexual predators or 
suspected sexual predators from driving their vehicles around 
stroll areas — so we’re trying to keep them off the stroll — and 
the result has been a significant decline in traffic on the stroll. 
And I’ve never once heard members opposite acknowledge that 
progress has been made in this area. 
 
This is a tough file, Madam Deputy Speaker, and our 
government has taken a number of measures . . . I haven’t had 
time today to make reference to all of them, but better student 
tracking, a lot more support for children who are not in school. 
 
Let me conclude, Madam Deputy Speaker, by moving the 
amendment: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
“Assembly” and substituting the following: 
 
support the development and implementation of a new 
comprehensive continuum-of-care model for sexually 
exploited children in response to the Children’s Advocate 
recommendations on the Oyate Safe House and as 
proposed by the Minister of Community Resources. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone and seconded by the member from 
Yorkton: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
“Assembly” and substituting the following: 

support the development and implementation of new 
comprehensive continuum-of-care model for sexually 
exploited children in response to the Children’s Advocate 
recommendations on the Oyate Safe House and as 
proposed by the Minister of Community Resources. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Yorkton, the Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I want to say that I am entering this afternoon or this 
morning into the debate, wanting to share some of my own 
experiences over the years on a very significant file and that of 
dealing with children and family. 
 
Madam Speaker, we’ve had a very, very difficult debate here 
over the last number of weeks. And I can say that, as a member 
of this House who has never had the opportunity of sitting as 
the minister responsible for Community Services — or as I 
know it, Social Services — this would be a very difficult 
opportunity to try to lead. And I say this from this perspective, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. I spent 20 years of my life working in 
the department of Social Services as a child protection worker, 
as a trainer of staff, and then worked for 10 years, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, with a private organization called SIGN 
[Society for the Involvement of Good Neighbours] in Yorkton. 
 
I can tell you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I have been in the 
homes of children who have been neglected, children who have 
been severely beaten, children who have been abused, children 
who have been sexually violated. It was my job as a child 
protection worker to remove those children from those families 
and place them into the continuum of care which the 
department had in place. 
 
I can say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I, I have never 
experienced anything as painful as having to go into the home 
of a family and remove from their homes children who are 
screaming and crying and calling out for their parents as you 
take them outside of their family. I have never in my life 
experienced anything like that, and I can say, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, from time to time I still hear some of those voices of 
those children, a very difficult experience. 
 
I want to say and trump what the member from Kelvington said, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, because she said the history of 
governments have been that they’ve screwed up. And the reality 
is, Madam Deputy Speaker, that in the time that I’ve practised 
in the field — in the early ’70s, and I know before that — 
governments in fact did screw up because, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the majority of children that we had in care then and 
that we took into care and those that we take into care today still 
represent many of the folk and young people from Aboriginal 
families. They still remain in majority those children. 
 
But we did something different in Saskatchewan, not as a 
political party that decided that we would do this in isolation of 
everybody else, but collectively with people from within 
community, with leadership from municipal levels, from 
opposition parties. We were able to put together a strategy, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that said we’re going to work 
co-operatively together to build a society in our province of 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

which we can live and work together. 
 
And what happened in the ’70s, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that 
we had a lot of dialogue with First Nations people. And we said 
to them we can’t continue to do business or we can’t continue 
to raise our families and live together in our province in the way 
in which we do it today. And we set up an extensive network of 
how we’d work and collaborate and treat each other in building 
a stronger Saskatchewan society. 
 
And we met with First Nations leaders . . . this government. 
And we did a number of things, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
are outstanding. And we talked, yes, about children that were 
being sexually abused. And yes, we talked about children that 
were being neglected. And we talked about families who were 
unemployed. And we built a structure in this province, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and it’s about supporting families. It’s about 
the context of how we deal with children for sure as the initial 
priority, but it’s about how we integrate children and family 
into community. That’s what the issue was all about. 
 
And we built a Saskatchewan structure that’s based on 
family-based services, Madam Deputy Speaker, because I can 
tell you that every one of those children that I took into care, 
screaming and crying from their families, where did they all 
want to go back to, Madam Deputy Speaker? Every one of them 
wanted to go back to their family. Not but one had ever 
indicated that they wanted to stay in the continuum of foster 
homes or child care institutions or to be placed for adoption, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, which I had some experience doing as 
well. None of them asked for any of those services. They all 
wanted to go back to their families and be part of that. 
 
And so what did we do in this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, over that period of time, including what we did with 
children who were sexually abused? There should be nobody in 
this House who stands up and gives a speech that we haven’t 
done anything with children who’ve been sexually abused in the 
history of this province over the last 35 years, irrespective of 
which administration was in place. We shouldn’t be making 
those comments because they’re not accurate. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have today 34 community tripartite 
with RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers in 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because we said in this province that we 
needed to have Aboriginal people involved in policing their 
own family, their own reserves, because we were, as the 
member from Kelvington said, screwing up. And you know 
what? We made that agreement, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
now we have it today. 
 
We said, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we’re taking way too 
many children into care. We’re not providing the appropriate 
foster home support for them or the specialized services that 
they require. Our institutions don’t have enough Aboriginal 
people working in them. And so we developed over the years in 
this administration and the administration that followed us in 
the ’80s occasions where we had Aboriginal people working in 
those facilities, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And today under our administration in the early . . . throughout 
the period we have today, Madam Deputy Speaker, 19 — 19 
Indian and child family service agencies to deliver these kinds 

of services across the province. And they were put together 
collectively through debate and discussion. Why? Because as 
the member from Kelvington says, we were screwing up, those 
years. And so we made some decisions about how we would 
make that better when we put new resources into place, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what have we done going forward since then, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? And the . . . [inaudible] . . . of the kinds of 
things that we’ve been able to do over the last 20, 15 years with 
First Nations people is unprecedented. We have today a model 
of child care service delivery and family services in Canada that 
was born in this province. We did it. We led the nation on this 
piece. 
 
And today, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s been incorporated. 
And there shouldn’t be anyone in this legislature who says that 
that’s not the fact because it is. We’ve had provinces come here 
in the early ’90s from all over Canada to adopt Saskatchewan’s 
system. Why? Because it is the very best system in terms of 
how you deal with families and children, because it’s family 
focused, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s family focused. It’s about 
providing services to families. 
 
And what have we done over the last number of years, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? Well we’ve provided additional support and 
financing for families that are of the poor. Have we done 
enough? By not a country mile we haven’t done enough. And 
people would argue that we should do more, and nobody would 
argue that we shouldn’t. And we should build on the work that 
we’ve done in integrating and providing opportunities for 
Aboriginal people into the workforce. 
 
And we have today, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the most 
comprehensive contracts with private sector and Aboriginal 
people in the nation — we have it here — to alleviate the kinds 
of things that cause the issues that we’re talking about today, 
which is sexual abuse and poverty and neglect of children. It’s a 
job, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a job. It’s an opportunity for 
you to be able to support your family and your children. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we had a number of initiatives that we 
voted on in this House over the last number of months. We’ve 
had $14.1 million increases to the Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan and transitional program. We have 1.15 enhanced dollars 
to employment supplement and $3.6 million for child care 
subsidy. And we’ve increased our First Nations child care 
agencies. We have $700,000 that we’ve put into that now, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we continue to do a ton of things 
to build the relationship between First Nations and our 
government and our communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what this debate should not deteriorate to, Madam Deputy 
Speaker — it should not deteriorate to — it should not 
deteriorate to the notion about the fact that there aren’t, 
equipped today in Saskatchewan, appropriate First Nations 
communities that can do this job. Yes sometimes, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, there is a failure in the continuum to reach the 
level that’s required to do good work and provide services. And 
that’s been acknowledged. But we shouldn’t discount their 
capacity to get stronger. We shouldn’t discount their capacity to 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

do better work. And we shouldn’t discount their capacity to 
provide leadership on this very important front. 
 
And so, I say to the members opposite and to this legislature, 
we have a tremendous number of programs and services that we 
provide today. And I want to commend the minister that’s been 
handling this file because it is the most difficult piece of work 
that anybody could ever have the responsibility of taking on and 
managing. 
 
And that’s why, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going to be 
supporting the amendment to the motion which says that we’re 
going to continue to have a comprehensive continuum of child 
care services across the province for sexually assaulted children 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I do count it 
an honour to be able to stand in the Assembly this afternoon 
and speak to this issue. 
 
And I just want to begin by just quoting a couple of comments 
in one of the local papers made recently and the questions we’re 
asked — when is the government just throwing money at a 
problem to save political face and when is it a heartfelt 
admission that a government truly screwed up in the care of 
some of society’s most vulnerable people and is finally putting 
in the model of care and funding levels that should have been 
there in the first place? And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was 
certainly pleased to hear the member who just spoke, the 
member from Yorkton, acknowledging the fact that there have 
been mistakes made. And no doubt about it, we trust that from 
the mistakes we’ve learned a number of things. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, if actually beginning to work and 
move towards the model that was brought forward by the 
all-party committee or the recommendations, if the debate that 
has taken place over the past number of months following 
recommendations and information brought forward by the Child 
Advocate and the Provincial Auditor then, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the members of this Assembly have certainly been 
doing their job. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I enter this debate, I think — 
as we have noted and most members have noted — children are 
certainly important in each and every one of our lives. And I 
was honoured to be part of the all-party committee that in 
1999-2000 toured the province of Saskatchewan trying to 
address the issue brought forward by a former colleague, the 
former member from Humboldt, Arlene Julé, regarding children 
at risk. 
 
And at the time, Madam Deputy Speaker, I had no idea of the 
number of young people — and specifically young girls — that 
were on the streets and the challenges that they were facing. 
And in fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, as we met with 
community groups, as we met with First Nations leaders and 
tribal councils, it was not only mind-boggling but it was 
emotionally draining to hear some of the stories that were 

brought to our attention of the challenges that young people 
were facing. And we realized, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
many of these young children were actually coming from 
dysfunctional homes as well. 
 
And so the challenge we had as a committee was to come up 
with some recommendations that we hoped would encourage 
the government of the day, which is the current sitting 
government, to begin to move and address these issues. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, out of this, one of the 
recommendations that actually came forward was the 
implementation of a safe house actually and the house in 
question, Oyate Safe House. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I believed at the time that the 
involvement of the tribal council and the people in the Oyate 
Safe House was certainly one of a desire to meet the goals and 
objectives of the all-party committee. However what I’ve seen 
in the past number of weeks is what we’ve seen . . . a situation 
where the government has actually dropped the ball on the 
issue. We’ve seen a minister that has refused to actually come 
clear with the people of Saskatchewan regarding a number of 
concerns that were raised by the Child Advocate and by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
[12:00] 
 
We’ve seen a government that’s been trying to hide from their 
responsibilities. And the scathing reports that we brought 
forward by the Provincial Auditor and the Child Advocate were 
issues that I believe from a while back the . . . there certainly 
were the indications that the government and certainly the 
comments that were made by the minister were not leading us 
to believe that the government really understood the issue. And 
I believe the . . . on one of the call-in shows the Child Advocate 
even made the comment that it was his feeling that the minister 
didn’t understand the complexities of the problems that were 
happening at the Oyate Safe House. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you have a minister of 
Community Services on one hand welcoming scrutiny but then 
on the other hand refusing to answer questions, or when you 
have government members on one hand moving a motion to 
have the former deputy minister to come forward to Public 
Accounts Committee and answer questions, and then on the 
other hand when the deputy minister does appears, moving a 
motion that the deputy minister can’t speak — you have to ask 
yourself what’s going on. 
 
Those are many of the questions, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
we’ve been raising for the past number of weeks — questions 
that people across this province, people that care about children, 
are concerned about. People that care about children have been 
asking. And the member from Yorkton just moments ago 
acknowledged in this Assembly, in his past life as a worker in 
Social Services, of the traumatic situations that he faced. And it 
said to me that this member understood a number of the 
complexities that children at risk face. However, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure all the members on the 
government side of the House have the same or were showing 
the same compassion that that member was just speaking about 
a moment ago. 
 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as opposition members, it’s our 
responsibility not only to criticize but to compliment the 
government when they do make a right decision. Now our 
criticism over the past number of weeks has been unrelenting. 
And I don’t apologize for that because there have been some 
serious questions and issues and children’s lives are at risk. But 
I notice from the amendment that was brought forward by the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone, the member talks about the 
development and implementation of a new comprehensive 
continuum care model for sexually exploited children. And I 
believe that’s what the all-party committee was talking about in 
the first place. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, had the government actually 
moved on a number of those recommendations a number of 
years ago, we probably wouldn’t be sitting here debating this 
issue today. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, well the Minister of 
Justice says, oh yes we would. And considering the complexity 
of the issue, he’s probably right. He’s probably right. There’s 
no doubt about it. This is a complex issue. 
 
However, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important for us 
to realize that when you finally recognize you make mistakes 
— as the columnist said, the government screwed up — then 
maybe you need to move on. We’ve heard for the past number 
of weeks . . . We’ve another comment talking about: 
 

For a year now, [the comment is, for a year now] we’ve 
listened to meaningless rhetoric from Belanger that the 
children come first — words that rang rather hollow, given 
the fact that the government entrusted their care and 
treatment to a board and staff at Oyate incapable of 
dealing with their problems. 

 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s what the debate has been 
about. The debate has been all about the care of these children, 
how that care was being provided, whether or not Oyate Safe 
House was indeed the right place for this type of care. And as 
we’ve seen, Madam Deputy Speaker, we find that there were 
many situations in that safe house where children really weren’t 
getting the care or even that the personnel providing the care 
didn’t receive the proper scrutiny that should have been given at 
the time before they were hired. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as I think back to the number of 
meetings we had and the challenges that were brought to our 
attention by families, by parents, by grandparents, and by First 
Nations peoples, it’s imperative, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
we rather than the . . . I think it was the minister responsible for 
advanced education and learning was commenting about the 
fact today that it’s not about the children. Well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it is about the children, and it’s important for us to 
realize that it is about the children. 
 
That’s why this debate is taking place. It is about the children. 
It’s about recognizing the challenges that face young girls that 
are placed on the streets, many cases against their will. It’s 
about the fact that we also recognize, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
unfortunately that in this province the greater majority happen 
to come from First Nations communities. 
 
And that’s why it’s imperative that we need to work with First 
Nations leaders and, as my colleague from Saskatoon 

mentioned, the fact the . . . recognition that within the First 
Nations community we do have leadership. We do have elders. 
We do have men and women who have a genuine concern for 
young children and are willing to offer their help, their 
assistance to provide whatever means is necessary, whatever 
needs to be done to ensure that young children have a means 
whereby when they find themselves in exploited situations that 
they can find the safety and security of . . . whether it’s a home, 
whether it’s Ranch Ehrlo, or whether it’s an extended family 
member that may be able to provide the care and love that will 
give them the opportunity to escape the ravages of the street 
life, Madam Deputy Speaker, and enable them to move on with 
their lives and to grow up to be valuable citizens in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s my great privilege to enter into this discussion, a 
very important discussion that I think demands some sensitivity 
and some carefulness as we move forward in this debate. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I have really three areas that I want to 
cover in the brief time that I have. The first area I want to talk 
about is what the Children’s Advocate says about the work that 
this government has done. 
 
The Children’s Advocate supports the government’s plan for 
reopening the Oyate Safe House but does have questions about 
the care of vulnerable youth, the care that they will receive. 
Bernstein gave the government credit for its commitment to 
assisting youth by pursuing a cultural component for 
rehabilitating clients, providing more funding to community 
outreach programs, and laying out a multi-tiered plan that 
includes Ranch Ehrlo and Oyate. 
 
And this is a quote, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the Children’s 
Advocate says, quote, “I’m more comfortable with the 
restructured role . . . [of] Oyate. That will assist them with 
operating within the boundaries of their competency.” He does 
go on however as a cautionary note that, quote, “Oyate is only 
one facility in . . . community dealing with a specific group of 
vulnerable children.” But this is the important part. I’ll go on,     
“But sexual exploitation is a major systemic problem in the 
province,” Madam Deputy Speaker. This is an issue that didn’t 
arrive recently. It’s a long-standing problem. It’s a stubborn 
problem to repair. It’s a reflection of a lot of other occurrences 
that have happened within our province and within our country 
over the last 150 years. 
 
But the most important point is what are we doing about it. The 
most important part we have — and I just have a brief time — 
but the three points I wanted to cover is the area of Justice and 
what DCR [Department of Community Resources] is doing as 
well as some of the areas that my department is able to work on. 
 
Just this week, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are new police 
resources to combat child sexual exploitation. The Government 
of Saskatchewan is providing 133,000 this year and nearly 
$1,000,000 annually to expand the provincial strategy on child 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

sexual exploitation. 
 
The province will provide 50,000 this year with 550,000 
annually to expand the capacity of police services to deal with 
the street level sexual exploitation of children. Five new 
municipal police officer positions are being provided; two each 
in Regina and Saskatoon and one in Prince Albert. 
 
There is also work being begun to establish a specialized team 
staffed by two prosecutors and one assistant coordinator to 
strengthen the province’s ability to use the flagging system to 
identify long-term offenders or dangerous offenders. 
 
And finally, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is funding of 50,000 
this year to begin a $150,000 public education campaign aimed 
at preventing child sexual exploitation and that plan will be 
rolled out into the future. 
 
Under the area of DCR, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the 
government expansion of those services, additional support for 
sexually exploited children. The focus, as the minister has said, 
is always to ensure protection, safety, and well-being of 
children in need. There will be an expanded, multi-faceted 
approach to address the needs of young people who require 
special care and treatment services. The new service delivery is 
being delivered by Ranch Ehrlo, Madam Deputy Speaker, and 
that is a leading child welfare agency with worldwide 
recognition of their abilities. There is also an expansion of 
services of $350,000 in funding to other community-based 
organizations which are already providing outreach programs to 
sexually exploited children and youth in Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Prince Albert. 
 
And this is in emphasis to the government’s continued 
commitment to working with First Nations. There will be two 
more people on the board, two additional staff to consult with, 
and, most importantly, development of a plan to implement 
each of the auditor’s and children advocate’s recommendations. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there is also the long list of things that 
are being accomplished under the Premier’s Project Hope. And 
I would just like to raise a couple of them: a day program in La 
Ronge that has been developed, and also an additional mobile 
treatment coordinator has been hired, and funding has also been 
provided to the detox centre in Saskatoon. 
 
Regina’s drug treatment court has been opened and is operating. 
We’ve expanded methadone services. The Project Hope 
implementation team is in place. We’ve held a conference in 
Saskatoon to help train addiction professionals. There is 
additional safer communities and neighbourhood officers in 
Regina and Saskatoon, and we’ve also hired additional drug 
treatment officers, two in Yorkton and two in North Battleford. 
We’ve also lobbied the federal government and they’ve 
responded to strengthen penalties under more serious drugs. As 
well, we’ve built on Meth Watch to ensure that crystal meth 
components are out of the hands of children. And also, we’ve 
also have an education and prevention director that is in place. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this brings me to my last point — and 
I have a very short time — is the opposition’s handling of these 
types of issues in the last number of years. And it’s really hard 
to accept some of the comments that they’ve made, when on the 

one hand the Leader of the Opposition says and I quote, “There 
is not a single government dollar available to help free your son 
from addiction.” He said that publicly when he knows that the 
Project Hope has provided additional dollars, multi-year dollars, 
additional beds in Saskatoon, in Prince Albert, and in Regina. 
 
This is what the member for Saskatoon Southeast said in a 
householder: we won’t have a single new bed until 2008. Well, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when he said that, we had already had 
new beds in P.A. [Prince Albert], Saskatoon, and Regina, nearly 
two years ahead of the plan schedule. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Northwest is wanting to enter the 
debate again and yet he is an individual that has advised parents 
to go out of province for treatment without checking to see if 
there’s publicly funded beds here in Saskatchewan — and the 
media has caught him out on that — without checking. In fact, 
this is what he said about Project Hope, this is quote: “. . . truly 
it is [a] project no hope.” 
 
Now who are you going to believe, the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest or the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse which 
provided this government and this province with an award of 
leadership in the whole area of substance abuse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the opposition 
just can’t help themselves. They have lots of words, but very 
little actions. In fact, even today in their talk, they’re saying that 
we’ve thrown money at the problem. The Leader of the 
Opposition has said, we’ve throwing money off the back of the 
truck, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Yet just recently, Madam Deputy Speaker, they released a 
pamphlet that has their guiding principles. And I’m just going 
to highlight three of those guiding principles. The first one of 
them is smaller, less intrusive government. The other one is 
steady, gradual reduction in government spending. And finally, 
a strong safety net for those who truly need support. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, of all the million dollars that 
I’ve just talked about that’s being spent, I would like to hear 
from the opposition in their question period and in their 
speeches how they plan on funding all of the ones that they’re 
calling for when they’re saying, well they want a steady, 
gradual reduction in government spending, smaller, less 
intrusive government. And which of these people are truly in 
need of support and which of the people that we’re helping are 
truly not in need of support? 
 
[12:15] 
 
I think the public demands an answer. These people have laid 
out their plan, their guiding principles. We need a little bit more 
detail, Madam Deputy Speaker. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
definitely support the member for Greystone in his motion and I 
oppose the motion put forward by the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This ends the 65-minute portion of 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

the debate and we’ll now open up for question period. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Madam Deputy Speaker, to the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone, from Saskatoon Greystone: the 
Children’s Advocate today stated in the newspaper . . . he 
questioned where treatment fits into the new service model 
which only mentions assessment, stabilization, and transitional 
care. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Clearly treatment is going to need to be involved as 
part of both the detoxification and stabilization process, and 
also part of the residential care process. And Ranch Ehrlo will 
provide very important advice on treatment for these children. 
 
And then that effort will be combined with the cultural 
knowledge that the tribal council will bring to bear in terms of 
the healing process, because I think we need a culturally 
appropriate healing process. So the combined efforts of the 
tribal council and Ranch Ehrlo will provide the treatment 
resources that these children need. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Their federal cousins, the Conservative Party of Canada, has cut 
and has not proceeded with the Kelowna accord, which is an 
important new strategy formulated by the federal government 
and by First Nations from all across Canada that will do great 
work to address many of the concerns that is subject to this 
debate, but also other areas beyond this debate. So does the 
member support the federal Conservatives in slashing and not 
agreeing with this report? Or does he think that the federal 
Conservatives should stand up and support the Kelowna 
accord? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Thank 
you very much for the opportunity to respond to the question. 
You know, the member from Saskatoon went on previously 
here about project no hope and where it’s doing and what it’s 
not doing. And, you know, the member knows very well that he 
hasn’t put in place one long-term treatment bed in this province 
yet. 
 
He goes on to talk about children and what children are doing. 
He’s studying it well, but in fact he hasn’t delivered one 
long-term treatment bed in this province as of today. What he’s 
done is done reports, done studies, and blame — blame 
everybody but what is really in case. Maybe he would like to 
explain to me why the member from Yorkton closed 
Whitespruce Treatment Centre which was for addiction 

children, and also dropped the program SADAC [Saskatchewan 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission]. Could the member 
explain that? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 
member from Greystone. Since we started this issue of children 
on the streets, there’s been three ministers that have dealt with 
this department. None of these ministers spoke about this in the 
House today, although we did have two cabinet ministers speak 
on the issue. The three people that really were responsible, the 
ones that we needed to have answers from, haven’t been 
answering us at all. 
 
My question to the member is: why don’t the people who were 
aware of the issues all along — the member from Regina 
Rosemont and the member from Moose Jaw North and the 
member from Athabasca — why didn’t they speak to this issue 
that’s so very important, if in fact it is important to your 
government? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — . . . Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Let me very simply say the minister who has 
responsibility for this file right now is the Minister of 
Community Resources, and he has been answering your 
questions every day in this Assembly for the last 12 days. 
You’ve had dozens and dozens of answers from that minister, 
and you’ve never acknowledged the progress that has been 
made on this file. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Yorkton, the Minister of Regional Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m holding today a document that’s been 
circulated around the Saskatoon ridings, of which it says in it, 
one of the guiding principles . . . And I put this to the member 
from Saskatoon Northwest, answer the question to me which it 
is. Which families do you think — and children — that do not 
need to be supported in the social service system today of which 
we provide because your note here says that you’re going to 
reduce the services to those who only truly need it. Tell me 
which ones of the folk that live today and work in the social 
services system no longer need the services. Could you describe 
for me which ones you would pull out of the system. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you for the opportunity to respond. I 
don’t even know what document he’s talking about, but I will 
ask him because he was the minister that was there: why did the 
member from Yorkton close Whitespruce which at its time was 
a state of the art facility for children with addictions? You 
know, why does he have in his own Premier’s riding children 
that are dying on a ratio of 4:1? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the Assembly to allow 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

the member who’s on their feet to answer the question without 
having to holler it to the room. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, we saw that the health report 
showed in the Premier’s riding a ratio of 4:1 children dying. We 
saw 1,600 per cent more suicide rate, and the member 
obviously hasn’t done his job. Would he explain to me why he 
closed Whitespruce facility, a state of the art for addicted 
children in this province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The question that I have for the member from Yorkton 
is that we had some . . . the Child Advocate in his report put 
forward some interesting information and some of his fears. He 
talked about child-first legislation, and I know that the member 
from Yorkton talked about that as well. 
 
I want to know how this member and this government sees the 
Children’s Advocate’s report and what they feel about his 
recommendations that children should always come first 
regardless of any other situation, regardless of the incidents 
around them. They want to know: what do you think about the 
children’s-first legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There is no debate about, and there has 
never been a debate about . . . And in my comments I put very 
clearly that children have to be the priority. It’s the model of 
what you deliver the services from, and they, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, are family based and family oriented, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. That’s what I said. 
 
And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that there is a continuum of 
services that are provided where you use institutional care, 
where you use foster home programs, where you use 
community support services to provide those, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, but the reality is that it’s always about children first. 
 
And we have a ton of programs in Saskatchewan today of 
which other parts of the country today provide, and they got 
their initiative from this province, Madam Deputy Speaker, in a 
host of fashions. Of course it’s about children first, but the 
model is about ensuring that families are engaged in a full 
complement. And that is not the position, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that Conservative governments in Saskatchewan have 
taken of the past, and it will not be the situation of which that 
members opposite would take, Madam Deputy Speaker, for 
sure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. My question is to the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest and it relates to the issue of funding for the 
Department of Community Resources and further to the point 
that the member for Yorkton was making. In your current 
literature you’re talking about cutting funding for key services. 
You’ll recall that a few years ago you proposed a $50 million 
cut to the Department of Community Resources. And my 
question to you is: in light of your plans for a $50 million cut, 

where will the funding come to continue to reduce poverty in 
the province and provide services to sexually exploited 
children? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
That’s a very easy question to answer. That $50 million would 
come out of the business investment fund that they have there 
that led to things like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]. We would take that $50 million and 
we would put it towards children in this province . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time limit is now 
elapsed. Oh I’m sorry. Keep going. I’m sorry, I misread the 
clock. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know they won’t explain why they 
closed Whitespruce. I would like to know from any member 
over there, in the three years that Oyate Safe House was 
opened, how many children were returned to their families 
cured and healed? How many children were there in the facility 
in total? How many of them went back to their families? How 
many of them are still on the street today? And I know the 
answer to the question — absolutely every one of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time has now elapsed for the 
75-minute debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Motion No. 2 — Fostering a Balance 
Between Work and Family 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to move the motion 
recognizing the contributions of the province of Saskatchewan 
and the ongoing . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I ask the 
members . . . 75-minute debate has now elapsed; 75-minute 
debate is elapsed. I ask the members to come to order. It was a 
spirited debate, but I’ve now recognized the member who wants 
put forward a private member’s motion, the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to move the motion recognizing the contributions of 
the province of Saskatchewan to the ongoing struggle to strike 
balance between work and family. It is also my pleasure to rise 
today in this debate. Madam Deputy Speaker, no reasonable 
person can deny the great importance of balancing work and 
family life. It is a struggle that all working people share, a 
struggle, Madam Deputy Speaker, perhaps not unfamiliar to 
even the members of this Assembly. 
 
The work and family unit of the Department of Labour 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

coordinates the activities aimed at lessening the negative 
personal corporate and more extensive economic consequences 
arising from employees’ inability to balance their family and 
work responsibilities. The unit has come to some very 
compelling conclusions regarding the importance of this issue 
in those three primary areas. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as the social and economic realities of 
our time continue to change with the ebb and flow of our 
culture, the face of family life changes and adapts. Today in 
Saskatchewan 67 per cent of mothers of preschool age children 
contribute to the labour force. That is two out of every three 
mothers. Today in Saskatchewan two working parents 
characterize the majority of families and the vast majority of 
single-parent families contribute to the labour force. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in addition too, our population and 
consequently our workforce is aging as a result of the baby 
boom generation. As baby boomers retire and age, a large 
portion of our population will become dependent upon the care 
of family. Of course the challenge of caring for this large 
segment of society will not be a phenomenon unique to 
Saskatchewan. All of the provinces and states on the continent 
will be affected by the aging of baby boomers. Our population 
is experiencing an increase in work-family conflict and stress. 
Circumstances are forcing people into situations where they 
cannot sufficiently balance work and family. 
 
My own situation was where, when my daughter was two years 
old, my father took ill, my mother was physically handicapped, 
and my daughter and I had to move into my parents’ home to 
provide the care that my father needed at that time. Shortly after 
my father passed away, my mother ended up being afflicted by 
breast cancer. And being that we have no family members in 
Canada, that responsibility fell upon my husband and myself as 
well. So my family can very readily identify with the issue of 
balancing work and family and the struggle that it brings upon 
us when we’re doing so in a situation where we have small 
children and are sandwiched in a situation where we’re also 
caring for our parents. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, so prominent has this issue become 
that the balancing work and family initiative of 1997-98 was 
established. It included a public task force and primary research 
on the employees in Saskatchewan. According to the 1998 
Saskatchewan work family survey, an estimated 57 per cent of 
the employees in this province maintained the responsibility for 
the care of an elder. Twenty-two per cent spent an average of 
3.98 hours a week providing such care. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, 18 per cent of the employees in Saskatchewan are 
estimated to be in this sandwich generation. Of course, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the survey was conducted in 1998. Since then 
our society has continued to age and the incidence of care for 
older generations has only increased. 
 
In addition to the increasing frequency of elder care, an 
estimated 14 per cent of employees in Saskatchewan have 
children three years of age or younger and an estimated 20 per 
cent have children four or five years of age. What this means, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is that the responsibilities that our 
society bears to family is increasing. Of course the amount that 

Saskatchewan residents are working is not decreasing. 
Precarious employment forces some to work several jobs in 
order to sustain themselves. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Madam Deputy Speaker, the incidence 
of two working parents has becoming steadily increasing for 
decades. The research of Saskatchewan’s balancing work and 
family initiative has shown that the majority of employees 
report a significant amount of fatigue and stress in trying to 
balance work and family. In fact 51 per cent reported what the 
researchers deemed to be high role overload. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, they simply have too much to do — too many 
responsibilities between their work and family lives. 
Twenty-six per cent reported again what researchers deemed 
high work to family interference. This could be, for example, 
attending a workplace meeting while a child is ill. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a lack of work-family balance comes 
at a significant cost, not only to the employee in question or to 
that employee’s family, but also to that person’s employer and 
to the economy of Saskatchewan as a whole. Of course 
employees suffer stress and fatigue, and families suffer from a 
lack of time together. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, employers 
also suffer excessive absenteeism and decreased productivity. 
Stress contributes greatly to a person’s physical health. 
Ultimately even recruitment and retention becomes a problem. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, communities suffer from a society’s 
inability to balance work and family. People are far less apt to 
join clubs, teams, or social groups without balance in their lives. 
Community and neighbourhood relationships suffer. There is 
also a significant cost to taxpayers. 
 
A 2004 study found that a lack of work-family balance is 
increasing physician visits by 25 per cent, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. In-patient hospital stays are increasing 17 per cent, and 
use of emergency rooms by 23 per cent all across Canada. 
Balancing work and family life is not only the best interests on 
any individual employee; it is also necessary for business to 
operate efficiently and for our economy to flourish. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, 1998 Saskatchewan work-family 
research showed a correlation between the amount of 
work-family conflict employees report and incidence of 
workplace productivity when polled employees indicated a 
relationship between lack of balance and feelings of 
dissatisfaction and decreased productivity at work. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, evidence of this problem abounds. A 
2002 publication based on the pan-Canadian research of Dr. 
Linda Duxbury and Dr. Chris Higgins suggests that employees 
with high levels of role overload are 5.6 times more likely to 
report job stress. They’re also 3.5 times more likely to have 
high levels of absenteeism due to emotional, physical, or mental 
fatigue, 2.3 times more likely to report high intent to turnover, 
and 2.8 times more likely to miss work due to child care 
problems. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada 
reports that 75 per cent of employers believe employee stress 
can be attributed at least in part to difficulties in balancing work 
and personal responsibilities. In its 2000 Changing Employment 
Relations study, the Canadian Policy Research Network found 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

that when asked about what is important to job quality, 70 per 
cent of employees reported work-family balance. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this is especially remarkable when one 
considers that only 62 per cent reported, pays well. Canadians, 
according to this particular study, are more concerned about 
striking a work and family balance than they are about being 
well paid. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government recognizes the 
importance of this issue, not only to workers of Saskatchewan 
but also to business and to our economy. Our focus is on 
making life better for the Saskatchewan families and that is 
exactly why, Madam Deputy Speaker, Family Day will provide 
workers with the opportunity to tend to the growing needs of 
family and allow busy families to reconnect with a focus on 
family. 
 
Our government has introduced the new statutory holiday called 
Saskatchewan Family Day. Our government truly understands 
the importance of Family Day. This government is committed 
to making Saskatchewan the best place in all of Canada for 
young people to live, work, and raise a family. We are 
committed to providing families with the opportunity to strike a 
balance. A prime example of that is Saskatchewan’s recognition 
as having amongst the most statutory holidays of all the 
provinces in Canada. Combine this along with having the most 
generous vacation provisions in the country. It provides the 
people of Saskatchewan with the chance to achieve a good 
work-family balance. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, time with family is critical for each 
and every one of us. Critical to a balance between work and 
family is the opportunity to re-establish the relationships that 
become strained by all of the responsibilities in life. Family Day 
is just another of this government’s initiatives for families that 
will benefit workers, employers, and our economy alike. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech provided a vision 
for Saskatchewan that is progressive and good for the working 
people of this province. Making life better for the families in 
this province is not simply a slogan, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
We are implementing real ideas and getting real results. Of 
course our ideas and our vision didn’t begin with the Throne 
Speech, Madam Deputy Speaker. The spring budget set out a 
vision that we are now building upon. This has been the legacy 
of this government — a progressive approach and a clear 
vision. We have in the past and are continuing to address the 
issue of work-family balance for the sake of business, the 
economy, workers, and, most important, Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
The results are clear. Madam Deputy Speaker, what price can 
be put on employee loyalty? Research shows that the long-term 
economic cost of employee turnover is considerable. There are 
issues of rehiring and retention of course, and that comes at a 
price. According to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan has 
consistently achieved the highest average job tenure in Canada, 
exceeding the national average by 22.8 per cent in 2005. And in 
Saskatchewan you can count on a loyal workforce willing to 
help business to succeed in the long term. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it is remarkable that Saskatchewan maintains its record 
for retention even in spite of the efforts to continuously slander 
the province by the party opposite. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, the economy of Saskatchewan is so 
hot, so booming that week after week and month after month 
we are setting records for jobs in this province. Statistics 
Canada figures, released on November 7, show five thousand 
and one, seven hundred people were working in Saskatchewan 
in October. That’s up 21,800 over the figure for October 2005 
and exceeds the old record for October set only two years ago 
by 16,200. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, October’s figures represented the 
seventh straight month of record job numbers for the province. 
This is truly great news for Saskatchewan, and in the words of 
the member for Saskatoon Massey Place, just, quote: 
 

“. . . the latest example of an economy and a province that 
are on a roll. [Madam Deputy Speaker] Our continued job 
growth is good news for both working families and for our 
young people who are currently building their careers and 
futures here.” 

 
But unfortunately bad news for the Saskatchewan Party who 
continually paint a negative picture of Saskatchewan, despite 
the facts. Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

Full-time jobs in Saskatchewan increased 22,900 over 
October of last year. [And] Youth employment was up 
8,100 over last October. 
 
Jobs were up last month in construction, services, the oil, 
gas and mining industries, trade, transportation, finance, 
insurance and real estate and public administration. 
 
[Madam Deputy Speaker] . . . manufacturing shipments, 
natural gas and oil production, urban housing starts, 
international exports, retail sales, building permit values, 
retail sales, and average weekly earnings are all up. 

 
Saskatchewan had the second lowest unemployment rate 
in all of Canada in October, at 3.3 per cent . . . [down from 
October 2005] and well below the national rate of 5.6 per 
cent. [Madam Deputy Speaker] This is the lowest 
unemployment rate for October in 27 years. Saskatoon had 
the third lowest unemployment rate among major 
Canadian cities at 3.9 per cent. 

 
Clearly, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is no shortage of jobs in 
this province. Saskatchewan’s economy is performing so well 
that there is only a shortage of labour. That is exactly why this 
province must continue to be progressive in its approach to 
workers. Who could possibly believe that destroying 
Saskatchewan’s labour legislation in favour of what the 
misguided Saskatchewan Party calls, a competitive labour 
climate, will encourage workers to come to this province? 
 
Who could possibly believe that scrapping some of the most 
progressive labour legislation in Canada, labour legislation that 
includes protections for workers’ health and regulations for 
balancing work and family life could attract working people? 
 
If we listened to the member from Kelvington-Wadena, the 
province shouldn’t even have occupational health and safety 
regulations. Apparently we don’t need them. Presumably the 
issues of safety for workers would take care of themselves. She 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

said on the topic of worker safety that, and that was in this 
Chamber, Madam Deputy Speaker, quote “. . . the government 
doesn’t . . . have to put forward every rule and regulation . . . ” 
 
I suppose Madam Deputy Speaker that this shouldn’t be too 
surprising considering the Leader of the Opposition, along with 
his declaration of war on working people, has referred to the 
occupational health and safety legislation as merely, quote, “red 
tape and regulation.” 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I wonder, I wonder if the 72 miners at 
the Mosaic mine near Esterhazy would agree with the 
Saskatchewan Party on how unnecessary labour legislation is. I 
wonder if they believe that safety issues would just take care of 
themselves. 
 
On the issue of the Saskatchewan Family Day, we have some 
interesting quotes from the members opposite, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that I would like to share with you. For instance the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast, as he stated in this Chamber, 
and I quote: 
 

I would like to first start out, Madam Deputy Speaker, by 
commending the NDP for using yet one of the 
Saskatchewan Party initiatives. This is something that 
[again] the Saskatchewan Party has talked about for some 
significant period of time. 

 
Now this is very interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, given that 
the member from Cannington said that his party hasn’t even 
looked at the issue. Matter of fact he goes on to say that, 
personally he does have an opinion, quote, “As an employee I 
always wanted one, holiday in February, maybe every February 
29th,” he said in The StarPhoenix. 
 
 [12:45] 
 
Now if we move on to a quote from the Leader-Post from the 
member for Cypress Hills, the quote reads, “a mid-winter 
holiday even isn’t on the radar screen for Cypress Hills 
constituents,” said the member for Cypress Hills. Now the 
Leader of the Opposition as recently as October 2006 on CJME 
radio said, quote: 
 

You know we just finished a by-election in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and I knocked a lot of doors myself . . . I heard 
nothing from the people of the province about a demand 
for another stat holiday. 
 

But yet the member for Saskatoon Southeast says it’s been on 
the radar screen for a significant period of time. I’m confused. 
Now the other quote from the Regina Leader-Post is that the 
. . . “Such a measure [to introduce a statutory holiday] was also 
opposed by Saskatchewan Party Leader . . . in 2004.” 
 
And the member for Wood River in this Chamber of October, 
2006 said, quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, we talked about the family day that was 
announced. Another political ploy to try and buy voters off 
I guess . . . Now teachers have already talked to us and 
said, you know what we have a set number of days in the 
calendar year that we must teach — 197. Now we have a 

holiday in February. Where are we going to make up that 
other teaching day. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I haven’t had one single phone call 
from a teacher in my constituency or elsewhere complaining 
about Saskatchewan Family Day and I might be surprised ever 
to receive such a phone call. Now in contrast this has been on 
this NDP government’s radar screen for some time, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to quote the member for Saskatoon Greystone from 
March 29, 2001 and he said in this Chamber: 
 

First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see . . . [the] 
amendment to The Labour Standards Act that will provide 
every Saskatchewan resident with a statutory holiday in 
the third week of February. At the present time, there is no 
statutory holiday between January 1 — New Year’s Day 
— and Easter and I believe the time has come to put such 
a holiday in place. 
 

Now that’s in stark comparison to the quotes that we have read, 
heard, and seen from the Saskatchewan Party members 
opposite. 
 
Now the NDP, the NDP has a lot to be . . . You know it’s really 
sad, Madam Deputy Speaker, when the members opposite find 
this a humorous topic because as I’ve stated before we on this 
side of the House don’t find it humorous. Some of us . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. It’s hugely important. The 
members on this side of the House find it hugely important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — And that’s why we are constantly reviewing 
situations where we can improve the work and family life of the 
Saskatchewan families in this province. We are concerned for 
their situation. We are concerned that they have . . . that there is 
a growing situation with having to balance . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members 
to respect there is a member on their feet. The Speaker cannot 
hear that member and she is using, I think, her full voice. So 
please respect the ability of the member to put forward her 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I was ill 
for all of last week and my voice is still coming in and out and I 
apologize if it doesn’t come through clearly at some times. As I 
was saying, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is a growing 
situation where people are having to care for young families as 
well as for elder care because of the aging population. So we 
are always reviewing improvements that we can possibly make 
to address those issues and we take those issues extremely 
seriously, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
It is clear to most of Canada and certainly to the people of 
Saskatchewan — if not the members opposite, Madam Deputy 
Speaker — that balancing work and family is a huge priority. It 
is also clear that Saskatchewan, under leadership of this NDP 
government, has been at the forefront in facilitating this balance 
with a progressive approach to labour, to business, and to the 
economy. 



November 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

Madam Deputy Speaker, family . . . Saskatchewan Family Day, 
Family Day is a perfect example of that. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I would therefore like to move the following motion, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That Saskatchewan is a leader in fostering a balance 
between work and family with initiatives such as the new 
Family Day statutory holiday. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Walsh Acres and seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That this Assembly recognize Saskatchewan for being a 
leader in fostering a balance between work and family 
with initiatives such as the new Family Day statutory 
holiday. 
 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It is a delight and honour to enter into this debate and 
second this motion. I want to first congratulate the mover from 
Regina Walsh Acres on her fine speech on a very important 
topic that’s facing working men and women and families here 
in Saskatchewan. A very important topic and I think it’s one 
that our government is addressing in many, many ways, one of 
which, the most important initiative, is the new Family Day 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But before I start talking about that I just want to take a minute 
to review our economy. As the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres said, it is just so hot, it’s unbelievable. The incredible 
economic growth that’s happening in this province, despite 
what the members opposite have to say, Saskatchewan’s 
economy is in phenomenal shape and only getting stronger. In 
fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, full-time jobs here in 
Saskatchewan increased over 22,000 over last October. We 
have the lowest unemployment rate since 1979 with over 
500,000 people working here in Saskatchewan. And what’s 
really important, Madam Deputy Speaker, youth employment 
was up over 8,000 since last October and there are another over 
5,000 jobs on saskjobs.ca. 
 
Our unemployment rate is the second lowest in the economy 
and what we’re doing here is clearly working for the province 
and for working people. Maybe not working so well for the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party, but that’s 
the way it goes. Saskatchewan is poised to post the fourth 
fastest growth among provinces this year and next. Well, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these are the facts and the facts reflect 
one of the hottest economies in the nation, one that is benefiting 
Saskatchewan’s working people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, despite what the members opposite 
claim this government has developed the climate for economic 
growth. We’ve managed to drive down the embarrassing debt 
left by the friends of the members opposite — the Tory 
government — and in doing so increase our debt-to-GDP ratio 

up to the third best in Canada. Madam Deputy Speaker, this is 
pretty impressive considering the Conservatives left 
Saskatchewan with the worst debt-to-GDP ratio in the country. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, this financial management has 
provided us with resources to make significant tax cuts. 
Therefore, building on our government’s vision to further 
enhance our competitive advantages, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has recently introduced some of the most 
significant tax reforms in the province’s history. These reforms 
will promote Saskatchewan to the rest of Canada and the world 
as an even better place to launch and expand business 
operations. When fully implemented, the reduction in corporate 
and small-business tax cuts will result in a saving of over 500 
million to the business community here in Saskatchewan. 
We’ve also recently introduced the provincial sales tax reform 
from 7 per cent to 5 per cent. This tax cut will show every 
Saskatchewan resident the real benefits of our booming 
economy. Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, businesses and 
residents of Saskatchewan will see about $325 million in 
savings. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ve worked hard with 
employers and workers and students to raise awareness too 
about workplace health and safety. This is very, very important. 
Through initiatives such as WorkSafe Saskatchewan, focusing 
on education, enforcement, we’ve seen some of the biggest 
decreases in worker injury rates here in Canada. Very, very 
important. They’ve declined by some 14 per cent since 2002. 
 
And what do the folks over there say? Well what did the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena just say last week? You 
don’t have to put forward every rule and regulation because 
employers know if you don’t look after your employees they’re 
not going to be there. They don’t want to come to work. They 
like their employees. You don’t have to trust government to tell 
them what to do. So I wonder if the folks over there would do 
the Family Day? And we’ll see if they support that. 
 
All right, Madam Deputy Speaker, recently I’ve just received 
the recommendations on the Commission on Improving Work 
Opportunities for Saskatchewan Residents. We commissioned 
this report to ensure improved access by part-time and 
vulnerable workers to employment income, employment 
benefits, and work opportunities here in Saskatchewan. Now 
we’re currently looking at these recommendations, but we want 
to make sure we focus on one thing — one thing, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — that no one in Saskatchewan is left behind 
on the path to opportunity here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to speak now about what 
this motion is all about — our unrivalled commitment to 
ensuring Saskatchewan is the best place to work here in 
Canada. Saskatchewan is a leader in work-family balance 
initiatives. Regular public holidays, along with the most 
generous vacation provisions in the country, provide the people 
of Saskatchewan with a chance to achieve good work-family 
balance, providing a high quality of life for all of Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
We have among the most generous vacation provisions in the 
country. We have provisions for bereavement leave as well as 
compassion care leave, neither of which are offered in our 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2006 

neighbouring province of Alberta. And with our recently 
announced Family Day, Saskatchewan will have the highest 
number of holidays here in Canada. This is truly good news for 
the workers here in Saskatchewan, and I notice a lack of 
applause from the other side. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we believe Family Day is a way 
of this government acknowledging the hard work, the 
hard-working families and individuals that have contributed to 
our booming economy. We believe Family Day is another 
means to help our workers strike a healthy work and family 
balance and feel the real benefits of our strong economy. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Family Day is one more component 
among many strong and innovative incentives that ensures that 
we have a quality of life here in Saskatchewan that serves our 
young people and attract qualified workers from across the 
country to fill the jobs in our booming economy. 
 
I believe that a new public holiday to break up our long winter 
is one more example of this government’s commitment to 
ensuring that Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada to live, 
work, and build a strong future. 
 
I support this motion. And I want to thank you very much. This 
is a very important motion for these people, the people here in 
Saskatchewan. And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
encourage all of us to support that. To that end, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I would like to now move adjournment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:58.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................425 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................426 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................426 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................427 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................428 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................428 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................428 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Louis Riel Day 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................428 
 The Hokey-Pokey 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................428 
 New Democratic Party Candidate Nominated in Prince Albert Carlton 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Responses From Premier 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Transitional Housing Project 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Mouseland Revisited 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................430 
 Saskatchewan Party View of Canadian Wheat Board 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................430 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................430 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................430 
 Litigation Regarding Department of Highways’ Contract 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................432 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................432 
 Documentation Concerning Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................433 
 Leadership and Political Futures 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................434 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................434 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Mid-year Financial Statements 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................436 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................437 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................438 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................438 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..........................................................................................................................................................................438, 448 
  Draude ...............................................................................................................................................................................440, 448 
  Prebble ...............................................................................................................................................................................442, 448 
  Serby ..................................................................................................................................................................................443, 448 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................445 
  Addley ................................................................................................................................................................................446, 448 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Fostering a Balance Between Work and Family 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................449 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................453 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


