






















































Hansard: October 31, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 95 
 October 31, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills who continue 
to be concerned about the state of highways in the southwest 
part of our province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is once again signed by 
individuals from the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of the province regarding 
the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Carnduff, 
Gainsborough, Prince Albert, and Glen Ewen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present these 
petitions on behalf of a constituent who was a sufferer of 
cancer. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the communities of Storthoaks, 
Carnduff, Carievale Regina, Calgary, Oxbow, and 
Gainsborough. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today I had to make the tough 
decision on which petition to read, and I decided Highway No. 
49: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Kelvington, Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Preeceville 
and Porcupine Plain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today to do with the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Oxbow and Gainsborough. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with lack of funding by 
this government for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it seems 
this government has a plan for more gravel highways in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. I have another petition dealing with 
another highway, Highway No. 99. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 
gravel portion of Highway 99 between Junction 6 and 
Craven. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Craven, Southey, Meadow Lake, and Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have several 
pages of a petition of citizens concerned with the safety of the 
access road to Bruno. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5, which would be the narrow Highway 
No. 5. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, Viscount, 
Humboldt, and Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are deeply concerned about the government’s refusal to 
fund the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and Regina. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens of Wilkie concerned about their health care 
services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition today from residents from across 
Saskatchewan that are concerned and disappointed that the 
government made a decision not to fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. I’ll read from the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners today come from Carievale, Carnduff, and 
Oxbow. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure as well 
to enter a petition to the Assembly. And I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petition I present is signed by folks from the communities 
of Whitewood, Grenfell, and Windthorst. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

And the signators of this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Oxbow 
and Glen Ewen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade Highway 
20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
by primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
Duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This is signed by the good citizens in the town of Strasbourg 
and area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly this afternoon and present a petition on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the funding 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

of the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition has been signed by the very 
good citizens of Carnduff and Estevan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you very much for the opportunity to speak. My petition is that 
the Saskatchewan government made a decision not to fund the 
cancer drug Avastin, and the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the city of 
Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present yet another petition regarding the drug 
Avastin. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from a variety of 
communities across the province. I so present. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to Rule 15 (7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning the cancer drug Avastin, SP 
[sessional paper] 21; 

 
A petition concerning Highway 5, sessional paper 22; 
 
Highway 36, sessional paper 23; 
 
Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon, sessional paper 24; 
 
Highway 22, sessional paper 25; 
 
Highway 310, sessional paper 26; 

Broadview Union Hospital, sessional paper 27; 
 

Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7 and 8. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 9 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: in the current fiscal year, does the 
government have any plans to convert highway section 
shops to satellite facilities; and if so, which section shops 
will be converted? 
 

And also, Mr. Speaker, the same question for the previous two 
years. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: who will own 
the carbon dioxide separation technology that will be 
developed for SaskPower’s clean coal initiative? And a 
second question, what is the timeframe for the carbon 
dioxide separation technology agreement for SaskPower’s 
clean coal initiative? In addition who owns the licensing 
rights for technology developed through SaskPower’s 
clean coal initiative? 
 
And also, who owns the patents and the intellectual 
property rights from technology developed through 
SaskPower’s clean coal initiative? Also what is the 
financial responsibility of each partner in SaskPower’s 
clean coal initiative? And finally, Mr. Speaker, what is the 
financial commitment from each partner in SaskPower’s 
clean coal initiative? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m very pleased this afternoon to rise and 
to introduce in the west gallery, Ilean and John Kolynchuk. 
They’re from Melville. They’re in the Assembly today for the 
first time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
John is receiving treatment for cancer here in Regina and is here 
through the course of the week, Monday to Friday. John has 
worked with the railroad for many years — 38 years to be exact 
— and his wife has been a homemaker assisting with raising of 
their three children. And they’re in the Assembly today to have 
an opportunity to examine how the Assembly works. 
 
And I want to extend my appreciation to have had the 
opportunity to meet them today and to thank him for the 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

tremendous work that he’s done in making a difference in our 
part of the world and helping us grow our economy in the 
Yorkton-Melville area. Thank you very much for being here 
and continued success in recovering through your treatment. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming Ilean and John to the Assembly. 
When I walked into the Assembly today and I looked up and 
the faces were very, very familiar, and it took a long time for 
me to figure out exactly where I’d met them before. But they’re 
both . . . John is a member of the Elks club. And I remember a 
couple of different Elks’ mixed provincial bonspiels that we 
were at and curling against them, and unfortunately I don’t 
think we ever did beat them in any of the spiels that we were in. 
But I’d like to welcome them to their Assembly as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce a 
constituent sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Garnet Ball 
from Alida. And fact is, he just lives four miles east of me and 
tears up the roads between his place and town which I have to 
drive along, Mr. Speaker. So I’d just like to ask everyone to 
welcome him to his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Gainer the Gopher Banned from McMahon Stadium 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a sad day in Saskatchewan. Imagine our 
shock and dismay at our opponent’s display of bad blood and 
poor sportsmanship. Mr. Speaker, the entire province is 
incensed — and rightfully so — over what is clearly a violation 
of all that Saskatchewan people value and all that we hold near 
and dear. 
 
And it begs the question: whatever happened to the rules of 
good conduct and proper etiquette and fair play? Mr. Speaker, 
football is a rough and tumble game, and we’ve witnessed other 
transgressions over the years. But, Mr. Speaker, this one is 
different. The hard hits and give-and-take that go on at field 
level are one thing, but banning Gainer the Gopher, the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders’ beloved mascot and our province’s 
favourite gopher, from McMahon Stadium for this weekend’s 
western semi-final against the Calgary Stampeders, Mr. Speaker 

— I say that this has simply just gone too far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatchewan Fans at McMahon Stadium 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, this 
weekend all of Saskatchewan will be tuned to their TVs when 
the Riders take on the Stampeders in the CFL [Canadian 
Football League], and I know I speak of all members in this 
legislature when I wish the green and white the best of luck. But 
I think all of us were shocked at today’s news that one 
important member of the Riders won’t be making the trip — 
Gainer the Gopher. 
 
Gainer has been banned from McMahon Stadium for this 
weekend’s game because officials are reportedly concerned 
about him inciting the crowd. Mr. Speaker, I think the move by 
the Stampeders organization has less to do with the impact that 
Gainer will have on Calgary fans and a lot more to do with the 
fact that there are so many ex-Saskatchewan residents living in 
Calgary that half the crowd at McMahon Stadium will be 
wearing green this weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 9 of the last 10 years under this NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government, Saskatchewan has lost 
population, mainly to Alberta. It’s not enough that 
Saskatchewan has never won a Grey Cup while the NDP are in 
power. Now we’re a home team when the Riders play in 
Calgary. Mr. Speaker, it’s time to stop the out-migration of 
people from Saskatchewan, even though the NDP would say 
there would be more gophers left for the rest of us. Go Riders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Natural Gas Services for Northern Communities 
 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, despite what’s happening 
with Gainer the Gopher, yesterday was an exciting day for the 
people of La Ronge, Air Ronge, Weyakwin, and surrounding 
area. The additional funding has been put in place to extend 
SaskEnergy’s natural gas network north from Montreal Lake. 
Many people have worked extremely hard to see this day 
happen. It was only possible because of the dedication of the 
gas committee, municipal leaders, the Lac la Ronge Indian 
Band, and SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look to the experience of Montreal Lake 
residents and businesses, and I’m excited about the possibilities 
for La Ronge and area. Today at Montreal Lake more than 260 
homes and many community facilities including the school, the 
band office, the arena, and the health centre are enjoying the 
clean burning heat and savings with natural gas. It is my hope 
that in just over a year those same benefits will be felt 
throughout La Ronge, Air Ronge, the Lac la Ronge First Nation 
and Weyakwin. For businesses, reduced energy costs means 
new opportunities, and that opens up the future for jobs for our 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for the Cumberland constituency, I look forward to 
working with the community to see it take full advantage of this 
growth opportunity. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Saskatchewan’s First Ethanol Symposium 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, a very important event occurred 
in the Cypress Hills constituency earlier this month. 
Saskatchewan’s first ever ethanol symposium was hosted by 
Cypress Agri Energy and Action Southwest in the community 
of Shaunavon. 
 
Looking towards future developments in biofuel production in 
our province, the symposium was organized to promote the 
feasibility and numerous benefits of ethanol production 
province-wide. The Cypress Agri Energy group has a real stake 
in ethanol, having worked diligently — and at their own 
expense I might add — to develop a 90-million litre facility in 
southwest Saskatchewan for more than five years. 
 
There were 400 people or more who had the opportunity to hear 
from a panel of biofuel experts from Canada and the US 
[United States] including industry promoters, ethanol retailers, 
plant engineers and construction specialists. Information 
provided by each presenter made one point very clear: biofuel 
production can have a significant positive impact on the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The Deputy Premier made a half-hour presentation at the 
symposium and spoke glowingly about his government’s 
biofuels agenda. But a wave of disappointment filled the room 
when he provided no assurance that the Shaunavon ethanol 
project could be an important player in the industry, nor did he 
make any commitments to infrastructure support. 
 
The community needed to hear that its project provided an 
important template for future grain-based ethanol facilities and 
that the government was committed to seeing at least some of 
these plants erected in rural Saskatchewan. Failing to hear those 
minimal words of encouragement turned a successful, well 
organized day into a bittersweet event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Cultural 
Celebration and Powwow 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, over the past week I, 
along with a number of my colleagues and 20,000 spectators, 
had the great pleasure of attending this year’s FSIN [Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] cultural celebration and 
powwow. 

Mr. Speaker, it was an extraordinary event filled with colour 
and sound and spectacle. As a cultural event aimed at raising 
awareness and promoting First Nations culture, it was an 
unqualified success and left no doubt whatsoever of the health, 
vibrancy, and strength of First Nations culture here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a significant milestone for First Nations 
people in the province. It is the 60th anniversary of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. Commemoration of that 
important anniversary provided one theme for this year’s 
celebration. The other theme was the Year of the First Nations 
Child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s children and young people are 
Saskatchewan’s future. And we will work together to ensure 
their future is bright and that Saskatchewan is a great place for 
them to live and work and prosper. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to acknowledge the 
contributions that First Nations leaders have made to the 
province through the FSIN over the past 60 years. Their efforts 
at protecting First Nations rights, building economics, and 
providing opportunity for First Nations have been invaluable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past weekend’s cultural celebration and 
powwow is proof of their past success and of their pride and 
standard of excellence that is the foundation of their future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Review of Headlines 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While it was good 
to hear that members opposite continue to monitor the many 
speeches made by the Leader of the Opposition on broadcast 
media across the province, I do think they should listen with a 
little more care. And instead of merely listing the headlines 
provided to them in daily NDP caucus briefings and word 
puzzle books, perhaps the members opposite would do well to 
try some independent research. 
 
Yesterday’s list of headlines provided to this Assembly was at 
best incomplete. Some might even call it historical revisionism. 
Instead of copying the work of others, I think it’s time that 
those members do their homework, and maybe they would get 
higher marks. 
 
In order to provide some assistance to those members, I will 
now read a more complete list of headlines about the business 
and political climate of Saskatchewan. October 12, “Maple Leaf 
bails out of Saskatoon.” October 21, “Faith low in 
Saskatchewan economy.” October 19, “Youth exodus must be 
stopped.” October 9, “Are power bills subsidizing NDP 
re-election bid?” September 29, “Premier likely hasn’t ended 
concerns about leadership.” October 28, “Tax cut signals NDP 
panic.” October 28 again, “Family day should be renamed 
record profits day.” October 28, “Sales tax cut cynical ploy.” 
October 24, “Labour shortage a pain for new hospital 
construction.” 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

Strangely these headlines didn’t make the list compiled 
yesterday by the member of Regina Walsh Acres. If I didn’t 
know any better, I would swear that the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres missed the stories on purpose. But perhaps maybe, 
Mr. Speaker, she was just too busy. Or perhaps she has trouble 
reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Person’s Day Breakfast 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had to recover first. 
Sorry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday I was privileged to attend the 14th 
annual Person’s Day Breakfast hosted by the Women’s Legal 
Education and Action Fund. Person’s Day celebrates a 
landmark legal decision of October 18, 1929, when the then 
highest court in Canada declared that women were persons and 
were eligible to be appointed as senators or magistrates. 
 
This year’s guest speaker was Nettie Wiebe, philosopher, 
political activist, and agrarian feminist who is currently 
teaching ethics at St. Andrews College at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Ms. Wiebe has been an active participant in 
public policy forums across Canada and around the world, 
speaking on numerous issues involving sustainability and 
human rights. She has been recognized as Global Citizen of the 
Year and received the Distinguished Canadian Award. 
 
Although equality initiatives for women and minority groups 
are under attack by the Harper Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, we 
must be diligent. We must preserve the progress that has been 
made and be steadfast in our determination to realize equality in 
Canada. 
 
Ms. Wiebe told the story of her garden. Although a hailstorm 
appeared to have ruined everything, the plants were so well 
rooted that they survived and flourished. So too the Canadian 
belief that no one should be underprivileged is deeply rooted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the disruption that is the federal Conservatives is 
simply a storm that will be short-lived, just as we in 
Saskatchewan will weather the negativity of the conservative 
Saskatchewan Party across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, on a point of order, today we’ve 
had three breaches of one particular rule, and that is that 
members’ statements are not to be debated. First of all I think 
we had a comment here by the member for Cumberland, then 
an extended comment — the member for Humboldt — and then 
a little comment by the member for Regina Walsh Acres. So I 
just ask all members to keep in mind that members’ statements 
are supposed to be stand-alone statements and should not 
depend or be a reaction to any other member’s statement. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Wait Times for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
this side this will come as no surprise that the Minister of 
Health yesterday failed to answer my question about how long 
cancer patients are waiting in Saskatchewan for their first visit 
to an oncologist. 
 
In April, patients like Emily Morley were told she’d have to 
wait three months. That’s three times the national average. We 
also learned about Doug Bonderud who had to wait four months 
for a second opinion from an oncologist. And that would be 
four months, Mr. Speaker, longer than three times the national 
average. I’ll give the minister another chance today. How long 
do people in Saskatchewan have to wait for a first visit to an 
oncologist? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If 
there was as simple an answer to the simple question that the 
member raises, it would be a simple matter of stating what 
would be the obvious. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as far as cancer care is concerned in this 
province, there are many complications depending on the 
unique circumstances of each individual case. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve also had the stresses within the system of having fewer 
than full complements of oncologists, which have now been 
corrected and in the process of being corrected. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had the challenge of being able to — using the 
resources available to us — provide the correct communications 
to individuals when they are first referred to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken the concerns, we have acted upon 
those in conjunction with the regional health authorities and the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
and assure the Saskatchewan public that waiting times are being 
reduced in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Supply of Oncologists in the Saskatoon Health Region 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a simple 
question. How long do patients have to wait for a first visit to 
an oncologist? He talked about a full complement of 
oncologists now in Saskatoon which is quite interesting because 
yesterday we heard some conflicting information from other 
agencies, for example organizations in this area. For example, 
in 2002 the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency stated in a letter that 
we received that the full complement for Saskatoon would be 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

nine. Yesterday a spokesman for the agency said that a full 
complement was eight. When the minister spoke in his news 
scrum yesterday he said seven. What is it? Is it seven, eight, 
nine just to maintain a three-month wait? Or what is needed in 
order to bring the waiting list down to the national average? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The correct 
number is seven. It has always been seven, and other numbers 
that the member opposite has are incorrect or misleading or 
have come from sources that are not specific to the agency. The 
correct number is seven, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the efforts that are being undertaken by the good people at 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and the regional health 
authorities, Mr. Speaker, are aimed at reducing the wait times, 
not maintaining them. The argument that the member opposite 
raises is completely misleading to the Saskatchewan public. He 
should recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the efforts we are taking are 
consistent with improving the delivery of services to 
Saskatchewan people, improving the ability of Saskatchewan 
people to live, work, raise their family in this wonderful 
province of ours. Mr. Speaker, we are reducing waiting times in 
cancer care and other care within Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the only person that’s 
misleading the public is that Minister of Health from this NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, because I’ll send this letter over to 
him right after I’m done reading from it, quoting from it from 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency of 2002. And it says, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . the Saskatoon Cancer Centre is experiencing a 
significant shortage of medical oncologists with five out of 
nine positions now vacant. 
 

In other words, the full complement of oncologists in the 
Saskatoon Health Region is nine. He’s saying it’s seven, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll take the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s numbers 
any time over that minister’s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, and what is it? Is it the fact 
that we have less incidence of cancer in Saskatchewan right 
now? I don’t think so. Is it the fact that he says the waiting lists 
are getting shorter for cancer treatment? I don’t believe that 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. When will this government do the 
right thing and supply the proper number of oncologists for 
people in the Saskatoon area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite will not only today but I expect in the future 
use numbers gleaned from any number of sources to complicate 
the issues. Mr. Speaker, there are more, there are more 
oncologists in the Saskatoon Health Region than even the 
member opposite is talking about because, Mr. Speaker, there 
are medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, pediatrician 
oncologists, and stem cell hematology oncologists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatoon Health Region, when you add all 
of that up together, there’s about — well I can’t add quickly in 
my head, Mr. Speaker — but there are seven medical 
oncologists in Saskatoon; there are six radiation oncologists in 
Saskatoon; there are two pediatric oncologists in Saskatoon; 
there are two stem cell oncologists in Saskatoon; and there are 
four clinical leaders who are oncologists, Mr. Speaker — not 
seven, eight, or nine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take about a 
minute to ask this question. Perhaps he can get his numbers 
added up in that time and give us a real number, Mr. Speaker. I 
certainly realize that there are different subsets, specialists in 
the cancer field. We know that. But when we talk about medical 
oncologists, and that’s exactly what we’ve been talking about 
for the last number of days, medical oncologists is exactly what 
is stated by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency in that letter. And 
they say that we need nine medical oncologists — not using 
some of the other specialists — nine medical oncologists for a 
full complement in Saskatoon. The minister stood in his place 
today and said seven. I’ll take the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency’s number any time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when is this minister going to 
step up to the plate and start dealing with the issue of recruiting 
the proper number of oncologists? I know he’s got a real 
problem with setting targets — and I can see why because he 
needs to adjust it so that his numbers can fit, Mr. Speaker. 
Because the real complement is nine. When is he going to do 
his job and fill that demand? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
number of oncologists is determined by a national standard 
based on the number of patients in a province divided by the 
number of types of referrals that the individual oncologist can 
see. There are more people that can be seen by a medical 
oncologist compared to a radiation oncologist, for example, Mr. 
Speaker, and so the numbers will vary from time to time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is a competitive and challenging 
environment for oncology. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

Cancer Agency — and in this case the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority — have worked diligently and very hard to 
ensure that we have a number of oncologists that meet the 
demand for the region and the area. Mr. Speaker, they have 
been successful at doing that just as they’ve been successful, 
Mr. Speaker, at recruiting cardiologists, endocrinologists, and 
physicians within the region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a very successful year for recruiting 
in the Saskatoon Health Region. We should be very proud of 
the work they’ve done. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Physician Complement in Rural Hospitals 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
government’s failure to recruit and retain doctors is also having 
a negative effect on my hometown of Spiritwood. As of 8 a.m. 
this morning the Spiritwood hospital has closed its doors 
indefinitely to emergencies and regular patient admissions. The 
three-doctor hospital has been operating with only two doctors 
— a husband and wife team — since August when the third 
doctor left. My constituents are worried about what is going to 
happen with emergency. Who will they go to to stabilize them 
before they are transferred to another facility? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific steps is this government taking to 
ensure that the hospital can reopen to emergencies and patient 
admissions as soon as possible? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite very well articulates the challenges that are 
faced in rural Saskatchewan and in rural communities 
throughout Canada, Mr. Speaker, that on occasion facilities face 
the stress of being unable to have a full complement of 
physicians, whether it’s in the emergency department or 
whether it’s just within acute care in the hospital. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this happens on occasion on a temporary basis 
throughout this province. This case is current in Spiritwood. 
We’ve heard about cases around the province in the past, and I 
suspect we’ll hear about cases like this in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authorities are responsible for 
delivering the care, and the regional health authorities are 
responsible for recruiting and retaining health professionals 
with the help of the province. Mr. Speaker, in the case of 
Spiritwood — and I’m sure there’ll be a supplementary and I’ll 
go further on this in a moment — but, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 13, 
2006, hospital services in Spiritwood were suspended over the 
weekend. At that time, the overwhelming workload of the two 
remaining doctors was cited for the suspension of services. A 
representative from the Prince Albert Health Region told the 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] that the doctors, 
quote, “ . . . ‘indicated that they’re not able to work this 
weekend. It’s due to them being tired and . . . [they just needed] 
a break’. . .” 
 
This is the very same reason the hospital has now cancelled 
emergency services and regular patient admissions. Patients 
now must either go to Saskatoon or Prince Albert for 
emergency care. Mr. Speaker, it is clear other centres are being 
forced to pick up the burden. What specific steps are being 
taken to staff up these other centres to handle the increased 
workload? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
knew there’d be a supplementary, and so I’m very happy to 
answer the question as it was raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional care authority has the responsibility 
of ensuring patient safety and care. When there are stresses 
within the system and individual doctors acknowledge that they 
are having difficulty or cannot perform the responsibilities 
necessary, the regional health authorities will work with other 
centres to bring in doctors or, Mr. Speaker, they make 
arrangements with other regions to handle the care until the care 
for the people in a safe and secure manner can be handled in 
that facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the temporary suspension in Spiritwood is to 
protect the safety and interests of the people of the Spiritwood 
area. The regional health authority is working with the 
community to communicate this to the people who live there. 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the regional health authority 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
situation is not unique in the town of Spiritwood. One hour 
away in Big River, the town is short one doctor. An hour away 
down the road at Shellbrook, the hospital is also short one 
doctor and soon may be short two. The situation is the same in 
rural communities across this province including Kamsack, 
Central Butte, and Arcola. The shortage means rural people do 
not have the same access to health care as their urban 
counterparts. The shortage also puts more pressure on urban 
hospitals that are already busting at the seams in a constant state 
of code burgundy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 15 years, for 15 years, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

government has ignored the growing crisis in rural 
Saskatchewan. What guarantees is this government giving the 
people of Saskatchewan, and specifically the town of 
Spiritwood, that full health services will be restored to their 
hospitals, and by when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
as the member knows, this government, in approaching the 
issue of recruitment and retention, has done a number of things 
this year. Number one, Mr. Speaker, we worked with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association to put in place new 
measures to assist with the recruiting of physicians, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, our new contract with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association will put an additional $25 
million to work at addressing this issue province-wide. 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have funded from the last year’s 
budget a recruitment agency for the province to assist regional 
health authorities to do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even without these initiatives, some of the health 
authorities are doing a very good job of providing new 
recruitment efforts to their communities. Rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some days there’s fewer doctors and other 
days there’s more. Prairie North Health Region, Mr. Speaker, 
has just announced the hiring of seven new physicians. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister pointed out that I wasn’t a social worker 
and I concur with that, Mr. Speaker. I’m just a parent concerned 
with children and I hope that’s good enough for this minister. 
 
Yesterday I asked the minister about an individual involved in 
the establishment of the Oyate Safe House who was arrested for 
sexual involvement with a minor. The arrest prompted the 
cancellation of an official opening. The minister said this 
individual had never been in contact with children at the safe 
house. Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of any cases where 
employees working in the safe house were in contact with the 
children and under police investigation, and were there to his 
knowledge any employees at the safe house with serious 
criminal records? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to point out that we explained to the media yesterday in 
relation to the case that that member opposite raised that the 
individual that was at the time working on the proposal didn’t 
have any access to the children. He didn’t work at this facility. 

He wasn’t on the board. He wasn’t anywhere near Oyate. And 
what the member opposite pointed out to the media, and I 
quote: 
 

“Clearly the incident points to a serious problem with the 
people running the safe house . . .”[said Merriman]. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he heard me when I told the media — and the 
media got it — that this individual was not anywhere near the 
Oyate Safe House, not a staff of ours, not a staff of Oyate, and 
not on the board. Yet that member gets up and misrepresents 
the point that I made and I clarified with the media three or four 
times. And he goes out and he says, these are the people 
running that safe house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that member: if you’re really as 
concerned about the kids that you say you are, stop playing 
politics and get on board . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I remind the minister to 
direct all his remarks through the Chair. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister 
failed to state was that he couldn’t answer the question: then 
why was the grand opening cancelled? Mr. Speaker, were there 
employees in the safe house required to undergo a criminal 
check? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the second part 
of the question, I have an article here from Wednesday, March 
15 of this year in which I was asked about an allegation of 
assault against the safe house employee. And from my 
perspective, and I pointed out at the interview with the reporter, 
and I quote: 
 

“We have no evidence that there has been any problems, 
we have no evidence that they did not respond to the 
issues.” 
 

And that was made in reference to the board not responding to 
the allegation, Mr. Speaker. This department insisted and 
insisted again that the Oyate board do a criminal record check 
on all their employees. And, Mr. Speaker, they did not do one 
on one individual, and he was a casual employee. The problem 
was immediately found out after there was an allegation. That 
employee was terminated or let go, and the issue was sent to the 
police. Mr. Speaker, the board did what they had to do, and they 
done that very quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, only one employee who 
wasn’t really involved but was involved when we cancelled the 
meeting; another employee who was just a casual employee. 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, he’s making my case for me and I want to thank 
him. 
 
That briefing note from Mark said the department had been 
assured that all employees were to submit to a criminal record 
check by June 2004. Can the minister tell this House if that 
deadline was met? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, in our service agreement 
with Oyate, the department insisted and continued to insist that 
all employees are subjected to a criminal record check. And 
guess where that member got that information from, Mr. 
Speaker? He got it from the reports that we submitted to the 
Children’s Advocate and to the auditor and to a special 
committee. 
 
We have nothing to hide, Mr. Speaker. As we indicated in the 
past there were some problems. We responded to the problems. 
The board acted decisively, and this individual was released. 
Mr. Speaker, he was also investigated and I understand that 
there is no charges laid. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we take the issue very seriously. We’re 
going to resolve the matter, and we’re going to continue 
insisting with Oyate that they’ve got to get their criminal record 
checks before anybody works at Oyate, otherwise they will not 
get any more funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the barn door is open; the 
house is out. They had three years, July 2003 until now, to do 
these criminal checks, Mr. Speaker. And now we’re talking 
about we’re going to do it ongoing. What about the children 
that were affected prior to that date? 
 
The March briefing note provided to this minister concludes 
that one employee at the safe house was not subject of a 
criminal records check until 14 months — 14 months, Mr. 
Speaker — after the deadline was set. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister care to share with this House the 
results of that criminal check as outlined in the briefing note 
given to him a month after he joined and became minister of 
that department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that 
all the information on the Oyate Safe House is very public. This 
is an issue that is two years old. And the member is correct in 
the sense that 14 months after we began insisting that the 
criminal records checks be done because our service agreements 
indicated, they found out that this individual was working on a 

casual basis at the safe house and that they did not do a criminal 
record check and there was an allegation made against that 
individual. 
 
We’ve done this story six months ago, very public story. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the board erred. And, Mr. Speaker, this is very 
unfortunate and is not acceptable. However from this day 
forward, Oyate will be cleaned up and they’ll not get one red 
cent unless all the conditions of the auditor and the advocate are 
met. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s where the work begins and that’s 
where, as a minister, I want to focus my time on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’ll 
remind the minister that the story broke from CBC which 
started this, and Public Accounts Committee — pushed by this 
side of the House — to do the auditor’s report and the 
Children’s Advocate report. Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, that 
facility would be open today and he’d have done nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, let me read the briefing note. 
 

The department learned upon the conclusion of the police 
investigation into the alleged sexual assault at Oyate that 
the former employee in question was hired by the agency 
despite having a criminal record including violence. 
 

Can the minister please explain to this House how that 
happened? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
pointed out earlier that as a department we insisted, and we 
continue to remind the board, that criminal record checks must 
be done. And, Mr. Speaker, our department did not run Oyate. 
It was being run by an autonomous board and we were assured 
on a regular basis that criminal record checks were indeed done. 
 
Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, is the board did not do one 
criminal record check on this employee. There’s an allegation 
that was investigated, and the board acted decisively, Mr. 
Speaker. The board let the individual go. There was a police 
investigation. 
 
And guess what, Mr. Speaker? The Children’s Advocate and 
the auditor give us a plan of action to follow. We’ve met with 
the board last month and we told the board, you’ve got to get 
those criminal record checks done. If you don’t get them done, 
you will not be getting any further funding, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’d much rather listen to the Children’s Advocate and the 
auditor than members opposite who purely have a political 
agenda because they keep focusing on the problems and not on 
the solutions, Mr. Speaker. Shame! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — That’s ironic that they asked for the 
criminal checks last month. It’s been closed since April. That’s 
really encouraging. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also point out to 
that minister that they provided the funding and he has the sole 
responsibility as the Minister of DCRE [Department of 
Community Resources and Employment] for every child in this 
province under his care. And no matter who is responsible for 
Oyate, he is the final buck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Once again, Mr. Minister, this minister 
hasn’t even read the material provided again. Once again, Mr. 
Minister, this minister keeps backing up. He has demonstrated 
complete incompetence on this file. Once again this minister 
has demonstrated a callous disregard for the young children 
involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier and former minister of Social 
Services, when are you going to do the right thing? How much 
longer are you going to watch this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Member would restate his 
question through the Chair. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Try to do it without reading. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I’d be delighted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the Premier going to do the right thing 
and replace this minister for complete incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to refer once again 
to the members opposite, we got a really good road map from 
the Children’s Advocate and from the auditor. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to follow that road map. It’s right here, 
Mr. Speaker. That road map is very clear. 
 
And as minister we’re going to, we’re going to follow all the 
recommendations, going to do exactly what the auditor and the 
Children’s Advocate asked us to do. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s 
really important, what’s really important is the plan; it’s clear 
and we’ve got good direction and that’s what we intend to do. 
 
I don’t know how much more clear that I can be. When it 
comes to the responsibility that I have — and I take that 
responsibility very seriously, Mr. Speaker, because many of 
these kids are my own kids, Mr. Speaker. And we must 
continue building forward, working with Oyate, with the First 
Nations community, with the Children’s Advocate, and the 
auditor. 
 
What we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is follow that 
political agenda over there, because that does nothing to solve 
the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Mr. D’Autremont.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
had a few moments last night to put some brief comments on 
the public record regarding our Throne Speech, and I’m pleased 
to enter into this debate on the Throne Speech. And last night, 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated that I wanted to remind the members 
opposite of some of their comments in the Throne Speech 
before the last provincial election, and I’ll do that in a moment. 
 
But first what I would like to do is say a warm word of 
welcome to the new member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. I 
remember coming into this Legislative Assembly. I was a tad 
bit older than the member from Big Muddy when I entered into 
this Assembly, but not much. And I can tell, Mr. Speaker, from 
the member’s comments that he is a man that understands a bit 
of history. He maybe even is a student of history. He certainly 
cares passionately about this province, and I’m looking forward 
to hearing from the member from Big Muddy in the months 
ahead as we have a debate in this province about the future of 
this province. 
 
The other thing I wanted to do, Mr. Speaker, is I want to 
welcome some new people that are working in my ministerial 
office in this building. Mr. Speaker, fundamentally the staff in 
my office have totally turned over. I think that the average age 
of the people, the young people working in my office is about 
24 years or 25 years of age. And these are young people who 
are full of vim and vigour, and they care passionately about this 
province. I want to put it on the public record that they do good 
service for the citizens of our province day in and day out. 
 
I also want to thank my constituency assistant back home in 
Saskatoon. I know that the members earlier last week were 
talking about Mr. Heppner and his constituency assistant being 
of good Mennonite descent. And I want you to know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the woman that works in my constituency office 
in the city of Saskatoon is also of Mennonite descent, and she is 
an extremely hard worker and does yeoman service on behalf of 
the people living in Saskatoon Nutana. Her name is Judy 
Gossen, and I want to thank her for the work that she does on 
behalf of the people of this province, providing important 
services to people who want to interact with government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good Throne Speech, and I’ve had an 
opportunity to watch many throne speeches and listen to many 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

throne speeches in terms of my history in this Legislative 
Assembly. And what throne speeches do is they lay out the 
government’s agenda for the following year. 
 
They don’t provide a lot of detail, but what they do is provide a 
framework for discussion, and it frames the budget process as 
you move into putting the meat on the bone, so to speak, Mr. 
Speaker. It really outlines the foundation for an agenda for the 
coming year. And in this case, I think it outlines a foundation 
for the future of our province which I think is important. 
 
And as a student of history, you’ll know how important history 
is. And one should never look back in its entirety, but one 
should never look forward unless you understand some of your 
history. And, Mr. Speaker, the historical facts are quite clear. In 
1991 when the NDP came to government, the reality for us was 
that we were inheriting in the previous . . . in that year, a $1 
billion deficit. That is a fact. 
 
Another fact . . . and I know the members of the opposition 
don’t want to hear this, but the Provincial Auditor in 1982, 
when Allan Blakeney left office, clearly indicated that this 
province on a GRF [General Revenue Fund] basis had a surplus 
of $130 million. There was no debt when it came to the General 
Revenue Fund. When our government came to office in 1991 
. . . And it shows the overall debt. It was about $3 billion, and it 
was Crown corporation debt. Oh no, I’ll get you the record, 
member opposite. History is important and let’s not stretch the 
facts. We know what we inherited in 1991, and we know what 
we left in 1982. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some of my colleagues have said this. The 
members of the opposition want to become the government. 
They will do anything to become the government. But one of 
the things that has become quite clear to me, having 
experienced the history of 1980s, it’s not only about 
government. It’s about the treasury and who has access to the 
treasury, who has access to the wealth of this province that is 
created through taxes and royalties and so on. 
 
And as a result of what we experienced in the 1980s . . . and I 
was a young person in this province in the 1980s. I was a young 
person. I know exactly what happened in this province, and 
young people left this province in droves in the 1980s. But we 
inherited a massive public debt. 
 
And I remember in 1991 and 1992 and 1993, getting us all the 
way through the 1990s, the struggle that we had in order to 
ensure the bond dealers and the money lenders and the bankers 
that we were going to get our fiscal house in order. And I 
remember, and some of my colleagues were there, when we 
issued a bond. The Department of Finance issued a bond; there 
was a bond issue. And there were people who didn’t want to 
buy our bond, and that sent a horrible signal through the money 
markets, a horrible signal. 
 
And basically, Mr. Speaker, we had a cabinet meeting — and I 
think I could put this on the public record because it has been 
discussed — where we talked about do we turn this place over 
to Brian Mulroney, or do we make our way out of this mess. 
And we began to make our way out of this mess. And we did, 
Mr. Speaker. And it took us all the way through the ’90s, all the 
way through the ’90s. And you know we’re an activist people. 

We wanted to come into government and do things on behalf of 
our citizens. But the worst thing we could have done was to turn 
this place over to Ottawa. We were elected to right the wrongs 
of the 1980s and make this place right. And we did it. We did it, 
and we got ourself out of that mess. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And the historical facts are, we have had 13 credit rating 
upgrades. We have fourteen credit rating upgrades. We have. 
That is a fact. The fact is — and the members of the opposition 
won’t want to acknowledge this — we have, we have in terms 
of our debt to GDP [gross domestic product], we have reduced 
it to under 20 per cent. It used to be over 30, Mr. Speaker. That 
is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, we came out of the ’90s, we came 
out of the ’90s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to be able to put my comments on the public record. We 
came out of the ’90s, and we got ourselves in a position where 
we had some flexibility. We started to reduce interest on the 
public debt, and that gave us some flexibility. 
 
The other thing that happened in the late 1990s is the 
Government of Canada gave the provinces the ability to look at 
redesigning their income tax system. And in 1999 we promised 
the citizens of this province that we were going to reduce their 
personal income taxes by $1,000 a family. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we had the Vicq report, and Vicq made a recommendation how 
over a period of years we could begin to reduce personal 
income taxes in this provinces. And, Mr. Speaker, we did it. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier of Saskatchewan — 
who they like to belittle, who they like to belittle — when he 
came into office as our leader in 2001, January 2001, he said, 
okay we have our fiscal house in order, and now what we have 
to do is get the economics of this place right, personal income 
taxes. 
 
Then we changed our royalty structure — not only for heavy oil 
but for enhanced oil recovery. And then we thought, well we 
have some more fiscal flexibility. We need to change our 
mining royalty structure in order to perhaps not only expand the 
potash industry in this province but perhaps get another mine. 
And there’s diamonds, and there’s rare earth, and there’s other 
opportunities. 
 
And we did that, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, we now 
are positioned where we can reduce business tax, corporate 
capital tax, and corporate income tax which we did last spring. 
All of this has been put in place through careful thinking, 
careful thought, carefulness, Mr. Speaker, because we didn’t 
want to put the province back in the position it was in, in 1991. 
 
Now when I listen to the members opposite, when we’re 
bleeding jobs, it’s the NDP government’s fault. And when we 
have job shortages and the economy starts to turn around, it has 
nothing to do with government. I want to assure the members 
opposite that the situation we’re in now has been carefully laid 
out in the 1990s, the 2000 to 2005 period when we started to 
use some of the levers — the minimal levers that we have as a 
government — to change the economics of this province. And 
we are poised, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in a very long 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

time, for the first time in a very long time, to have this province 
running on all engines, Mr. Speaker, on all engines. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members opposite, in 
the Throne Speech before the 2003 election, member after 
member after member rose in their seat and they told this side 
of the House that we were gone, that this government would 
never be re-elected. They had wagers that this government 
would never be re-elected. They said time after time that 28 
days after the next provincial election they would change seats 
with us. They would be sitting over here. 
 
It’s very familiar, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard the same information 
shared with this side of the House during this Throne Speech 
because they believe that before the next Throne Speech, we 
will have a new government. We will have an election. 
 
And I remember being in, I think it was, Germany with some of 
the members of the opposition, with the member from Wascana 
Plains. And we were told that summer that we were gone. They 
were getting all ready. I mean as George Bush just said recently 
about the Democrats in the United States, they were busy 
measuring the curtains for their new offices and putting in new 
furniture. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things I’ve learned in politics . . . 
and this is an important thing to remember. It’s a very important 
thing to remember. A day is a long time in the life of a 
politician. A week is a long time in the life of a politician. A 
month is. Six months is. Eight months is. And one should never 
underestimate the determination of the New Democratic Party 
in this province and its MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One should never underestimate our 
determination. And we are a determined group of people. And, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things I’ve come to know, we are a 
fairly disciplined group of people. And when we set our minds 
to doing something, I think that we can do what needs to be 
done. And as I will say to the members opposite, it’s not over 
till it’s over, and we have a few miles to go before the next 
election. So don’t become too arrogant too soon because you 
never know. You might be sitting there after the next election. 
Mr. Speaker, you just might be sitting there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to what some of the 
members had to say about this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
another word of advice for the opposition: it is absolutely fine 
to criticize the government. That’s fair. It’s fair to criticize 
public policy. It’s fair to engage in good public policy debate. 
But I think one of the things you need to remember is that when 
you’re criticizing the government you need to distinguish 
between the government and the people of this province and 
this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes you 
should remember this. You should remember this, Madam 
Speaker, because let me tell you about that. Let me tell you 
about that. 
 
I have received some letters that have been sent by the Leader 
of the Opposition, who wants to be Premier, to young people in 

this province. And these are young people who are wanting to 
come to the province perhaps. They want to move here. 
 
And does the Leader of the Opposition talk about the thousands 
and thousands and thousands of jobs that are available in this 
province? No he doesn’t. Does he refer them to the city of Swift 
Current’s website where there are jobs, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? Does he refer them to the Swift Current Chamber of 
Commerce website? No he doesn’t. Does he talk about various 
employers that are looking for people to fill unfilled positions in 
the province, Madam Deputy Speaker? No he does not. 
 
All he does is he rails on and on and on about the Premier’s 
government. Well, Madam Speaker, if you’re a young person, 
you don’t live in the province of Saskatchewan, you’d like 
perhaps to come home. Or maybe you’d like to move here 
because we have affordable housing. You could afford to drive 
a car. You’d have the lowest bundle of utility rates in the 
country. This is an affordable place. You’re close to 100,000 
lakes in this province. Does he try and put a positive image of 
this province forward? Absolutely not. 
 
What the member of Swift Current does, the opposition leader, 
the would-be premier of Saskatchewan, all he does is dump on 
this province. 
 
And in fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, last week when we had 
the announcement of the Family Day, what did he do? What did 
the would-be premier do? He had a very odd look on his face is 
what I recall on television, and he said everybody would be 
going off to Calgary to see their family. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, do you want to know how many 
people stop me to tell me how offended they were by that? How 
offended they are about an Alberta sycophant? They are 
offended because we have family here. We have family here. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, if the would-be premier, the 
member from Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition, 
wants to get himself to the position where he just might be 
premier, he needs to be more positive about the province of 
Saskatchewan. He needs to, he needs to start selling this 
province as a good place to live, work, and raise a family. And 
he needs to start encouraging young people to not only come to 
this province, but stay in this province. 
 
But that’s not what he’s interested in, Madam Speaker. He is 
only interested in this Chair — it’s all about power — and he’s 
interested in the public purse. That’s what he’s interested in. 
He’s interested in the treasury. He’s interested in getting his 
hands on the peoples’ money. And for whom? Is it about 
supporting the citizenry? Or is it about supporting their friends 
who have been waiting and waiting and waiting 15 years to get 
their hands, their mitts back on the public purse, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to remind the public what happened in the 
1980s, because it’s important that young people know this 
student of history. Because I watched as a young person, I 
watched who got rich and who didn’t. Oh they say it was a long 
time ago, but we’re paying for that money. We’re still paying 
for that money. And some people got rich. And some people got 
rich. And some people got rich. And we know who they are. 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

And guess who’s paying for it? We’re paying for it. And we’re 
still paying for it, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the other thing I want to talk about very briefly is about 
immigration. And I recall the member from Biggar speaking 
about immigration last night. And what’s so curious about 
immigration . . . And by the way, we are making great strides 
on immigration in this province, great strides. But I’d like to 
remind the members what they had to say about our 
immigration policy last spring. And by goodness, you’d swear 
to goodness that they’d dreamed up this immigration policy 
themselves. 
 
Well here’s what the member from Rosetown Biggar said: “ . . . 
bring people into Saskatchewan to be unemployed.” We have 
massive job shortages. 
 
Here’s what the member from Cannington says, asks us if we 
were telling immigrants what was it like in Saskatchewan or are 
we “. . . painting bright blue skies. . . ” when promoting our 
province. The message is, don’t come. There’s nothing 
happening here. 
 
And then the member from Estevan says, what are they going to 
do when they get here, when literally there are hundreds of 
immigrants that could be and are on their way to Estevan to 
work because they have a lack of skilled workers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
My point is, Madam Deputy Speaker, my point is that we have 
an immigration policy. It’s working. We have an immigration 
policy where international people are coming from all over the 
world to fill some of those job shortages. We have an 
immigration policy that means that not only the nominee but 
their family is going to be coming to the province, and they’re 
coming from all over the globe. And that’s the way this 
province was over 100 years ago. We have communities that 
are welcoming these newcomers to our province. They are 
filling positions that are going vacant. 
 
And the members opposite, one year ago, less than a year ago 
when we announced this policy, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
were negative about this policy. And now they understand that 
we do have a labour shortage in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But here’s my point, Madam Deputy Speaker. Every time the 
Government of Saskatchewan moves forward with a positive 
initiative, they dump on it and then —might be six months later 
— it was their idea, and they’re critical because it’s not working 
as fast or as well as they think it should, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And that’s what the opposition’s all about — not good 
enough, province isn’t good enough, the policies aren’t good 
enough, the strategies aren’t good enough. All they do is dump 
on the people who are working in this province. I’m not talking 
about the government members of the legislature. I’m talking 
about the employers, the people in the communities, the 
regional colleges, the chambers of commerce that are working 
very, very hard to fill positions in this province and encourage 
people to come to this province, retain people in this province. 
 
But all we have is the negative nabobs over there dumping day 

in and day out, not on the government members but on the 
people of our province. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan are sick of it. They’re sick of it. And if 
these folks want to be elected my recommendation is you need 
to start talking positively about Saskatchewan — not that they’ll 
take my advice. But you need to start talking positively about 
this place because when you get people on a train you need to 
figure out how to get them off that train, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the other thing I want to say, 
they talk about young people. I think it was in July we had a 
record number of young people between the ages of 15 and 24 
working in this province — 105,000 young people. Pretty good 
I’d say, pretty good. Can we do better? Absolutely. But the 
trends are starting to come up. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the last quarter, and we will soon 
get the quarter for July, August, and September, and the last 
quarter our population was up — not much, 305. But we seem 
to have started to turn things around, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and we can. We have over on our SaskJobs.ca 10,000 positions 
in this province, just on the government website, that we need 
to fill and they are in all of their constituencies. That’s 
important, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have a recruitment and retention strategy and recruitment 
agency coming from the Department of Health. We have a 
labour market strategy that we’re going to roll out here shortly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. But I will say this, this province is 
now poised; we are poised, Madam Deputy Speaker, for the 
next century. And I can say it’s because of the work that this 
government along with the citizens of our province did in the 
1990s and in the first part of the last century . . . or this century. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe we have the 
cornerstones in place. We just need to keep going in the 
direction that we’re going. And we need to be positive and 
optimistic about this province because I believe that this is a 
province that has tremendous opportunities, offers tremendous 
opportunities, for all who live here and all that will come here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s indeed a great pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly. It’s been a number of times that I’ve had 
the opportunity to speak on behalf of Canora-Pelly residents. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to begin by first of all thanking 
my family members, my wife, Gail, who continues to be the 
principal and teacher in Invermay School and has been 
supportive of me for my entire 11 years as an MLA. And I 
really appreciate her support and her dedication to not only her 
job but also to helping me do my job. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this year was a year of mixed 
emotions in our family as . . . We have two children and our 
oldest has been a teacher in the community of Strasbourg now 
for a number of years. But our youngest daughter graduated 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

from the U of R [University of Regina] this spring and like 
many Saskatchewan people she has been given a job in Calgary 
working for an oil and gas company. And so she is one of a 
number of the, I think, very good young people in this province 
that has looked at opportunities in Alberta and has moved. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the people of Canora-Pelly have also 
had a mixed year. There have been tremendous crops grown in 
the more easterly part of the Canora-Pelly constituency and 
there are piles of grain from Kamsack up through Norquay, 
Pelly. But on the far western area getting closer to the area of 
Rama and Invermay which is in the Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency, we see very poor yields. A lot of land that wasn’t 
seeded and of course because of that and because of wheat 
midge and other pests we see that even the yields in crops like 
wheat is down to 12 bushels per acre. Canola, due to rain and 
the heavy amount of heat that the crop experienced in the latter 
stages of July, we see six, seven, eight bushels an acre. So it’s a 
mixed part of the province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one thing. The minister opposite 
talked about optimism and there is optimism in the 
Canora-Pelly constituency when we talk about agriculture. 
Agriculture always has to be optimistic about next year or we 
wouldn’t have any farmers. 
 
And with the recent announcement by two private companies in 
the Yorkton constituency to locate their canola crushing plants, 
there is optimism. There is a chance that maybe prices will be 
affected in a positive fashion and that we’ll see the opportunity 
for biodiesel plants in the future. And that is encouraging to 
farmers as they suffer through this last while where commodity 
prices have been extremely low. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I do want to begin by thanking the 
member from Melfort and the opposition member from Moose 
Jaw North for working diligently on producing a new calendar. 
For many of us who travel far to reach the legislature here in 
Regina, where we have a two and a half hour trip, it is difficult 
to get back to meetings on a Monday night or a Tuesday night. 
And now we will have that opportunity to have meetings 
scheduled into our calendars on Thursday nights and then to be 
in our constituency on Fridays and Saturdays and maybe, 
maybe, Madam Deputy Speaker, save having to go to our 
offices on a Sunday like many of us have done in the past. So I 
think this is a great step forward, and I think we’ll see the 
benefits of that as we move through the next few weeks. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the constituency also, tomorrow is 
election day for rural municipal councillors and reeves, and 
there will be some changes. I was surprised that the number of 
changes that may take place will not be as many as the number 
that has taken in the urban elections. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I know I took a quick look at the number of changes in 
my constituency, and we will have a significant number of new 
mayors in the communities that I represent. And I look forward 
to working with those people in communities like Preeceville 
and Kamsack, which are two of the largest communities. And 
even some of the smaller communities like Togo and Stenen 
also have new mayors. So congratulations to all who let their 
names stand, and congratulations of course to those who will 
now be representing their communities. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech has created a 
number of concerns, a number of concerns in Canora-Pelly. 
And that’s what I’m going to spend my few minutes on is 
talking about how this government, the NDP’s policies have 
affected the people of Canora-Pelly and the delivery of services 
to those people. And I’m going to begin with health care. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m sure many have heard me in this 
Assembly talk about the announcement of the construction of a 
hospital in Preeceville, a facility that was announced already a 
number of years ago — 1999. And at that time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the cost was projected to be 4.5 million. And as 
everyone knows, the share that is expected to be raised by the 
local community is 35 per cent. So that would have meant that 
the community would have had to raise 1.6 million. They did 
that. 
 
But we’ve been waiting seven years, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
And now when we finally see the possibility — and I say again 
the possibility because it is going to tender — the most recent 
projection for cost is now $10 million. And Preeceville’s share, 
the share for the Preeceville area — and it’s not just the town of 
Preeceville, it’s the entire area — has risen to $3.5 million. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think you see how that kind of delay, 
that kind of procrastination will now mean that the people of 
Sturgis and Stenen and Norquay and Preeceville and Buchanan 
and Rama now have to come up with $3.5 million. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we heard today . . . In question period 
we talked about facilities that have closed due to lack of health 
professionals. I took a look at the medical SaskJobs postings for 
Kamsack, Canora, and Preeceville as of today. Today there are 
four postings for registered nurses. There are two postings for 
licensed practical nurses. There’s one registered psychiatric 
nurse posting. There’s one medical laboratory technician 
posting. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the area requires six new 
doctors. We currently have a complement of six in the area that 
serve Preeceville, Kamsack, and Canora. But that area needs at 
least 12 and these are the recommendations of the Sunrise 
Regional Health Authority. So we need 12 and we have six. So 
that means we have a posting of at least six family physicians 
needed. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what this tells you is that with that 
kind of shortage, with that kind of need, problems develop in 
the system. And I’m going to tell you about a situation that 
happened in the middle of August. A situation occurred on a 
Sunday morning where my dad fell — and was severely injured 
— off his back step at his house. I was called and I came to his 
aid and I took him in my vehicle. And I wanted to call an 
ambulance but he said no, just take me in, and we headed into 
Canora. 
 
Now Canora’s the most . . . closest hospital to my area. When I 
got there, I went in quickly. He was cut severely and I wanted 
to leave him in the vehicle. And a nurse came out to tell me, to 
say no, Ken, you can’t, you can’t take him out of the facility. 
You must go to Yorkton because Canora’s on bypass. There are 
no doctors in the Canora facility. 
 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

So we went, we went on to Yorkton. But when I got there, I 
looked around the emergency room and there were dozens of 
people waiting. And I recognized some people from Norquay 
and I recognized an individual from Kamsack. And I was 
thinking, well you know, why did they come here? Then I find 
out that Kamsack is on bypass for that very weekend. So we 
had two facilities in the Canora-Pelly constituency, two out of 
the three hospitals, both on bypass and we’re funnelling 
everybody into Yorkton. 
 
Well you know what happened there? I was amazed. Those 
nurses were just running. They were trying to do the best they 
could. The two doctors that were handling the emergency cases 
were trying to do the best they could, but it took three to four 
hours before my dad finally saw an actual doctor. Now what 
that shows you is that there is a lack of a plan. You can’t, you 
can’t have Yorkton . . . You can’t expect Yorkton to handle 
everything when you don’t have anybody in Kamsack and in 
Canora. 
 
Let me tell you about another situation. In the facility of 
Yorkton when acute care facilities were closed, we were told, 
people in Canora-Pelly were told about what a great facility 
Yorkton would be as a regional hospital. Well let me tell you, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there isn’t even a pathologist in 
Yorkton today. 
 
Last week, last week when my dad had to have a biopsy done 
on a Wednesday, his results were . . . The biopsy tests were sent 
from Yorkton because there is no pathologist. They were sent to 
Regina. Madam Deputy Speaker, those results did not come 
back, they did not come back for a whole week, because when 
Dr. Wanis’s office called Regina, they said we are swamped. 
We can’t deal with that kind of a deluge of incidents that have 
been sent from rural Saskatchewan. So, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, there is a problem in the health care field; there is a 
problem. And this government better recognize that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about a situation 
involving Canora. The specific item is regarding child care. We 
have been told, Madam Deputy Speaker, that there were going 
to be 250 new places created for child care. Canora was 
approached by the Community Resources minister’s staff and 
said, you know, it would be a great thing if Canora had a 
facility. So they went through the process of putting forward a 
proposal to the government. They were encouraged by the 
government. And I want to read a press release, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It says this: both the survey and the public meeting 
indicated that there was a demand for a licensed child care 
facility in Canora. 
 
So they went through the procedure. They were encouraged to 
submit an application for 25 spaces, which they found out . . . 
And then they found out, Madam Minister, that there was a 
tentative agreement for a building and continued support from 
provincial representatives. The group was informed in March 
that an additional operating grant was available. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you’ve worked on a project 
for eight or nine months and you’ve heard from the government 
that says there’s additional funding, please do this, please do 

this, please do this, and you’ve done all that, what would be 
your expectation? Your expectation would be that there would 
be an approval. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to read 
from a letter dated July 3, and it is to the Canora Community 
Child Care Centre Inc., and I quote two paragraphs. It says this: 
 

In determining the space allocations for 2006-07, 
consideration was given to the corporate priorities of the 
provincial government and the Department of Learning. 
Priorities reflect school-liked services, support for 
immigrant families, northern and rural development, 
non-standard hours of service and links to post-secondary 
education. 
 

Then it says this: 
 

Your request for 25 new spaces for Canora Community 
Child Care Centre Inc. has been considered. Given the 
priorities mentioned above as well as the substantial 
number of spaces currently waiting for funding, not all 
requests were able to be approved. As such, I regret to 
inform you that the funding for the 22 new spaces you 
requested is not available at this time. 
 

Suddenly 25 became 22. I don’t know how that happened, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, but this program was expected. This 
program was expected. But you know what? This government 
wanted to do the Imagine campaign. Imagine if we had 
$300,000. Imagine if the Canora community had some of that 
money, some of that money that was dedicated to this 
advertising campaign. Imagine, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
could have a child care program in Canora that would serve the 
families of Canora. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there are so many 
things that need to be mentioned by myself in respect to the 
Canora-Pelly constituency, and I’m only going to touch on a 
couple of more. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in parts of my constituency, 
specifically Kamsack, there is a level 1. Level 1, 2, I guess is 
the best way of describing it. It is the Eaglestone Lodge. It is a 
facility that provides just tremendous care to people that still 
don’t have the needs of level 3 and 4. But you know what 
happens to some of those people, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
They are on pension. They have a finite amount of money that 
comes into their hands. They don’t have assets. Some of them 
don’t even have family members living within this province, 
and many times there is a situation where their total income is 
about $1,300. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the fee to live in Eaglestone Lodge 
was increased last year, and it’s about $1,500. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I wrote a letter to the minister, the 
minister again of DCRE to ask him what can be done. What can 
be done to provide assistance to these people? And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the response I got back just baffled me 
because it talked about the fact that the government doesn’t 
fund level 1 and 2 anymore, and that if the needs were there that 
they could to level 3 and 4 and that care would be subsidized. 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

The question I was asking was this. If someone is short $200, 
will social assistance provide that $200 so that they can live in a 
facility as great as Eaglestone Lodge? The answer never came 
back. Never came back that said it was yes. It said, well you can 
call this number, you can call this number, you can call this 
number. The question I am asking is whether or not Social 
Services will ensure that these people are not out on the street. 
 
Or in the matter of Kamsack, the town of Kamsack and many of 
the people in Kamsack have to do additional fundraising to 
complement and supplement the amount of money that is 
available from the individual. That’s not what we should have 
for a system in a province as great as this is. That’s just not 
acceptable. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when we talk about job creation and 
we talk about where this province is and the lack of population, 
it’s just so evident when we see the example of the former 
minister of Learning and his new amalgamation schedule. You 
know, Madam Deputy Speaker, the numbers that were proposed 
for the Good Spirit School Division in 2004, the enrolment in 
all of those smaller divisions that were put together was 6,337. 
In 2005 that number was 6,092. And the September 30 statistics 
just obtained for 2006 are 5,861. So we see a drop of 245 in the 
first year and 231 in the second year. 
 
What does that mean, Madam Deputy Speaker? At that rate of 
decline about a 4 per cent rate of decline in enrolments. And 
you can see the projections of the students that are in grade 12, 
11, 10, all the way down to kindergarten. We will continue to 
lose. We will continue to lose the number of students we have 
in schools. What does that mean? Well obviously some school 
closures. It’s going to mean some teacher cuts. It’s going to 
mean that the students will have further and further to travel to 
a new school. 
 
But you know, Madam Deputy Speaker — as I understand my 
time is drawing to a close — what this really means when you 
see that kind of non-population growth, and that’s the best way 
I can talk about Saskatchewan, it has a non-population growth, 
and I quote from Doug Elliott, Doug Elliott’s article of 
Tuesday, August 15. And it says this: 
 

“If we don’t see population growth, then the shortage of 
workers will affect the economy. People won’t invest here 
and people can’t be found to build a new plant, drill a new 
oil well or dig a new mine,” Elliott said. 
 

That’s what that means, Madam Deputy Speaker. As we drop in 
the number of students, we will have less and less people 
coming out of grade 12 to enter university or enter 
post-secondary or go to job opportunities. 
 
But do you know what we’re seeing right now? We’re seeing 
families, there’s many families . . . I can give an example of one 
family in Norquay where not only is the father but now also his 
son are working in Alberta. They have left the home, and they 
are working in Alberta because that’s where there is the job that 
will pay them sufficient money so that they can maintain their 
farm in Norquay, Saskatchewan. That’s reality. 
 
Now what’s going to happen as these people work in Alberta? 
Do you not think that maybe the spouse that has been left 

behind after a certain number of years will say, why don’t I just 
move to Alberta? Why don’t I become one of those people that 
lives in Alberta as well? 
 
And that’s, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think a concern of many 
people. They don’t want to have . . . in cases of grandparents, 
they don’t want to be the only ones left here in Saskatchewan 
because the members opposite know the statistics for the age 
group 20 to 45. Per capita it is the worst in all of Canada. Who 
are the people aged 20 to 45? They’re the people that have 
families. They’re the people that will have good-paying jobs. 
They’re the people who will be buying things. They will be the 
builders of this province. We have the worst statistic in all of 
Canada. That’s a record of this NDP government opposite, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is clear that this Throne Speech, 
as a number of people in my constituency have said, it’s too 
little too late. Madam Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment and voting against this Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, 
the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity provided to me to rise in support of 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I want to begin by congratulating the new member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy on his election. I don’t know that he and I 
have a great deal in common, Mr. Speaker, but I think we might 
have one thing in common. I think both he and I were involved 
in partisan politics and organizing, working for candidates long 
before we were elected — in my case much longer before I was 
elected and in the case of the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
And I think we both probably thought when we came here that 
we knew a little bit about what we were doing here. And I 
expect that he is learning as I have learned that, well, we knew 
something, but it’s a little different when you get to these seats. 
I’m sure the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy appreciates the 
honour that he’s been given and the responsibility with which 
he has been entrusted, and I trust that he will do his best to 
fulfill those. And I want to welcome him here to the legislature. 
 
I also want to thank the people of Saskatoon Meewasin who 
gave me the honour of being part of this legislature and part of 
this government — a government that has improved access to 
education for young people by funding tuition freezes for three 
consecutive years now and creating new training spaces; a 
government that has led the country in creating electricity from 
the renewable and sustainable power of the wind; a government 
that has increased access to quality health care; and a 
government that has encouraged our economy that is providing 
ever greater opportunities for young people in our province. 
 
In respect to the Throne Speech I want to mention one specific 
but I feel highly representative item, one specific but highly 
representative provision of that Throne Speech, and that’s the 
creation of the statutory holiday of Saskatchewan Family Day. I 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

say representative because the creation of Saskatchewan Family 
Day represents both the belief of this government that the 
benefits of our growing economy should be shared by ordinary 
Saskatchewan families, by average Saskatchewan people, and 
the creation of Saskatchewan Family Day represents the belief 
of this government that economic progress should support 
social progress, in this case strengthening the work-family 
balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the reaction of the opposition to the creation of 
Saskatchewan Family Day is also representative. It highlights 
the difference between the Saskatchewan government which is 
working for the people of Saskatchewan and the opposition 
which is working for the interests of the Saskatchewan Party. 
The Leader of the Opposition’s first reaction to the new holiday 
was this, quote, “bread and circuses.” Bread and circuses, Mr. 
Speaker. That was his reaction. A commentator almost always 
favourable to the members opposite, a person who has been 
called something like the voice of the Saskatchewan Party 
called the opposition’s reaction to the creation of this holiday, 
churlish. 
 
Now I think it was William James who said that, Mr. Speaker, 
that to build character, you should do something for the sole 
purpose that it is difficult. And so that it was in the interests of 
building my character that I listened carefully to the opposition 
speeches on the Throne Speech — speeches that presented no 
alternatives, speeches that presented no vision, speeches that 
presented no plan. 
 
The opposition members who have risen and spoken to the 
Speech to the Throne have spent quite an impressive period of 
time attempting to run from their record, running away from 
their participation in the Devine government, the least 
competent and most corrupt government in this province’s 
history. 
 
And the defence of the members opposite, their separation from 
this record is threefold. They start with, well we weren’t there. 
It wasn’t us. Now there are members . . . The member from 
Moosomin puts up his hand, Mr. Speaker. I don’t claim that . . . 
He claims that he wasn’t there. There are members opposite 
who were in the Devine caucus. The member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs was a ministerial assistant. The member from 
Saskatoon Southeast was an organizer for that party before he 
received what he has termed a patronage appointment. So we 
weren’t there doesn’t really work for a lot of them. And 
actually, the member from Canora-Pelly who just spoke may be 
almost the only exception that proves the rule. 
 
When it wasn’t there doesn’t work, when we weren’t there 
doesn’t work, they move to the defence that was put forward in 
part by the member from Cannington. Well we were there, but 
it wasn’t that bad. Well his argument is I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
the argument of the members opposite was we’re actually in the 
same circumstance today in respect to finances. Put aside all the 
cabinet ministers convicted for breach of public trust, we’re 
actually in the same situation financially now that we were then. 
But of course that doesn’t stand up to scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, 
because if that was the case, we wouldn’t have had 14 credit 
rating upgrades between the circumstance then and the 
circumstance now. 
 

[15:15] 
 
So when they fall back from, well we weren’t there or if we 
were there, it wasn’t that bad, then they go, well we were there 
and it was pretty bad but I spent all my time in the daycare 
while I was in this building. And this is the defence of the 
Leader of the Opposition. He tried, I wasn’t there. He removed 
seven years from his resume. But when he was pinned down, he 
moved away to, I was there, it was pretty bad. You should tell 
the member from Cannington that. But you know actually it 
was an asset. And I want to quote him exactly. On March 22, 
2006, the Leader of the Opposition says, “I think it’s an asset 
that I was involved in a government that lost its way on these 
issues.” 

 
On what issues, Mr. Speaker? On what issues they lost their 
way? Well on the issues of credibility and integrity, Mr. 
Speaker. And what was the role of the Leader of the Opposition 
in that government that, as he put it so eloquently, lost its way? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bartender in chief. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well I’m coming to this. It’s the chief 
of staff for John Gerich. John Gerich was one of those cabinet 
ministers convicted for breach of public trust, Mr. Speaker. But 
John Gerich was also the minister responsible for the Liquor 
Board commission. And over a two-year period, when the 
Leader of the Opposition was his chief of staff, over that period, 
Mr. Gerich received over $19,000 of alcohol delivered to his 
office, delivered to the Leader of the Opposition as he now is. 
Nineteen thousand dollars. And he took delivery and, as a 
matter of fact I think he says, I think he admitted — I know he 
did when a reporter asked, you drank from the taxpayers’ 
money too? — the answer of the Leader of the Opposition was, 
and again I quote: 
 

I’m sure I would have done that, yeah. I’m sure I would 
have had some of that, absolutely. 
 

And that absolutely is just my favourite part, Mr. Speaker. Just 
the chutzpah of that defiant absolutely. Not I’m sorry, but oh 
yes, absolutely. 
 
So what was the Leader of the Opposition in Mr. Gerich’s 
office? What was his role in the Devine government, the 
government that nearly bankrupted this province? Was he chief 
of staff or was he, as one of my colleagues suggests, the 
bartender? Of course these are not mutually exclusive, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition could have been one of 
those three-in-the-morning, one-more-for-my-baby, 
one-more-for-the-road type of advisers, and that would certainly 
explain some of the decisions the Devine government made. 
 
It has been said that those who cannot remember their history 
are doomed to repeat it. The members opposite hope that the 
people of Saskatchewan cannot remember their history because 
they so, so much want a comeback, Mr. Speaker. It has been 15 
long, thirsty years since the Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues have had the opportunity to party in this building at 
the public expense. 
 
Now you would think that the opposition would want to talk 
about more than a new name. You would think they would want 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

to put forward, given that history, take the opportunity to show 
that they’ve changed. You would think they would want to put 
forward some new ideas. But that opposition, Mr. Speaker, will 
not tell the Saskatchewan people where it stands. 
 
Members rise . . . Members rise across the way and say we need 
a competitive labour environment. We ask them, what does that 
mean? They refuse to answer. What labour standards will be 
changed? Will they repeal the holiday to create a competitive 
labour environment, Mr. Speaker? The Leader of the 
Opposition has called for a war on labour. The questions are, 
how will that war on labour be fought by the opposition if they 
became government? And, for heaven’s sake, Mr. Speaker, to 
what end? 
 
The members opposite call for smaller government. What cuts 
to health care are they thinking about? What cuts to education 
are they thinking about? Why won’t they tell the Saskatchewan 
people what their agenda is? 
 
The Saskatchewan Party when it was founded said — and again 
I want to quote precisely — quote, “The Saskatchewan Party 
will explore partnerships in the health care field with private 
sector providers.” What part of health care will the party 
opposite convert to for-profit if they had the opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker? They have an opportunity, when we’re discussing the 
vision for this province, to tell us the answers to the questions. I 
suggest they take it. It is time for the Saskatchewan Party to 
come clean about its agenda. 
 
For my part, Mr. Speaker, I support the stated agenda of the 
government as expressed in the Throne Speech: 
 

[to] Make Saskatchewan the best place for young people 
to live, work, and build strong futures; [to] Strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving public health care 
while reducing wait times and improving access to 
services; [to] Advance Saskatchewan as a leader in 
environmental protection and the green economy; [and] 
Ensure [that today] Saskatchewan families benefit from 
our strong . . . economy. 

 
I’ll be supporting the Speech from the Throne. I will not be 
supporting the amendment from the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
real honour to stand here today as the voice of the people from 
the Kelvington-Wadena constituency for the 11th year in a row 
to reply to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I would like to start by congratulating the new member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. I know he’s going to be a real asset to 
our caucus and a real important voice for the people of his 
constituency, and I’m very honoured to be working with him. 
 
During the 2003 election there was drastic changes to the 
boundaries and I was no longer living within my constituency 
and I had never met a large number of the people that I 
represent. Now three years later I’ve had the privilege of 
meeting the vast majority of them, and after moving to 

Kelvington two years ago we consider ourselves very lucky to 
be able to call Kelvington home. And I want to take this 
opportunity to thank them for their support and their warmth 
and their hospitality at all the events that I’m asked to attend 
right across the constituency. I don’t always get the positive 
result I’d like to when they ask for my help but I always try and 
it’s a privilege to be their voice in the legislature. 
 
This summer one of the towns in my constituency, Foam Lake, 
was threatened not once but twice by fires that had the potential 
to wipe out the entire town. On June 28 a fire wiped out four 
businesses: Backyard Studio, Sears and the dry cleaners, a 
doctor’s office and restaurant and a family home. And just four 
weeks later a second fire took two elevators. I had the privilege 
to attend an appreciation function to honour and thank the 
firemen who had literally risked their lives for their friends and 
their neighbours and their property. 
 
One of the firemen talked about the night of the second fire — 
the feeling of helplessness as they watched the fire roll and 
grow in front of them. They saw the enormity of the situation 
and the very real possibility that the future of their town was in 
the hands of 14 to 16 firemen. They were still emotionally and 
mentally exhausted from the first fire. 
 
The task looked daunting and then through the darkness of the 
night they saw the lights coming towards them from the North 
and from the East and from the West. They saw the fire trucks 
and the firemen from the other towns, the surrounding towns, 
who never questioned what had to be done. They started to 
work without speaking and they worked together and saved 
their neighbours’ town. 
 
And without a single request, when they looked around that 
evening there were dozens of farmers with water tanks on the 
back of their trucks doing the work that had to be done without 
anybody asking. And at the same time there were dozens of 
people supplying coffee and sandwiches, and later on meals. 
And there was nobody talked about the cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is populated by homesteaders 
who were tough and resilient people and worked together to 
create communities. I am very proud to say that that attribute 
hasn’t left in our constituency and that’s who I represent in the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency. It’s a true community. 
 
During the summer the people of Kelvington were appalled at 
the CBC report on our town, using it as an example of the trend 
of small towns dying under this NDP government. And if you 
have any doubt that by far the majority of people in Kelvington 
see this government as on the wrong track and incapable of 
seeing their needs, you only have to look at the last three 
election results. 
 
That being said, they know that in spite of this government they 
will survive and so for a full week the whole community came 
together at a large variety of events to confirm their 
commitment to the town. It was an overwhelming success 
culminating in a variety night with tickets sold out days before 
the event. And I sure wish CBC could have been there that 
night. 
 
After that party I came to the legislature with a feeling of 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

euphoria and expectation. I shouldn’t have been surprised this 
NDP lived up to its expectations it set for us in the last 11 years. 
Expect nothing and that’s exactly what you’ll get. 
 
In 1996 I brought a memo into the legislature and tabled it in 
the Assembly. It had been left in the material given to me by the 
defeated NDP member in my constituency. It was written by the 
then minister of Economic Development to the premier, to the 
cabinet ministers and MLAs and deputy ministers to assist them 
in answering the questions regarding economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan. The memo stated, and I quote: 
 

There was, and still is, no intention of providing a grand 
strategy for rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Nothing has changed in 11 years since that memo was tabled. 
There’s still no strategy for rural Saskatchewan. We’ve had 
ministers responsible for rural Saskatchewan. We’ve had 
departments to deal with rural Saskatchewan. We’ve had 
committees and reports and more committees, but still no 
strategy. And never has rural Saskatchewan been a priority for 
this NDP government. 
 
When the members opposite have gotten up to respond to this 
Throne Speech in the last few days, the basic message they 
want to bring forward about rural Saskatchewan and about 
agriculture is the wheat board. They never speak about the 
changes that are needed to the pitiful crop insurance program 
that farmers are forced into in this province. It’s by far the worst 
crop insurance program in the Prairie provinces. 
 
They don’t want to talk about the CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization] program that the federal government has 
said that our government insisted stay in place. They don’t want 
to talk about the right to burn farm diesel fuel in machines 
being used for baling and corral cleaning. They don’t want to 
talk about the education portion of property tax. They don’t 
want to talk about the fact that they put $268 million less into 
agriculture this year than last year. They don’t want to talk 
about the fact that the Wheat Pool has stepped in to help the 
farmers to give them high-speed Internet. And they don’t want 
to talk about the fact that farms are forced to haul grain on roads 
that are really just a shamble. 
 
In fact they don’t seem interested in the fact that the 
Kelvington-Wadena farmers, by far the majority of them, had 
another very tough year. Less than 50 per cent of the crop is 
seeded in many areas, and right now it’s still so wet that many 
of them are wondering about seeding in the spring. 
 
None of these issues were talked about by this government. 
They wanted to talk about the wheat board. Here’s a news flash 
for the members across. This NDP has nothing to say about the 
wheat board. It’s between the farmers and the federal 
government. Unless there’s a farmer over there that’s holding a 
permit book, you don’t have any right to waste our time in the 
legislature. Look after the mess that you’ve created for farmers 
in Saskatchewan yourself. By speaking about this in the 
legislature for some reason you believe you’re giving yourself 
credibility. Validity in this issue is nothing more than a 
pompous acidity to the ninth degree when it comes to this 
government and the wheat board. The mere assumption that, 
because they’ve talked about it, it gives them some validity. 

And again I will tell them, unless you’re a bona fide farmer 
selling grain to the wheat board your opinion is not relevant in 
this legislature. 
 
This weekend I went home and I really didn’t have to ask for a 
response to this Speech from the Throne. Of course the 
announcement of a family day and the 2 per cent decrease in the 
PST [provincial sales tax] was welcomed. But to a person, the 
first response and question to me was, when are they going to 
call the election? This must mean there’s going to be an 
election. The people of Saskatchewan, of Kelvington-Wadena 
are wise. They know that the government plays with the PST 
before every election. In fact for the last three elections in a row 
the government has lowered the PST just before the election 
and raised it the first budget after the election. The financial 
socialist geniuses across the road have grabbed a half a billion 
dollars from the people of Saskatchewan in the past three years 
and . . . [inaudible] . . . it away. And now they expect people to 
be really happy that they’re giving it back to them. 
 
The reason for the PST, for raising the PST in the first place, 
was to deal with the overwhelming burden of education tax on 
property. People know that for three years the PST grab, the 
half a billion dollars taken from the hard-working people of 
Saskatchewan, went into that great big black hole known as the 
General Revenue Fund and it did not touch the problem of the 
education portion of property tax. 
 
Even worse than the tax increase they also see their education 
system going in the same direction as health care. Large paid 
bureaucracies, no one losing a job in the amalgamation and just 
ending up with a different title — and in most cases a raise — 
and the students are definitely no better off. But the real reason 
for amalgamation was never anything to do with financial 
savings. The real reason was to put a bigger buffer between 
government and the people they purport to represent. And no 
longer will they have to face a convention of 1,000 trustees all 
trying desperately to get this government’s attention. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but laugh at the member from 
Coronation Park as he tried to talk about the wheat board. The 
member from Coronation Park made a statement that if true 
should mean . . . that every NDP member who truly believes the 
statement, “New Democrats . . . [believe that] sometimes people 
need a hand up”, should resign right now. They should tender 
their resignation because one of their cabinet members are 
making a mockery out of everything they supposedly stand for. 
I suggest to you that no one in our society needed a hand up 
more than the young girls who were under the care and 
protection of the Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these children were sent to a safe home, 
Oyate, reported by the NDP government to give children a 
refuge from a world of sexual exploitation and abuse, a world 
full of drugs, a world full of gangs, a world full of poverty and 
helplessness — a world where there is no tomorrow, where 
days blend into nights and weeks into months and there is no 
hope. 
 
As a legislature, as a united legislature we learned the graphic 
details of the lives of many of these children who are being 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

failed by society and by government — thanks, I might add, to 
the then member from Humboldt who worked tirelessly on the 
issue. 
 
The NDP government was asked by unanimous agreement of 
the legislature to deal with the 49 recommendations put forward 
by the all party committee on child exploitation. All elected 
members gave the NDP government the leeway to do whatever 
they needed to save these young children. Every one of my 
colleagues on this side of the House agreed that this NDP 
government should make it a priority. They agreed there should 
be zero tolerance for sexual exploitation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Oyate should have been a safe haven but instead horrendous 
problems continued. And not only did they continue but it 
continued under the knowledge of the department and at least 
three government members. It’s not only unconscionable but 
contemptuous, given the facts in black and white, the minister 
today still continues to deny knowing there was a problem. The 
people running the house asked for help and when it was not 
forthcoming they did what they had to do. And in my humble 
opinion there was a lot of people who were abused by this 
government. Never will I or my colleagues or the majority of 
people in Saskatchewan have any respect for that minister or 
the government who will stand by and accept the situation. 
 
And you know why they accepted it? For one reason and one 
reason only — politics. If by admitting there was a problem at 
Oyate then perhaps the NDP members would have to question 
other actions and issues that the people of Saskatchewan don’t 
even know about. The whole NDP philosophy of caring would 
be exposed to the bright lights of the world as nothing more 
than raw politics, people that are only worried about power and 
not worried about governing — never about doing the right 
thing, only about appearing to do the right thing. People of 
Saskatchewan know the truth. All the NDP gave these children 
who needed a hand up was a slap. 
 
Before I take my place and vote for the amendment, I’d also 
like to read a few facts into the record to speak to the 
misinformation given to many by this tired, old, worn-out 
government who spouts rhetoric aimed at misleading the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
According to the Provincial Auditor in volume 2 of the 2006 
report on page 7 he states, and I quote: 
 

. . . Government has lived within its means for nine [out] 
of the last sixteen years (that is the Government raised 
more revenues than it spent in each of these years). 
 

The statement that there has been 13 consecutive balanced 
budgets is not true. On page 8 of the same report, the Provincial 
Auditor states that the net debt in ’91 was 7.9 billion; in 2006, 
7.8 billion. 
 
A decrease, yes, but not the huge, enormous decrease the 
government would like people to believe. In fact, with a 
windfall of unbudgeted revenues of over $1 billion in the last 
year alone, plus the extra money they took in from PST, that 
point one billion dollar decrease is a joke. What would have 
been the savings in the debt had the debt been paid off by the 
whole $1 billion? 

Page 34 of the 2006 report is a graph that the citizens of 
Saskatchewan should all see. Graph K, Government’s liabilities 
as at March 31, 1991 to 2006, shows clearly that 1991 liability 
of $17.6 billion was the lowest level of the liability in the whole 
time frame. Look at the total liabilities as March 31, 2006 was 
$21 billion — an increase of $3.4 billion since this government 
took office. 
 
The Premier and the NDP members keep saying that the 
opposition doesn’t offer any solutions. May I remind the 
government of the 100 Ideas which was released last spring. 
And we’ve seen many of those ideas incorporated into this 
government’s solutions: cutting corporate taxes; the crystal 
meth issue — Project Hope was born from that issue; increase 
in the basic allowance for those on social assistance; a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon; all-weather roads in the North 
to promote economic development. All of these and many more 
turned into solutions by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the private member Bills that are efforts to table 
legislation are perceived to be a dead-end process in this 
legislature. Government members are not free to support a Bill 
even if it’s the most common sense idea, if it comes from the 
opposition. One of the NDP members last night acknowledged 
the former Kindersley member supported the budget while the 
rest of his caucus opposed it. 
 
I’d like to point out that never once in 11 years has this 
government, this NDP government voted anything but in a 
block. The member from Regina Walsh Acres last year tried a 
type of show that she was an independent thinker on the most 
available hours Bill, yet at the very last moment she voted with 
her group to pass the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are judging this 
government on their performance, not on their promises as this 
NDP government always hoped. Look at the results of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. This tired, old, and, I might add, 
worn-out government recites platitudes and digs back three or 
four generations and talks about historic issues for one reason 
and one reason only — they don’t have a plan or a vision for 
the future. They can’t run on their record, a record of cabinet 
ministers misleading the public for six years, without feeling an 
ounce of guilt; cabinet members that risk the lives of children 
without remorse. 
 
And because of this NDP government’s legacy, the people in 
Saskatchewan are more cynical about politics. They won’t take 
the word of the government for granted because they know that 
actions speak louder than words. People who want hope and 
direction and encouragement need only listen to these speeches 
given by the NDP members talking about the past and blaming 
everyone from the federal Tories to the ’80s to know that they’ll 
never take responsibility for their own actions. 
 
People of Saskatchewan are victims of an insensitive and of a 
greedy government. They attack, they manoeuvre, and they 
manipulate every speech and every individual to shore up their 
weak and lifeless agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I waited to hear one of these members stand up 
and talk about something like the nuclear industry. Didn’t hear 
it. I never heard one of them respond to the question if the PST 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

cut is affordable. I notice that there was an issue in the paper 
about it today by Jack Vicq. He questioned whether it was 
affordable. I never heard this government talk about it. They 
prefer to talk about the past. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d be amiss if I didn’t mention the 
performance of the Minister of Youth, Culture and Rec last 
night. He gave an auctioneer’s version of an excited and 
hopeful government bent on buoying up depressed troops on the 
NDP side when he talked about celebration of arts in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party agrees that the people of Saskatchewan 
realize the value of arts and culture in our province. We also 
applaud and recognize the value of the people who provide the 
music and arts. The number of talented people in our province 
is significant. The quality of life in Saskatchewan is given depth 
and value because of them. Of course we’ve lost a great number 
of these talented people in our out-migration. But I assure you 
this government’s excitement about things, this year’s coming 
activities, is not stronger, it’s not louder or more passionate than 
members on this side of the House. We did however enjoy the 
200,000 words in 20 minutes from the minister last evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for First Nations and 
Métis affairs spoke of his work with First Nations. And I must 
tell you, the members, that I asked him about the problem that I 
see in the North when people in northern Saskatchewan pay just 
about double for a quart of milk compared to somebody in 
Regina. But people in the North pay the very same amount as 
somebody in Regina when it comes to a bottle of beer. This 
government hasn’t had problem with that, with subsidizing the 
amount of money for liquor but milk was another issue. And the 
minister’s response to me was, well maybe we should have a 
milk Crown corporation. I fail to see how that is going to 
address any of the issues that are a concern in the North. 
 
The minister talked about his promises. He talked about paving 
roads into and accesses for First Nations. My question is, when 
and where is he going to do this? The government will choose 
of course where they would want to pave these roads and who 
will get the pavement. My thoughts is it will be where they need 
to win the votes, just like the promise to build homes 
on-reserve. Where it’ll be is where the NDP needs the votes to 
gain a seat. 
 
He spoke of cultural awareness, and still this government has 
not mandated treaty education in schools. We talked about 
health, but where’s the strategy to deal with the issues of 
diabetes, of tuberculosis, of HIV [human immunodeficiency 
virus]? 
 
The northern strategy is as helpful to the North as the rural 
strategy is to those of us living outside NDP seats. The only 
strategy this government works on is how to get elected again. 
For that reason and many others I have mentioned, I will 
support the amendment and not the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to enter into this debate and to speak in favour of the 
Throne Speech that opens this session of the legislature and lays 
out our government’s vision for the year ahead. 
 
As I announced in January of this year, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
stepping down from my position as an MLA at the end of this 
term. I want to take this opportunity to sincerely thank my 
constituents for the privilege of being able to serve them in this 
legislature. 
 
I also want to thank my wife, Louise; my mother, Trudy; my 
sons, Mark, James, and Michael; and my step-daughter, Monte, 
for their unwavering support throughout my years in provincial 
politics. I’m looking forward to the chance to spend more time 
with them when this term is completed. 
 
I want to thank the Premier, Mr. Speaker, for the privilege of 
serving in his government as both his Legislative Secretary for 
energy conservation, renewable energy, and also as a member 
of his cabinet. 
 
I want to express appreciation to my constituency assistant, 
Puck Janes, for the outstanding job she does in helping me and 
in helping all those who come in to seek the services of my 
constituency office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look back on the years that I’ve had the 
privilege to serve in this Assembly, I have witnessed first-hand 
the large differences between those who sit on the New 
Democratic Party side of the Chamber, where I’m privileged to 
sit, and those who now sit in the opposition benches, formerly 
calling themselves Conservatives, now calling themselves 
members of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
When I first was elected in 1978, the Saskatchewan economy 
was on a roll under the leadership of Allan Blakeney’s NDP 
government. The government of that day delivered the best set 
of social programs in all of Canada. In 1982 the Conservative 
government was elected in Saskatchewan and quickly economic 
circumstances deteriorated. The Conservatives fired many 
professional public servants and replaced with their own 
hand-picked supporters who were much less competent. 
 
The Conservatives promised less government but in reality they 
were very big spenders and they also liked to make big cuts to 
taxes. Their spending excesses and their tax cuts just didn’t add 
up, Mr. Speaker. They quickly began to spend $1 billion a year 
more than they took in. And as their debts piled up, they began 
to reduce spending on social programs and to cancel some 
social programs entirely. 
 
A prime example, Mr. Speaker, of the kinds of programs the 
Conservatives cancelled was the children’s dental plan. It was a 
school-based program that delivered free dental care to 
children. Through the work of dental hygienists hired under that 
program, Saskatchewan children and teens once had the best 
dental health in all of Canada. The children’s dental plan was 
abolished by the Conservatives in 1987 and children’s dental 
health in Saskatchewan has steadily deteriorated in the years 
since, Mr. Speaker. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that one day we will 
reinstate that plan as finances allow. I would very much like to 
see that plan returned to the people of Saskatchewan. We’re 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

steadily making progress on programs like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me focus at this point on that Conservative record 
because not only, Mr. Speaker, were social programs cancelled, 
but Saskatchewan’s Conservative government stripped the 
Crown corporations of their assets, and ran Saskatchewan’s 
Crowns badly into debt. 
 
The Conservatives also sold off several of the Crowns at a small 
fraction of what they were worth. The combined result of 
excessive spending and poor Crown management meant that by 
the end of their second term the Conservative government had 
left a mountain of debt, $14 billion, Mr. Speaker. The interest 
charges on that were over $800 million per year and all that 
money every year had to be paid by Saskatchewan taxpayers 
before a penny of debt could be retired or before health and 
education or highways could be funded. Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, really was on the verge of bankruptcy. 
 
[15:45] 
 
During the Conservatives’ time in government, young people 
decided to leave this province in record numbers. Knowing they 
would face defeat at the polls, the Conservative government 
hung on to power for a full five years in their second term, 
refusing to face voters at the traditional four-year mark. Finally 
in October 1991 an election was called, and voters 
overwhelmingly elected an NDP government. 
 
Your NDP government has worked diligently since that time to 
turn things around, and slowly but surely we have succeeded. 
Gradually the public debt has been reduced to the point where it 
now sits at 11 billion. Interest charges are down to just over 500 
million a year from a high of over 800 million. Mr. Speaker, 
that is allowing our government to invest more money in 
services for people, and health care, education, and social 
services have all had major increases from this government over 
the last seven years. 
 
Under Premier Lorne Calvert, your NDP government has 
worked to rebuild the Saskatchewan economy. The last five 
years have seen steadily increasing job numbers to the point 
that this September we had 499,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan — the highest number of jobs in Saskatchewan’s 
history. After years of minimum wage freezes under the 
Conservatives, the NDP has steadily improved the minimum 
wage, taking it to $7.55 an hour, and it will be going up to 7.95 
in April, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Crown corporation sector under the NDP has now had 15 
years of good management, and the financial viability of each 
Crown corporation has been restored. And this was a massive 
task, Mr. Speaker. More than $2 billion of Crown corporation 
debt has been paid off. Under Premier Calvert’s leadership, the 
Crowns are now able to deliver to Saskatchewan people the 
lowest bundle of utility rates in the country. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . please. I just remind the member, I don’t 
believe he’s quoting from a paper, but he should not be 
referring to any member by name. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The lower debt and a 
strong economy is resulting in lower taxes for Saskatchewan 

residents — a $1,000 income tax cut per family between 1999 
and 2003 and a 2 per cent cut in the PST announced just last 
week. There’s been a wide range of tax reductions for small, 
medium, and large business as well. 
 
Lower debt and a stronger economy has also meant that 
innovation and investment in social programs has been 
accelerated. This last three years in government, under our 
Premier, has seen improvements in social assistance rates, a 
two-year freeze in undergraduate tuition rates, an expansion in 
literacy programs, thousands of new post-secondary training 
spaces, an expansion of community schools, new daycare 
services, new MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] and CT 
[computerized tomography] scanners, and a record investment 
in health care services for Saskatchewan people. Those who 
deliver community-based services have also gotten a 
well-deserved wage increase. 
 
That takes us to the Throne Speech before us now, Mr. Speaker. 
Our government is poised to deliver on a wonderful package of 
measures to make life even better for Saskatchewan families. 
My message to voters, as I step down from provincial politics, 
is don’t throw the progress away. Don’t take a chance on a 
rerun of the conservative regime of the 1980s and early 1990s. 
Don’t take a chance on the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I also say to Saskatchewan residents, remember the reason the 
Saskatchewan Party was created. The Conservative Party had 
been thoroughly discredited, not only because of its record but 
because of its corruption. As the decade of the 1990s 
progressed, issues of corruption among former Conservative 
members of government began to be investigated by the police. 
The end result was that approximately a third of the former 
Conservative caucus members went to jail or else, Mr. Speaker, 
were found guilty and had to pay fines. In one way or another, 
they were found guilty of a criminal offense. 
 
The Conservative Party was forced to rebrand itself and the 
result was that the Conservative Party ceased to function as a 
meaningful political party in Saskatchewan, and instead the 
Saskatchewan Party was created. Every Tory MLA in the 
Saskatchewan legislature joined the Saskatchewan Party. Only 
one Conservative was ultimately left out because of his criminal 
involvement in child sexual exploitation. That is the record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With a caucus dominated by conservatives, it was no surprise, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party would attack 
provincial Crown corporations, which they did throughout the 
period up to 2003. It’s no surprise that the Saskatchewan Party 
has proposed to freeze funding to health care and education as 
they did in the 1999 election. It’s no surprise that the 
Saskatchewan Party has consistently attacked trade unions and 
opposed minimum wage increases. 
 
And since it was rejected by voters in November 2003, it is no 
surprise that members of the Saskatchewan Party have been 
silent over the past three years about what they really stand for 
on the issues, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party is running 
from its record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The New Democratic Party government Throne Speech before 
us offers new promise for Saskatchewan families and a bold 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

vision of how Saskatchewan will develop over the next few 
years. There is a firm plan to expand Saskatchewan’s 
Aboriginal work force. 
 
There is an action plan to strengthen our highway system by 
ensuring in law that every dollar paid in fuel tax at the gasoline 
pumps goes to highway construction and maintenance and other 
essential work performed by the Department of Highways. 
 
There are specific commitments to expand literacy programs, 
continue the freeze on university tuition, and develop a 
children’s hospital within one of Saskatoon’s hospitals. There is 
a promise to create a new statutory holiday for families on the 
third weekend in February, a promise that I’m very excited 
about. And there is a clear plan for putting Saskatchewan at the 
centre of the Canadian music scene in 2007. 
 
There is a commitment to fully fund the CAIS program and to 
support the Canadian Wheat Board. There is a commitment to 
achieve one-third of our energy needs from renewable energy 
sources by the third decade of this century. And there is a 
promise to expand the production, processing, and marketing of 
local organic food. 
 
It’s an exciting package, Mr. Speaker. In contrast the 
Saskatchewan Party offers no specific plan. 
 
Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I want to raise one more pressing 
issue that all political parties in Saskatchewan must address. 
That is the issue of climate change. The Saskatchewan Party 
have been hopeless on the climate change issue from the outset, 
Mr. Speaker. Before the federal government signed the Kyoto 
Protocol in December, 2002, the Saskatchewan Party made 
Kyoto the sole topic of their provincial convention resolutions 
and resolved to oppose the Kyoto Protocol and the targets for 
greenhouse gas reduction with all the political muscle they 
could muster. 
 
The federal Conservatives took the same point of view, and it is 
no surprise that upon being elected as the national government 
they have failed to honour Canada’s international obligations to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and abide by the Kyoto 
Protocol. In fact the federal Conservatives have cancelled many 
of the programs designed to implement Kyoto including the 
homeowner grants under the EnerGuide for homes residential 
contribution program. 
 
The Conservatives also cancelled the commercial building 
incentive program which provided a grant for commercial 
building owners who build to an energy efficiency standard 25 
per cent or more above the model national energy code for 
buildings. These are just two of a great many climate change 
initiatives that have been cut under Stephen Harper’s watch. 
 
I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, that our NDP government plugged the 
hole left by the federal Conservative government and continue 
to fund the EnerGuide for homes conservation program in 
Saskatchewan. I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, of the 172 megawatts 
of wind power that have been built under our Premier’s 
leadership in Saskatchewan over the last four years, providing 
emission-free electricity to Saskatchewan homes and 
businesses. I’m proud of the energy efficiency standards for 
new public buildings that our government has set, 25 per cent 

better than the model national energy code for buildings. I’m 
pleased that the Office of Energy Conservation abolished by the 
Conservatives in 1982 has been reinstated in Saskatchewan 
under the NDP. I’m pleased that Saskatchewan is providing 
important leadership on the development of zero emission coal 
fire generating technology. 
 
But these good public policy measures are only a small start to 
what is needed, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 
Canada as a whole have a serious problem with rising 
greenhouse gas emissions. Canada is more than 30 per cent off 
its Kyoto target. And while Saskatchewan does not have an 
assigned target, our province’s emissions are even more above 
1990 levels than the national average. 
 
Actions to substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions is 
needed in every sector of the Saskatchewan economy. Over the 
past decade, the scientific community has reached a global 
consensus on the grim consequences of climate change. 
Western European countries are setting greenhouse gas 
emission reduction targets of 80 per cent below 1990 emission 
levels by 2050. 
 
Just yesterday, Sir Nicholas Stern, the World Bank’s former 
chief economist, warned the global community that if 
greenhouse gas emissions are not sharply reduced, the negative 
consequences will be on a scale similar to the Great Depression 
and the two world wars that marked the first half of the 20th 
century. Sir Nicolas estimates the cost of the world economy at 
$7 trillion in lost output and predicts that 200 million people 
could be forced to leave their homes from the flooding and 
drought that result from climate change. 
 
I had the benefit this summer of visiting with some of NASA’s 
[National Aeronautics and Space Administration] leading 
scientists. Many are of the view that the world has only 10 to 20 
years to turn things around before the consequences of climate 
change become enormous. If major emission reductions do not 
occur in this time frame, they fear that Greenland will 
ultimately melt and the additional water that enters the ocean 
will increase sea levels by six metres, causing many of the 
world’s coastal cities to become uninhabitable. Many scientists 
at NASA also fear widespread extinction of species as animals 
and plants are unable to adapt to rapidly rising temperatures, 
escalating drought, and changes in rainfall patterns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these consequences can only be avoided if the 
countries of the industrialized world sharply reduce their 
reliance on fossil fuels, make all new electricity generation zero 
emission, and undertake a massive energy conservation 
program in every sector of their economies. Canada and 
Saskatchewan will need to do their share and will need to do it 
more quickly than is currently planned. 
 
One of the obvious areas to start, Mr. Speaker, is in the area of 
new buildings, new vehicles, and new equipment. New 
buildings across this country, Mr. Speaker, should be built to 
the highest possible standards of energy efficiency. And 
building codes, Mr. Speaker, will have to be seriously looked at 
for energy efficiency in every province of Canada. It is difficult 
for Canadians to explain, Mr. Speaker, why all the US states but 
four have building codes for energy efficiency, all of western 
Europe has building codes for energy efficiency, and none of 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

the provinces other than Ontario have building codes for energy 
efficiency, Mr. Speaker. This is something that will need to 
change. 
 
Similarly with auto efficiency standards. The federal 
government is signalling that it wants to adopt US standards by 
2011. But, Mr. Speaker, that is moving much too slowly, and 
instead of adopting US standards, the federal government 
should be adopting the standards for auto emissions and 
automobile efficiency that have been set by the state legislature 
in California, Mr. Speaker. And those should be in place next 
year, Mr. Speaker. The automobile industry in North America 
knows how to meet them. It meets them for the California 
economy. It should meet them for the Saskatchewan economy 
and for the Canadian economy right across this country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are just examples of what is required 
in Canada and in Saskatchewan. But my central message here is 
that significant budget allocations at the national and the 
provincial level across this country and in this province are 
required to address the issue of climate change. Time is running 
out for these measures, Mr. Speaker. Carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gas emissions, once released into the atmosphere, 
will be present at elevated levels for long periods of time — in 
the case of carbon dioxide, for approximately 100 years. And 
once these emissions have been released into the atmosphere, 
Mr. Speaker, the situation cannot be reversed. So we live with 
the consequences of climate change that follow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The New Democratic Party is the only party in this province 
that shows concern and genuine interest in this issue. But the 
pace at which action is taken must be greatly accelerated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by saying that it is an honour to 
serve in this legislature. I’m very grateful to my constituents for 
the 15 years that I’ve been able to serve in this Assembly, and I 
want to thank them again for the opportunity that they have 
afforded me to serve. It’s also been a great privilege to serve 
with my colleagues on the government side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to thank them for the opportunity to work 
with them in cabinet and in caucus. And, Mr. Speaker, I will of 
course be supporting the main motion and opposing the 
amendment. Thank you so much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to join 
in the debate today of the Throne Speech. I want welcome the 
new member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. He’s going to make 
an excellent MLA, an excellent first speech — a lot better than 
mine, probably even a lot better than the one I’m even going to 
make today at that end of it. 
 
I want to acknowledge my family and their support for the long 
years I’ve been here. It seems like a long time. If there’s any 
constituents that are watching from Arm River-Watrous I want 

to tell them it’s been a pleasure serving them, and I will keep on 
serving them, looking forward to serving them in the future. 
 
Also want to thank my CA [constituency assistant] who’s did a 
lot of work for a number of years I’ve been here, and has did a 
lot of research and helped a lot of people in my constituency. 
They deserve a lot of help and I want to . . . She’s watching 
today and I want to thank you for the work that you’ve been 
doing with that. 
 
We’re getting to the Throne Speech. I’ve listened to them since 
basically 1999. And I remember one of the members opposite 
. . . Well the Throne Speech is laying out a plan for the future. 
Well they started, since I’ve been listening in ’99, laying out a 
plan and things haven’t changed since ’99. You have to ask, and 
I’ll ask my residents in Arm River-Watrous, have things gotten 
better for you since 1999? Are things better out there? And you 
know what they say? No. They say they’re not. They talk about 
population loss. They talk about trouble in agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. They talk about towns losing population, job loss. No 
they don’t believe things have gotten better. 
 
If you go out there and you talk to people in my constituency 
and you talk to people in Regina . . . and I’ve been talking to 
people in Regina and Saskatoon. They believe that things aren’t 
getting better under this NDP government. So when this Throne 
Speech come out, yes they’re cynical. You know I was in a 
coffee shop a couple days ago, and there’s a couple guys ahead 
of me, and they were joking about. One guy says, oh gee, 2 per 
cent is off the PST and we’ll save a little bit. And the guy says 
yes, but these were the same guys that raised it. Do you 
remember that? And the guy said yes, laughingly, he said yes. 
And you know if they get in again, they’re going to raise it 
again. That’s cynical. 
 
The member from Saskatoon was talking about this party only 
interested in being in power. Well what about there. What about 
that. The people out there, they realize the stuff they’re doing 
now isn’t for the people; it’s to try to hang on to power. It’s 
about raising taxes when they first got in when they said they 
wouldn’t, breaking their word when they said they would not 
raise taxes in the last election and then raising them. Going into 
another election, what are they doing? They hope to . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . That’s it, buy votes, lower the tax. 
And the people out there are saying, you know, they’re going to 
raise them. They don’t believe that now. 
 
They don’t believe this government, and that’s why they’re at 
24 per cent polling. That’s right. You read the headlines. That’s 
what the people are saying out there because that is that what 
they believe. 
 
You talk about my constituency. Have things gotten better? I 
want to congratulate my mayors and councillors that have been 
elected, if any of them are listening, and the RM [rural 
municipality] elections that I believe are on tomorrow. Them 
people out there are facing a huge challenge out there to try to 
run these towns and the RMs under this present government. 
The money is getting tighter. There are talk about the facilities 
out there, the rinks. A lot of them are talking about not opening. 
 
I had a couple of mayors that talked to me from small towns 
that have small town halls. They only get used maybe once a 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

month for functions. Do you know what, that SaskTel charges 
them a business rate for that phone? They’ve tried to go to 
SaskTel and say, why aren’t we charged a residential rate? You 
know, maybe then we can afford to keep our phones. Or the 
town of Hawarden has taken their phone out because of that. 
What business is being conducted in a town hall, Mr. Speaker? 
What business? Why aren’t they charged residential? 
 
Why aren’t you trying to help them towns, them rinks, them 
municipalities that are trying to do something out there? They 
haven’t gotten one bit of help from this government. They’ve 
been cut constantly with infrastructure money. As towns out 
there fight and struggle to keep their aging infrastructure going, 
have they got any help from this government? Is there any help 
in that Throne Speech? No, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t. And that’s 
why the residents and the constituents of Arm River-Watrous 
do not support this Throne Speech, at that end of it. The power 
and heating bills are going up. How are they going to keep the 
rinks open this year, the halls? A lot of them are struggling if 
they’re actually going to keep them open. 
 
Are the highways any better in rural Saskatchewan since I’ve 
been here since ’99? No, they haven’t. I’ve gotten petition after 
petition sent to me since ’99 on the highways — from 44 to 15 
to 19 to 219 — of how they’ve been busted up. 
 
This government talks about perception, of how they want the 
message that’s been sent. Well I’ll tell them of one of the 
messages that’s being taken out here. 
 
There was a couple from BC [British Columbia], Mr. Speaker, a 
couple from BC was coming on vacation to Saskatchewan. 
They were coming on vacation to Saskatchewan. They were 
going to Watrous to Manitou, and I was going to a national 
horse shoe tournament there. I was doing the opening pitch for 
there. And the people, the story going around . . . They brought 
me over these people. They had to tell me that story. I’ll read 
you part of the letter that they had sent to the Premier on the 
perception of what they have of this province and what they’re 
taking back to BC [British Columbia]. He says: 
 

I want to share with you an amazing story. I hope you will 
appreciate how many times I was amazed. Perhaps you’ll 
be amazed yourself! 
 

I’ll skip a couple of paragraphs. He’s talking about his family 
history in BC and coming to a reunion. He goes: 
 

[When] we reached Rosetown at 4:00 that afternoon and 
diverted onto Highway 15 for the last part of our journey. 
We continued our drive through Outlook, Kennaston, and 
pushed on to the farm where my family was gathering on 
. . . Friday evening for a barbeque. I was amazed by 
Highway 15. Particularly past Outlook. The pavement 
became a patchwork quilt of asphalt filled potholes. Frost 
heaves had left asphalt rubble and large holes to negotiate. 
Hundreds of red . . . warning signs were posted along the 
sides. Although it surely must have been a jest on 
someone’s part, my wife and I were amazed to see a road 
sign saying “SLOW TO 90 . . .” [kilometres]. We certainly 
couldn’t conceive of even going 90 . . . [kilometres] under 
the existing road conditions! 
 

While we were negotiating the last few miles at a much 
reduced speed, to our amazement, we left a paved road and 
went straight on to gravel. Unfortunately there was a 
washboard which started our vehicle skidding. After 
turning 180 degrees we slid off the road and into a slough. 
The momentum of the vehicle carried us out into the 
water. Amazingly we did not overturn! At this time my 
wife was saying a rather loud prayer to God. In an attempt 
to get out she amazingly, ripped the door handle right out 
if the door. Of course the water was within three inches of 
our windows and the pressure did not allow her or any of 
us to open our doors. The windows were all closed and 
being electric I was fearful they would not open but again 
I was amazed that we were all able to open our windows, 
climb out and escape to the roof. My 16 year old daughter 
was . . . [amazed] as she helped her 8 year old brother get 
out of his seat belt and climb out . . . 
 
My wife and I followed . . . [as] we watched our vehicle 
sink out of sight in 10 feet of water. . . All the horrible 
scenarios played out in my mind at that point and stay with 
me to this day but amazingly we were on the side of a 
Saskatchewan road alive and in good condition. Within the 
next 10 minutes three other vehicles had stopped to give us 
help. [There was an] . . . elderly [gentleman] Harvey 
Stewart from Simpson was one of those people. He was 
tearful as he asked us if anyone was still in our vehicle and 
recounted an. . . [innocent] of a 78 year old lady almost 
dying [in that same spot]. 
 

That’s happened time after time in my constituency — of 
people almost dying. And this government is not doing nothing 
at that. He goes on to say: 
 

I was amazed as I . . . [lie] awake that night [right] in my 
bed in the hotel room. For hours I listened to the breaths 
[of ] my son . . . as he lay beside me. In my mind I wrote 
and re-wrote many a letter to you during those quiet hours 
and not much I thought was complimentary. We have not 
. . . been able to replace all the physical things we lost but 
we are home [now] safe . . . 

 
I hope I have not left too much to read between the lines 
for you to get the point of this letter. I now pray for the 
family of the person who will surely die on that road. 
Perhaps not this year or the next, but this is the inevitable 
legacy you leave this province. 

 
And that was sent to the Premier. I don’t even think he 
answered that letter. That is what we deal with out in rural 
Saskatchewan time after time after time. And this government 
does nothing out there to help out there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You know this government talks about the 
future of this province and yet I see it deteriorating under this 
present government. The people out there in my constituency, 
they see it deteriorating. And they’ve lost faith in this 
government as of . . . The people in the cities now are losing 
faith with this present government. 
 
I can go on about different examples. I can go on about the 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

hospitals, the cuts out . . . that have been made out in my area. 
The long-term care facility that was closed. I can remember 
fighting when they wanted to raise long-term care fees by 95 
per cent in this province, this government. And then they talk 
about caring for people? How we fought in the petitions for that 
and then they finally backed up when the pressure hit that 
finally. If we hadn’t been here, they would have put that 
through. 
 
Available hours, they talk about that. They talk about big 
business fighting. It wasn’t big business. It was students that 
fought that. It was First Nations that fought that. It was workers 
that fought that — part-time workers that didn’t want it. It was 
the people of Saskatchewan that fought that. And they will 
remember that when it comes to election time next, next 
election, Mr. Speaker. They won’t forget that stuff out there that 
this government has pulled at that end of it. 
 
Crime. Crime out there. You talk to people in Saskatchewan. 
You talk to people in the cities. You know what their biggest 
fear is, seniors? It’s crime. That’s what they’re scared of out 
there. And what’s this government doing to address it? Nothing 
yet. I can remember promises in Throne Speech of hiring extra 
police officers, of hiring extra police officers. Have they filled 
that yet? They haven’t even filled that promise and that was in 
1999. You go out there. Crime. Are they dealing with any of the 
crime, the gang situation that’s happening here in Regina? No 
they’re not at that end of it. 
 
All they can talk about when they get up in this House is talk 
about history, our history. Well my history started in political 
. . . in 1999. All they can talk about is the ’80s. Let’s talk about 
their history, their party. When it started in the ’30s, you want 
to talk about what was going on in the world. What political 
parties were starting to emerge at that time as it spread out 
through there? Communism. Communists was spreading out in 
rural . . . out there in the world about the same time the CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] started. You could 
say that’s coincidence. It might be. You can say that except for 
one small fact — the Regina Manifesto. The Regina Manifesto 
which is still on their website today which they seem to be quite 
proud of. And they talk about state-run business, collective 
farms, and eradicating capitalism. That is their history; that is 
their legacy. As you go on. 
 
You want to talk about their history. Then we’ll move on to the 
’70s, through the Blakeney era, when they nationalized potash. 
They took companies away . . . took away from business. 
Nationalized potash. That’s what they did in communist 
countries; they nationalized businesses. They started the land 
bank, which was a move towards collective farming. That is 
their legacy. As we move on. 
 
We talk about their legacy. You know the last federal election, I 
got a pamphlet in the mail. There was a . . . We had different 
parties that ran. We had the NDP. We had the Conservatives. 
We had the Liberals. We had a Communist that ran in 
Blackstrap. You know what? She sent out a mail out. You know 
what she talks about? She says we have to form a block in 
parliament. If you can’t vote Communist, vote NDP. She’s got 
it right here in writing. Vote NDP because we’re similar in 
beliefs. And she says, she also says, and just left-minded 
greens, if you’re environmentalists but don’t believe in state 

ownership, don’t vote for me. Just vote if you’re an NDP. 
Obviously she thinks every NDP is into state-run ownership. 
 
And you know what? That pamphlet went to all the people in 
Saskatoon, to MLAs from Saskatoon. I don’t remember any of 
them saying, whoa, whoa, we’re not, we’re not, we’re not 
connected with the Communist Party, you know you shouldn’t 
be saying our name in your brochure. But I never remembered a 
statement like that. That’s their legacy. 
 
They’ve got a convention coming up right . . . coming up. What 
do you think they’re going to be talking about there behind 
closed doors? They’ll be similar to what happens at the federal 
one. I’d imagine they’ll be getting up and address the crowd as 
brother and sister when they talk about that. I wonder what the 
resolution will be? It’ll be running down business — big 
business, small business. It’ll be talking about collective farms. 
They’ll be talking about shutting down the mines up North, the 
uranium mines. That’s what they’ll be talking about at their 
convention. 
 
And then they’ll come outside and they’ll say, whoa, we’re 
business friendly. That all gets out there. You wonder why this 
province is in the shape it’s in? Because of their legacy and 
what they stand for and what they believe in. That’s why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The Premier, at that end of it, we talk about . . . 
I want to talk about . . . The member from Yorkton talked about 
families moving in. He talked about families moving in . . . out 
of province in Alberta. He’s got a short memory. Does he 
remember when we fought the land reform on this side — the 
committee — when they wouldn’t change it, when you had to 
be a Saskatchewan resident? Do you remember the fight we had 
over here in committee to get that passed? 
 
I can remember the member from Nutana still, still doesn’t like 
it, and she’s head of immigration. You wonder why there’s no 
immigration in this province right there? Do you remember that 
fight? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — They just said, big business will be moving out. 
All of a sudden now, he’s talking about the families, which we 
said would happen. 
 
You want to look at maybe Europe. There might be some 
families over there that might be interested in coming up. 
Maybe you should be looking at expanding that. There’s 
Britain. In France and Belgium and Ireland or Scotland, they’re 
in the same situation as Alberta. Land prices are high right now. 
Regulations are really strict there. They’re looking at coming 
over. 
 
But same as they had to do with . . . Alberta residents had to do 
up to about four years ago, they had to sell everything, move 
here for six months, then buy land. Why not have it so they can 
come here, maybe buy a section, rent it out to a local farmer, 
just see what the crops are, get a feel of it, go home, start 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

moving their stuff over slowly? Can they do that under here? 
Not yet. 
 
So don’t talk about progress. Don’t talk about change. That’s 
something you guys know nothing about. You live in the past. 
And that is why your polling is at 24 per cent, at that end of it. 
Mr. Speaker, that is why their polling is at 24 per cent, at that 
end. 
 
We can go on. I can talk about different things. I just got a letter 
from the library board. It just said the funding has been cut 
again from them. They’re struggling to stay open in these small 
towns. Have they gotten any help from this government Throne 
Speech? No. No help for library. 
 
Regional college. They talk about supporting them. Are you 
actually doing anything for them? We had a meeting with them 
not that long ago. They say very little comes this way. Sure, 
they’d say, there were good things, but no support — no 
support for anybody. 
 
But the NDP government, all they care about is staying in 
power. That is their only thing that they are interested in. That’s 
all that they’ve . . . focusing on. And that’s what they’re going 
to be focusing on for the next year. Not what’s good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They will try to do anything, do 
anything to grasp on, to stay on to power, at that end of it. 
 
We talked about health care, waiting lists. Many members have 
talked about it. Well it’s the same in Arm River-Watrous. 
People are still waiting just as long. And we’ve been talking 
about it since ’99 — since I’ve been here. The situation hasn’t 
gotten any better. 
 
The population is still being drained. You have to ask if they 
haven’t fixed the problem by now, obviously they can’t fix it. 
 
They don’t have a leader over there. The Premier over there, 
Mr. Speaker, to me he’s a nice guy, but he’s not a leader. He’s 
not a leader. And one member over there recognized . . . I think 
there’s some other members too but at that end of it. And I like 
the Premier. He’s a nice guy but he is not a leader. 
 
We are in troubled times right now. We are at a turning point in 
Saskatchewan history right now when we could be something. 
We could be a permanent have province. We could take our 
place alongside of Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, the provinces, 
instead of always crying for a handout. And under this 
particular NDP government we’re missing opportunities and 
some of the members over there recognize that. I think they’re 
starting to recognize that they need a change in leadership. 
Coming up to this convention I will give the Premier one word 
of advice. Beware of the ides of March over there. I will give 
him that piece of advice over there. 
 
Talking about the Throne Speech, how will it help people in my 
constituency? I can’t see that. I can see getting more letters of 
people almost dying on the highways, of waiting for lists on 
cancer lists, of wondering for weeks and weeks if their cancer is 
benign or malignant because they have to wait to get that done. 
That’s a legacy of that government over there. 
 
And their Throne Speech is not going to address it. They didn’t 

address them problems in 1999 and they’re still not going to 
address them. I can’t support this Throne Speech. You know 
why I can’t support it? Because the constituents of Arm 
River-Watrous don’t support it. The people of Saskatchewan 
don’t support it, if you’ve read the papers and the letters. They 
don’t support it and they will show that the next election at that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I can’t support this Throne Speech 
but I will support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise today to join in the debate from the Throne 
Speech and have a chance to put my comments on the record 
about the record of this government, plans for the future, and 
what a wonderful outlook the province of Saskatchewan has as 
we move into the province’s second century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first off I would like to pass along I think a 
heartfelt thank you to my colleagues from Coronation Park and 
Regina Wascana Plains for the great speeches that they did to 
kick off this session in moving and seconding the Throne 
Speech. It was appreciated, and it’s also an honour to be able to 
move and second the Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join with my colleagues to 
offer a congratulations to the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, and I hope that he enjoys representing the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. It’s an honour that few of us as MLAs in 
this House representing a constituency . . . it’s a pretty rare 
privilege that we have to be here to represent a constituency in 
the province of Saskatchewan and that our constituents have 
given us this honour. I hope he enjoys it. There’s always 
challenges. There’s always some good debate. There is always 
some not-so-good debate as we have been witness to on 
occasions; some recently, I’m afraid. But, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
privilege, that each and every one of us has to serve in this 
House and represent the folks in Saskatchewan who have sent 
us here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been interesting to listen to the debate on the 
Throne Speech. There has been some pretty emotional speeches 
over the last couple of days, and it has been a pleasure to have 
the opportunity to listen to them. I think of my colleagues, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, who gave a very emotional 
accounting of the past 15 years of this New Democratic 
government and the struggles that were faced over that period 
of 15 years, the very difficult decisions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t elected at that point in time, but I 
have heard from many of my colleagues and I have met many 
of the folks first-hand who were charged with pulling 
Saskatchewan back from the brink of bankruptcy. They have 
talked about some of the very painful and difficult decisions 
that needed to be made. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I’ve actually had the privilege of serving in 
this House since 1999 and representing Moose Jaw Wakamow 
at the point in time where the finances of this province were 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

beginning to turn around. Did we have some difficult decisions? 
Yes, we did. We’ve made a number of them over the past six, 
seven years. There has been changes. There has been new 
programs. There has been the end to old programs. And always 
we have struggled to make the best decisions for the people of 
Saskatchewan and that Saskatchewan can stand on its feet and 
move ahead as every province in Canada should have the 
opportunity to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I have been elected, we have gone through 
some good years and some bad years. We have struggled with 
the decisions about, first off, the personal income tax changes 
that were put forward by this government. Could we afford to 
do it? Couldn’t we afford to do it? How should it be done? How 
should it be laid out? But we felt that if Saskatchewan was 
going to be competitive with other provinces, we need to make 
the changes and be able to move Saskatchewan into our second 
century on a sound footing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the income tax changes were successful, and then 
we began to look at other areas. The mineral royalties were 
changed, some of the mining royalties, the oil and gas royalties. 
And we’ve seen benefits from those changes quite quickly, and 
joined with that, I think some good luck in that oil prices also 
and world events also facilitated some changes to oil and gas 
prices which Saskatchewan most definitely benefited from. 
 
So we’ve seen a growing economy. We’ve seen some huge 
improvements in our economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
. . . Another big step was taken with our last provincial budget 
where we put in place the business tax changes, corporate 
capital tax — pretty substantial, in fact very substantial. 
 
We know that Saskatchewan can be competitive. Saskatchewan 
is competitive. And we know that the Saskatchewan advantage 
is there — competitive tax regimes, reasonable costs of land 
and housing plus all of the benefits of a beautiful place to live, 
clean air, clean water. And I think the biggest asset of the 
province of Saskatchewan is the people that live here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And our Saskatchewan attitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s one of the pleasures that I have 
representing Moose Jaw Wakamow, is that Moose Jaw is a 
community much like the province of Saskatchewan. Fifteen 
years ago many people were saying, well the last one out, turn 
out the light. Many people figured we were down and out and 
wrote us off. And, Mr. Speaker, we showed them. A very 
dedicated group of people got together in the city of Moose 
Jaw, have done some great work — lots of battles along the 
way to make sure that everyone in the community bought into 
the idea — and we’ve seen a real turnaround in our city. 
 
Is there a ways to go? Yes there is. Is there more things that 
could be done? Yes there is. But we’ve come a long way, and 
that’s the same as the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve come a 
long way in this 15 years, and our fortunes have really turned 
around. We’ve seen the debt brought under control. We have 
seen our economic conditions changed, and maybe not quick 
enough for some people, but in a step-by-step fashion that has 
brought us to the point we are here in today. 

Mr. Speaker, we seen the Throne Speech with its four pillars 
and really laid out where we want to see Saskatchewan go to 
over the next year and beyond. Now the opposition has stood on 
its feet, and they have criticized and they have said, well gee, 
this is the same old Throne Speech we’ve heard year after year. 
Well I must say to them, Mr. Speaker, they really weren’t 
listening then. And there’s a number of things since the last 
Speech from the Throne in 2005 where we laid out the plans for 
the future and built off what has happened in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to look at a couple of the highlights, 
over the last year there was again a balanced budget. And we 
paid down debt in this province which many people have 
trouble thinking that we have such a large debt, but it has come 
down substantially in the last decade, the last 15 years. 
 
The member from Nutana talked about our debt to GDP ratio 
dropping substantially. I remember reading one report where 
they talked about our debt to GDP ratio being almost 46 per 
cent. Currently we are well under 20 and closer to 15 per cent. 
It’s a phenomenal turnaround, Mr. Speaker. And it’s purely 
because of the hard work of the people of Saskatchewan and the 
situation over the last 15 years where people have just buckled 
down, pulled up their socks, and known that we’ve had some 
difficult struggles here in the province of Saskatchewan to get 
back on our feet. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we’ve paid down debt, we’ve done 
many other things. We’ve addressed the social programs, some 
increased wages to CBOs [community-based organization] 
across Saskatchewan, an increase in subsidy for child care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are my favourites. We have kind of a limited 
time here that we can speak to issues. And instead of trying to 
cover every issue, there’s a few things that I would really like to 
focus on that I think are important to the province of 
Saskatchewan and not only to the province but to the people, to 
the average citizen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when, in no matter what organization I’ve been 
involved in, I’ve always thought of what it means to me and 
what it means to me and my pocketbook. And we sit in the 
House here, and we talk about millions of dollars or we talk 
about hundreds of thousands of dollars. To most people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that’s an amount of money that 
really doesn’t have a lot of connect to them in their lives. It 
almost seems like an unrealistic amount of money. 
 
So when I look at the programs we’re doing and when I look at 
the things that we’re putting forward, I want to know how it 
affects the families in my neighbourhood — how it affects the 
senior citizens that are still living in their own home on South 
Hill of Moose Jaw; how it affects single women who have 
families, are raising their families on South Hill, Moose Jaw, 
and what it means to them — because, Mr. Speaker, those are 
the folks that I talk to. Those are many of the folks that I see on 
a day-to-day basis when I’m at home in Moose Jaw. 
 
And I want to know how it affects them because, Mr. Speaker, 
when I walk through this building as an MLA, I sometimes feel 
almost like a tourist. It’s a rare privilege, like I said previously, 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

to have this opportunity, but I never want to lose that 
connection that I have to being an average family in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s my goal being here, is how do we connect the things 
that we do to Saskatchewan families? How do we make them 
feel or give them the opportunity to feel that what we do is for 
them and hopefully will improve the lives that they lead and the 
opportunities for careers in the province of Saskatchewan that 
their children will have, whether it’s better opportunities at 
school, better opportunities at training. Or going back even 
earlier, Mr. Speaker, that when as young families they are 
beginning their careers that their children have the best possible 
opportunities in this province by accessing early learning and 
child care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I’ve talked about child care quite a bit 
over the last number of months. And when the federal 
government cut the funding to the province of Saskatchewan for 
the national child care program, there was many people that 
were extremely disappointed. 
 
I can tell you of women in this province who have fought for 
well over 30 years to put together a comprehensive national 
child care program. And when the federal government changed, 
they erased that. They said no, that isn’t the direction we want 
to go. Doesn’t matter that you will be responsible for child care 
in your province; we know better than you do. Doesn’t matter 
the work your community groups have put into this plan. As a 
federal government we know better than you do. Doesn’t matter 
the work you’ve put into it or what your needs are in your 
province, we have decided to change and put forward 
something different. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s what happens in an election, if 
that’s the direction that they had put forward, and people voted 
for them. They felt that it was their right and maybe their 
responsibility to go ahead with the $100 per month for children 
under the age of six. And they called it choices, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to be able to have choices, you need to have 
options to choose from. And that’s one big thing that’s lacking 
in this plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased and I was very proud of 
my colleagues when, although the federal government decided 
to pull the funding that they had committed to a national child 
care program, this New Democratic government said we have a 
good plan. We have worked with our stakeholders in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have talked to young families. 
We have talked to community-based organizations, and we 
have put forward a plan that addresses what’s needed in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And even though the federal 
government has pulled their funding with the change of the 
federal government, Saskatchewan will continue down the path 
of our plan to provide the best services we can to young 
families across this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it does have choices in that plan. There’s 
child care centres. There’s home child care. There is issues that 
will deal with child care needs in rural Saskatchewan and in the 
North. Mr. Speaker, we’ve put together a good plan, and we see 
in this Throne Speech a commitment again that we will proceed 
with the Saskatchewan child care plan as quickly as we can 

with the resources that are available to us without the federal 
government support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s fundamental to children’s success. It’s 
fundamental to families in this province because, Mr. Speaker, 
when I go to work as a mother, I am a much better worker, I am 
a much better employee when I know that my children are in a 
quality child care somewhere in this province that will give 
them the care that they need, that meets the standards that we 
know are so important for children and have that early 
connection to early learning. Whether it’s pre-kindergarten for 
three-year-olds or universal pre-K for four-year-olds, there’s a 
need for children to have that very good early start. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I was very pleased that my colleagues have again said 
that this is a priority and will continue to work on this child care 
plan right across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I’ve been kind of busy. And, 
you know, sometimes it’s nice if you have a bit of a song in 
your heart, you know, when you want to stand up and speak. 
And I was feeling a little bit flat, you know. It’s getting near the 
end of the day, maybe thinking about heading home to spend 
Halloween with all the kids coming to the door and try and 
guess which of your neighbours is knocking on your door. 
These little ones, they’re so much fun on Halloween. 
 
When the member from Arm River was standing up, I was 
listening to his comments. And do you know, Mr. Speaker, this 
is a great speech. It talks about four pillars. It talks about many 
of the good things that this government has done, talks about 
many of the things that we’ll continue to work on over this next 
year, family holiday probably being the biggest one that will 
first jump out at them when they hear the Throne Speech or 
heard of the Throne Speech, but also . . . I mean, it just goes on 
and on. The freeze on tuition on post-secondary is continuing, 
expanding the literacy funding which again the federal 
government has quit or pulled back on. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, of all the good thing that’s in this speech, of 
all the good things that are been talked about, whether it’s the 
holiday, whether it’s the 2 per cent cut to the provincial sales 
tax that the Minister of Finance announced, the thing that 
surprises me from the members of the opposition is they never 
criticize programs. It always turns to personal attacks. 
 
It’s kind of disappointing because you always think of this 
House there being great debates, debates more on the issues. 
And even the member from Arm River, when I just come back 
into the House this minute to sit down and take my place to be 
able to join in debate, was criticizing the Premier and talking 
about his leadership. And it’s interesting how they’re always 
worried about us across the floor. Now here we go. It starts up 
again. What about this one? What about that one? Do you know 
I would just once like the opposition to debate the issues. 
 
They never have anything positive to say. They don’t have 
anything positive to say about the province and, Mr. Speaker, it 
gets a little frustrating after a while. Now when you finally put 
something in place and then they say, well that was our idea . . . 
And I don’t know why they figure it’s their idea because they 
haven’t put forward any ideas, any policies on any of the issues 
affecting the province of Saskatchewan in . . . I can’t remember 
the last time. 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say to the opposition, you 
know, try dealing with the issues — not always making it 
personal — because we’re all here to work for the same people. 
We’re all here to work for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And there’s one area that I actually would like to comment on, 
that the member from Arm River talked about, Saskatchewan 
always asking for a handout. Now I actually . . . That’s all he 
said. Saskatchewan’s always asking for a handout. So I’m going 
to have to assume here, Mr. Speaker, that he was talking about 
our issue with the federal government and equalization. And it 
is infuriating. To think that retaining the revenues that 
Saskatchewan earns in a formula that’s similar to what’s been 
granted to other provinces in this country we all belong to is 
somehow viewed by the opposition as asking for handouts, 
that’s frustrating. 
 
But it’s also something that all of us here in Saskatchewan need 
to work towards. It’s something that all of us here in 
Saskatchewan need to be united on because the equalization 
deal that was promised by the federal Conservative government 
and which has been talked about by our 12 federal Tory MPs 
[Member of Parliament] multiple times during the election 
campaign — before the election campaign — was that 
Saskatchewan needed to be treated fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re asking for. So I wish the 
member from Arm River would just get on the same page as his 
Tory cousins in Ottawa and realize that Saskatchewan just 
wants to be treated fairly and be given the same deal that every 
other province has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve kind of wandered through and by and around 
the Throne Speech. It’s a great Throne Speech, and I will not be 
supporting the amendment. But I will be supporting the Throne 
Speech as presented by this New Democratic government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
in the House again today and participate in a debate that has 
almost had an ongoing history. I think we’ve heard throne 
speeches on about six or seven occasions since I was first 
elected and today’s Throne Speech debate is reminiscent of 
many others that I’ve heard previously. In fact they’re so 
similar that I think that the speech writers probably just go back 
to previous copies and change a few words here and there and 
then produce what they call a whole new vision for the 
province. 
 
But before I get involved in the actual debate today, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to offer congratulations to the newest member 
of the House, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. We’re 
very proud to have him as part of our team. We were especially 
pleased with the maiden speech that he delivered in this House 
a couple of days ago and we think that based on what we heard 
that day, we can look forward to big things from this young 
man, and we’re glad to have him as part of our official 
opposition team. 

And I’d like to offer my congratulations for years of great 
service to this House to the Clerk of the legislature, Gwenn 
Ronyk, who I understand plans to retire at the end of the year. 
And I think that now’s an appropriate time for me to put on the 
record publicly that I personally have appreciated her, my 
family has appreciated her openness to my wife and my 
daughter, and we’re grateful for the years of service she has 
given the people of Saskatchewan through her role here in the 
Assembly. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I appreciate what you do in 
this House because sometimes it’s tough to keep the competing 
sides and ideas at a civilized level. And I guess I should offer an 
apology to you because I think yesterday was the first time I’ve 
been rebuked by the Speaker so I wanted to say that publicly. 
And I think I crossed the line that Ben Heppner never quite 
crossed and I’m offering my apology now. 
 
I do want to say too though that, you know, this is a House of 
passion and sometimes topics really just grab you right at the 
point where it hurts and you can’t help but respond. And we’ve 
heard many impassioned speeches in the last couple of days. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that bodes well for democracy. 
And even though there are rules to govern our speeches and 
what is said and how it’s said, that passion is important as we 
delineate clearly the opposing views that the parties hold in this 
particular House. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I’m probably not as passionate a speaker as most but I think that 
I do bring to this position a sincerity and a belief that my 
constituents have recognized and supported. And as a result of 
their ongoing support I want to acknowledge the constituents of 
Cypress Hills today as well. They’re great people. They’re 
hard-working and they’re honest. They’re down to earth. 
They’re what I would call resilient and resourceful. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they’re not very patient any longer. And I 
would reference, when I make that comment, two or three 
things: first of all Highway 32 — does that sound familiar? — 
Highway 21, Highway 36 south of Shaunavon to the American 
border. Those three highways, Mr. Speaker, are in a disgusting 
state of disrepair. And the people of Cypress Hills have put up 
with this condition and these deteriorating conditions for as 
long as I have been in the legislature. And I think their patience 
has run out. 
 
There’s some other areas, Mr. Speaker, that I want to address a 
little later on, particularly with reference to ethanol and the 
potential development of a facility in Shaunavon, and the 
agricultural crisis that many of my producers have experienced 
yet again this year. Every year I stand in this House and I say 
there’s an ag crisis happening in some of my constituency and I 
think that next year will be better. I guess that’s the only hope 
that keeps my producer groups going. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the ag crisis has gotten worse year after year after year and just 
when you think it can’t get any worse, it happens. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have a few things I want to touch on as it 
relates to this Throne Speech and what’s going on in my 
constituency, and I hope to tie the two things together. This 
speech really was not much different, as I said, than the half 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

dozen or so that I’ve heard previously: long on promises, short 
on production, short on fulfillment. Say one thing, do another. 
But we’ve gotten even worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In many instances I find this government saying something and 
doing nothing. And I think that’s what hurts the people of this 
province so much. They hear with, you know, great grammar 
and much fanfare, all these laudable ideas and promises from 
this government and yet it produces nothing. And I can speak 
very specifically and clearly to the impact that this 
government’s policies have had on the people of rural 
Saskatchewan and most specifically Cypress Hills. 
 
Now when it comes to the Throne Speech itself, is there a 
highlight that we could focus on? Well I suppose that we could 
identify the announcement of a Family Day, a holiday in 
February as being the highlight of this speech. It probably isn’t 
the most substantive thing that should have come out of this 
speech but it’s been the one that garnered the most attention and 
it’s what we would call a highlight. And I would say that on 
behalf of the people of Cypress Hills, it’s probably a good idea. 
 
Now most of my constituents are not regular wage earners. 
Most of them do not go to a job 9 to 5 or five days a week or 
any of that. Most of them are agricultural producers or people 
who are working long shifts day after day, long at tough jobs. 
So the idea of a holiday for the actual wage earner isn’t that 
important and the other people who might enjoy this particular 
holiday will take advantage of it, I’m sure. And none of them 
will turn the idea of a holiday away. They’ll accept that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, part of the benefit of this holiday to the 
people of Cypress Hills is the fact that when Saskatchewan 
residents use that three days to go visit relatives in Alberta or go 
skiing in BC, they’re going to drive right through the 
constituency of Cypress Hills. And that’s good for business, 
Mr. Speaker. I have businesses, I have gas stations, restaurants, 
and any number of small communities along the No. 1 Highway 
that will see some increased business as a result of this holiday. 
And I think that from that perspective it’s probably better for 
the constituents of Cypress Hills than many of the other rural 
constituencies of the province. 
 
You know, there’s so much traffic. I was in Alberta for a long 
weekend a while back visiting my own family. And when I was 
travelling back to Saskatchewan I was amazed, Mr. Speaker, at 
how much traffic was heading west. Not much traffic heading 
east on the return trip, most of it heading west. And that whole 
situation is replicated every time we have a long weekend in 
this province. You know, the doubters over here are saying, 
well you know that’s not true. You know, they just need to 
stand on the Alberta-Saskatchewan border and count the cars 
going in opposite directions, depending on what part of the 
holiday it is. 
 
But it was so problematic our former member of parliament, 
Lee Morrison, when he heard that the provincial government 
was actually going to create four lanes of highway out west, 
said that he was sure it would be three lanes west and one lane 
east. And that in a humorous way represents the, sort of the 
psychological and mental picture people can have of the traffic 
patterns that have developed as a result of the relationship that 
so many of my families, my constituent families, have with 

people in Alberta, and other families in Saskatchewan who have 
children living in Alberta. 
 
I listened to the member for Moose Jaw North last night. Great, 
great orator, you know. I have to compliment him on his 
oratory. It was a blustery speech if I could describe it as such — 
lots of wind, not a lot of substance but, you know, lots of 
velocity there. And while I am particularly impressed with his 
skill, I wasn’t that impressed with what he had to say. Because 
what I find from the current government members as they had 
spoken on this Throne Speech is that they are clearly looking 
back into history. 
 
I mean we have heard a recitation of every wrong and every evil 
that ever transpired in this province and as the saviours of the 
province they feel quite capable of identifying those problems 
and I think that was part of the member’s speech from Moose 
Jaw North last night. But one of the things he said that I thought 
was interesting is that the Sask Party is running from its record. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 2 per cent tax 
reduction is evidence enough that this government is running 
from its record. That 2 per cent tax reduction is a clear ploy to 
make people forget the sins of this government, the 
inadequacies of this government, the problems of this 
government, the failures of this government in the 15 or odd 
years that they’ve been in power. 
 
So, you know, I would suggest to the members opposite that a 2 
per cent tax reduction might be welcome, but it will not cover 
all sins. It’s just not that big a deal. Mr. Speaker, a 2 per cent 
reduction might make good politics, but it’s really poor public 
policy and it’s especially poor public policy if it’s decided three 
or four days before it’s announced. And the fact that it was 
announced in a member’s statement in this House on short 
notice clearly indicates that it’s a move of desperation. 
 
I think we have a comment from Murray Mandryk in one of his 
recent columns to that effect, where he says: 
 

To be always changing course — particularly in the last 
year before an election — would make a government look 
panicky, desperate, and out of control. 
 

I rest my case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as to the record issue, I think that . . . and we heard the 
other member from Moose Jaw just a little while ago say that 
they haven’t heard a new idea from us in a long time. Well right 
here I have the Saskatchewan Party policy manual which was 
voted on and accepted by the party in February 2005 and in it is 
contained about 170 different policy planks. And I went 
through that and just highlighted in the index a few of the ideas 
that are in that particular policy manual and which have shown 
up, curiously, as government policy in the intervening two 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only got halfway through the index of that and I 
already had 22 ideas right out of the Saskatchewan Party 
manual that have been adopted by this government in the last 
two years. Now if that isn’t proof positive that this government 
is tired and old and have no ideas, I don’t know what is. In fact 
I could enunciate them all for you. I might if I have time do just 



October 31, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

that this afternoon. 
 
Here’s a couple of interesting examples, Mr. Speaker. On page 
3 of the government’s Throne Speech it talks about making 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures. Now that is a curious point to express in 
this Throne Speech because if the government is able to 
overcome the deficit of young people in this province through 
the actions that they outline in this Throne Speech, I will be 
amazed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this Premier became Premier, we’ve had 
16,000 young people under the age of 35 leave the province of 
Saskatchewan — 16,000. Just imagine the contribution that 
number of young people would make to this province if they 
were here providing us with their skill and their ability and their 
educational talents and their entrepreneurship and their devotion 
to their job. Just imagine what those 16,000 young people 
would contribute to our province. 
 
We’ve lost 4,500 people in this province in the first six months 
of this year. And the Canada West Foundation indicates that 
one in four young people below the age of 35 plan to leave the 
province to pursue their future — one in four — 25 per cent of 
young people currently living in Saskatchewan under the age of 
35. We’re worse than Manitoba, who are sitting at 20 per cent, 
British Columbia at 10 per cent. Young people in Saskatchewan 
do not see their future here. It’s not that they don’t want to be 
here. It’s not that they think this is a bad place. They just don’t 
think the opportunity that they need to pursue their career 
opportunities at the level they wish are existent in this province. 
And I think that of all the constituencies in this province, the 
constituency of Cypress Hills knows the pain of youth 
out-migration more than any other. 
 
I think I’ve alluded to this previously, Mr. Speaker. I did a 
survey of high school graduates in the constituency a few years 
back — asked high school students in grade 12 what their plans 
were and where they planned to pursue their careers and their 
education and so forth. And in virtually all the high schools in 
the constituency of Cypress Hills, more than half of them 
planned to leave the province immediately on graduation. That 
means that they were going to Medicine Hat or Calgary or 
Lethbridge to find work, or they were going to those cities to 
pursue their education. 
 
But the worst-case scenario was the community of Burstall 
where 100 per cent of the grade 12 graduates in that year were 
leaving the province. They didn’t even consider SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 
They didn’t even consider the University of Regina or the 
University of Saskatchewan. They were leaving the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that issue is probably one of the most 
heartbreaking problems facing the rural communities of our 
province. And no place knows that better than Cypress Hills. 
 
Quite simply, when the government talks about making youth a 
priority, the constituents of my area in southwest Saskatchewan 
do not believe that. They have no faith in that promise. They 
have no faith in this government to deliver. And I think that that 
is indicative of how the people of the province are now starting 
to view this government. 

I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that on page 4 of this Throne 
Speech, they talked about unveiling: 
 

a new partnership between business, labour and our 
training institutions to provide counsel to government to 
meet Saskatchewan’s evolving labour market needs; and 
[to] 
 
strengthen and expand our regional training model to bring 
education closer to students and better link training to 
learners, job-seekers and employers. 
 

You know, that’s right out of the Saskatchewan Party policy 
manual. I refer to page 11. Right here. It’s called Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Creation of a new partnership with business, labour, First 
Nations, local governments and educators called 
Enterprise Saskatchewan to create an entrepreneurial and 
enterprising economy; 
 
[invest] . . . in [a] new and old economy infrastructure; 
 
[invest] New resources for post-secondary education; and 
 
The removal of barriers to private sector investment in 
Saskatchewan’s key economic sectors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t plagiarism, I don’t know what is. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, if this had happened in university or in 
school, they’d be expelled for that much plagiarism. But they 
borrow freely and claim it as their own. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got 
many more examples, and I’m going to have a chance to bring 
these examples to the attention of the public and to the 
government as my speech unfolds, but, you know, it looks like 
we’re rapidly running out of time. How could that possibly have 
happened so soon? 
 
Well, you know, it’s amazing how fast time flies when you’re 
talking about something that’s important to you and important 
to the people of your constituency. And so given the short hour 
left, or shortness of time left, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Cypress 
Hills that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2006 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................95 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  Stewart .........................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................95 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Allchurch .....................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................96 
  Merriman ....................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................97 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................97 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................97 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................98 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................98 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Gainer the Gopher Banned from McMahon Stadium 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................98 
 Saskatchewan Fans at McMahon Stadium 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................98 
 Natural Gas Services for Northern Communities 
  Beatty ...........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
 Saskatchewan’s First Ethanol Symposium 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Cultural Celebration and Powwow 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 Review of Headlines 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 Person’s Day Breakfast 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................100 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Wait Times for Cancer Care 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................100 
 Supply of Oncologists in the Saskatoon Health Region 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................101 
 Physician Complement in Rural Hospitals 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................102 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................102 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................103 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................108 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................111 



 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................113 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................116 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................119 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................122 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................125 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


