


















































Hansard: May 17, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 62A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 17, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1703 
 May 17, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
present a petition once again on behalf of constituents primarily 
in the southern part of the constituency of Cypress Hills 
concerned about the condition of Highway 18, especially the 
section from Claydon to Robsart. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These two pages of petitions today, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Maple Creek and Fox Valley, as well as Piapot. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of citizens of the province regarding the 
funding of the drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition, the number of pages on this petition 
are signed by people from Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to read a petition on behalf of people who are concerned 
about the surgical services at Tisdale Hospital. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that surgical services are 
reinstated in the Tisdale Hospital. 

 
People have signed this petition from Star City, from Melfort, 
from Pleasantdale, from Macklin, Saskatchewan, and from 
Tisdale and from Sylvania. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The member for Rosetown Biggar. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorders. Mr. Speaker, the 
signatures on this petition are from people who are concerned 
that the number of children being diagnosed with ASD [autism 
spectrum disorder] is as high as 1 in 251. The prayer is long so 
I’ll just read a portion of it. It says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Saskatchewan Minister of Health. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, two of the recommendations include: 
 

Increasing the early diagnosis of children with ASD, and 
also having respite and family support accessible based on 
need. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of pages of signatures. They 
are primarily from the community of Outlook, although I see 
Saskatoon and Macrorie represented as well. I am pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with lack 
of provincial funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition appears to be signed by individuals 
from the communities of Weyburn and Yellow Grass. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
number of petitions of citizens concerned with the deplorable 
and unsafe condition of Highway No. 27. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade Highway No. 27. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Cudworth, 
Saskatoon, Vonda, Prud’homme, and Aberdeen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

petitions today of particular interest to the Minister of Health by 
people in the Melfort area who are concerned about the possible 
reduction of the number of hospital acute care beds in the 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to stop the loss of acute care beds by 
converting the second floor to office space. 

 
Signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the entire Northeast of this 
province. There’s thousands of them. And I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure to present 
petitions from the citizens of Biggar who are concerned about a 
possible reduction of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to rise to present a petition on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
Retirees Association. Many hundreds of people that weren’t 
able to join us in the galleries yesterday have signed this 
petition, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
initiate measures as required to bring parity to all 
provincial employee pensions and benefits. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators to this petition are from across 
Saskatchewan, mainly in Prince Albert and North Battleford 
and Saskatoon, those that weren’t able to join us yesterday. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the highway 
conditions of Highway No. 3. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Livelong 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from my neighbouring constituency of Arm 
River-Watrous, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remains 
open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who would be 
affected by such possible closures. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Imperial. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to improve SaskTel cellular service in 
rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment to ensure that residents along 
Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan are 
protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Strongfield and Elbow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and 
a privilege to rise today to present a petition on autism spectrum 
disorders. The prayer is rather lengthy. I’ll read a portion: 
 

Whereas people who have autism spectrum disorder are 
some of the most vulnerable in our province; 
 
And whereas in Saskatchewan the number of children 
being diagnosed with ASD is high and the rate of increase 
is alarming; 
 

And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendations made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee of human services to 
the Saskatchewan Minister of Health. 
 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
From the good people of Saskatoon Sutherland. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding autism spectrum 
disorder. Mr. Speaker, this petition has a lengthy preamble and 
a lengthy prayer for relief and I’ll only read a small portion. 
 
It makes reference to the high number of children being 
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and notes that there is 
159 per cent over six years up to 2004, and it calls upon the 
government to coordinate among the departments of Health, 
Learning, and Community Resources with input from 
stakeholders to formulate a provincial comprehensive autism 
spectrum disorder treatment program and to encourage and 
support autism-related research in Saskatchewan. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. 
I so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens of the province who are concerned with the 
reduction of surgical services at the Tisdale Hospital and feel 
that that will contribute to the current problems of lengthy 
waiting lists in that area, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to ensure that surgical services are 
reinstated in the Tisdale Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Tisdale, Arborfield, 
Crooked River, Aylsham, Mistatim, and Sylvania. Mr. Speaker, 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions received 
yesterday have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are 
hereby read and received as follows: 
 

A petition concerning provincial employees’ pensions and 
benefits, sessional paper 753; 

 
And additions to previously tabled petitions being addendums 
to sessional papers 638, 639, and 741. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 48, The Parks Amendment Act, 
2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When will Bill 48 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 48, The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my great pleasure today to introduce to our Legislative 
Assembly His Excellency, David Wilkins, the United States 
ambassador to Canada who, Mr. Speaker, is joining us in the 
gallery this afternoon. 
 
He is accompanied by Mr. Naim Ahmed, who has served the 
last number of years as our consul general of the United States 
in Calgary. He is also joined by Ms. Kim Klassen, economic 
and political specialist with the consul general’s office in 
Calgary. And they are being hosted today by Ms. Debbie Saum, 
our chief of protocol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very, very pleased to have the ambassador 
here in Saskatchewan. He has a very, very, very full day of 
activity. He has had opportunity already today to meet with a 
number of ministers, to meet with myself. He has engaged with 
the press now, I believe twice. He has been to the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] depot. He has given a major 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

address at the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. He 
is joining us here in the House. Later this afternoon he will be 
visiting the PTRC [Petroleum Technology Research Centre], 
and I am aware meeting with yourself, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
Her Honour, and I believe the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
We very, very much appreciate the ambassador’s willingness to 
provide this kind of an intense opportunity to learn of our 
province and our people and to build a relationship between our 
province and the United States of America. 
 
I want to, before I ask all members to greet our guests, also to 
recognize that while this is the ambassador’s first official visit 
to Saskatchewan, it may well be Mr. Ahmed’s last official visit 
as his tour of duty in the consulate in Calgary is coming to a 
close. And I want to thank Mr. Ahmed for his support of our 
province, for the many times that he has visited Saskatchewan 
and worked with us on issues of mutual concern. I want to 
thank him and wish him well in his future. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members to greet our 
guests who are in your gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today to 
join on behalf of the official opposition to join with the Premier 
in welcoming Ambassador Wilkins to this Legislative 
Assembly. I will have the opportunity to meet with him a little 
bit later on and I’m very much looking forward to that 
discussion. 
 
Also I want to welcome, together with the Premier, Mr. Ahmed 
and Ms. Klassen. We welcome them to this Assembly and wish 
Mr. Ahmed all the best in his future endeavours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1947 Harry S. Truman said: 
 

Canadian-American relations for many years did not 
develop spontaneously. The example of accord provided 
by our two countries did not come about merely through 
the happy circumstance of geography. It is compounded of 
one part proximity and nine parts goodwill and common 
sense. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, after over 50 years obviously since 1947 
when President Truman said these things, proximity hasn’t 
changed between us and I think it’s important that we commit 
mutually as friends, through respect, that neither will the 
goodwill or the common sense. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and we welcome His Excellency to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you I’d like to introduce three guests in your 
gallery today. Brian Graham is here with his mother and dad, 
Mr. and Mrs. Graham. Brian is president of the Pleasant Hill 
Community Association. He’s deeply committed to public 
safety and strong communities and he’s making a real 
difference. So I’d ask all members to welcome our guests here 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was remiss while I 
was on my feet to not also introduce Mr. Graham to the 
Legislative Assembly and would like to do so in addition to 
welcoming his mom and dad, and on behalf of the opposition to 
thank him for the leadership that he’s showing in the inner city 
in Saskatoon with the Pleasant Hill Community Association. 
And we wish him well in his endeavours to ensure that that 
community and the inner city in our province are safe places for 
the residents that live there. 
 
So on behalf of the opposition, welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you 30 grade 8 students seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Brian Lewis. 
 
It’s good to be able to return some of the hospitality. I’ve had 
many good visits to St. Dominic School over the years, and at 
one point read to many of these students during Education 
Week and can’t believe how quickly they’ve grown into mature 
young men and women. As they mature for their high school 
years, I wish them all the best in future endeavours. 
 
They’re not able to stay for a visit and for me to tell them about 
question period although I know that they’ve had a chance to 
visit with the member from Indian Head-Milestone. There’s a 
very special person to my colleague in the number of students, a 
son. And I’d ask all members to join in welcoming the grade 8 
students from St. Dominic Savio, wish them all the best, and a 
special welcome to a young Mr. McMorris. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Regina Wascana Plains and welcome the 
grade 8 class from St. Dominic Savio, the home of the Sharks, 
for being here. They walked across, well not across the city, but 
from St. Dominic in University Park, over to the legislature on 
this beautiful day, had a bit of a game of soccer out on the front 
lawn, and then had to come in and sit around in our boardroom 
table for a little while and listen to me talk. I think they enjoyed 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

the soccer game quite a bit more than the talk that I was giving. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — But I would like to welcome them here. 
You know they’re much better on the courts and the gyms at 
school. The school was able to win the city championship in the 
Catholic schools sports league this year in volleyball and 
basketball this year, which is quite an accomplishment and 
certainly a credit to the teachers and coaches that they have in 
that school. That’s enough of that. 
 
Now while I’m on my feet though, I would like to also 
introduce a group of 24 grade 3, 4, and 5 students from the 
Wilcox Elementary School. Their teacher is Sarah Kennedy and 
they’re chaperoned by Jana White. They’ve made the trip in 
from Wilcox today, again on a beautiful day, but they came by 
bus which I would strongly advise. 
 
Sarah has a strong connection with one of the security guards. 
Don Maloney is her dad and is one of the guards that we see 
each and every day in this Assembly. 
 
So I’d like to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. I’ll 
be visiting with them right shortly after question period and 
hopefully can answer some of the questions that they have after 
seeing question period. 
 
So I’d like to ask all members to welcome both school groups, 
from St. Dominic and also Wilcox. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the legislature, Dr. Curt Hagele who is in the west gallery. Dr. 
Hagele is registrar for the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 
Association and has worked very hard on issues around scope 
of practice to try and help educate the public and the 
stakeholders. There’s more work to be done on that front, but I 
commend him for his work. And I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 
welcoming Dr. Hagele on behalf of the official opposition and 
as a cattle producer to express my appreciation for the good 
work veterinarians do in this province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you, and members of the Assembly 
as well, two individuals seated in your gallery — if they’d give 
a little wave when I introduce them. 
 

First of all, Mitchell Villeneuve is our summer student this year. 
Mitchell comes to us from the community of Meadow Lake. 
He’s taking commerce presently at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He’s planning on majoring in finance and then 
taking law. He has always been extremely interested in politics. 
 
When I spoke to Mitchell for the first time in his class, he was 
in grade 6. And he expressed an incredible interest — sorry, 
Mr. Premier — in being premier of our province but since then 
has always been keenly interested. So having now the 
opportunity to work in the legislature this year, he’s, I think, 
really finding it thrilling, and he’s looking with interest to watch 
the proceedings today. 
 
Also with him, seated beside Mitchell, is Nicole Foraie. Nicole 
has been our summer student for the past three years, and now 
she’s on a work term in our office during the summer months 
and into the fall for a little bit. Nicole is in her fourth year of 
French education at the University of Regina. This is, as I said, 
her fourth summer in the building, and she’s enjoyed the 
politics in Regina and has enjoyed the politics very much as 
well. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all to please welcome these two 
young, enthusiastic students to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure 
to meet this morning with 21 grade 7 and 8 students from Quill 
Lake School. And they were most interested in being able to see 
question period before they had to leave at 2:15, but with all 
these esteemed guests in the House today that we need to 
introduce, they may not make it. 
 
However I’m sure that they will remember their visit. They are 
brought here today by chaperone, Lori Yaworski, and their 
teacher, Stephanie Weiss. They are a great bunch of young men 
and women who believe quite passionately that the future of 
this province means that they’re going to stay here and develop 
careers and lives, and we really encourage that. So thank you 
for coming to your legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
introduce a school group today. Through you, Mr. Speaker, to 
the Assembly I would like to introduce eight grade 8 students 
from the school in Cabri. Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery, I 
might add. 
 
The occasion of this visit is an annual affair and I don’t get that 
many school groups driving all the way in from Cypress Hills. 
So when they make an effort to arrive here to make this annual 
pilgrimage, I’m happy to welcome them to the legislature. I 
understand that they were a little bit late today because of a flat 
tire. However they’ve arrived, it looks like, in good shape and 
full of enthusiasm. We’ll have an opportunity to visit with them 
after question period today. I’m looking forward to that time 
with them as well. 
 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

So would the members please join us in welcoming the eight 
grade 8 students accompanied by Denise Andreas and Marj 
Cator from the Cabri School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, at this time I would like to 
introduce and acknowledge somebody who is here on the floor 
in the Chamber today, and actually she’s here every day, and 
that is Margaret Woods, who’s our Clerk Assistant. Margaret is 
leaving tomorrow to compete at the Canadian masters swim 
meet in Calgary. 
 
Margaret, we want to wish you well. We understand it’s going 
to be hard to outdo your performance of the year 2005. Last 
year she won six medals in the World Masters Games in 
Edmonton. I know members will want to recognize your 
outstanding accomplishment and wish you the best of luck in 
your masters events this year. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Norwegian.] 
 
Today is Norwegian Constitution Day, Norwegian National 
Day, and the national anthem of Norway is sung right across the 
world, but especially in western Canada, in Saskatchewan, and 
also in many places in the United States because we have as 
many Norwegians in North America, descendants, as they have 
in Norway. And what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we all 
are very pleased to celebrate with Saskatchewan Norwegian 
descendants across our province. And there are parties big and 
small that are happening here. 
 
I want to especially point out that my parents, Tom and Randi 
Nilson, are celebrating Syttende Mai in Norway this year, and 
they’re both 80 years old and so that’s a big event in our family. 
 
Also this is an Olympic year, and we want to say thank you to 
the Norwegian coach, Bjørnar Håkensmoen, who gave his ski 
pole to Sara Renner so she could win a silver medal for Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So in many, many ways there are 
connections between Norway, Saskatchewan, our American 
friends — where many of us come from. But I think all of those 
in the Assembly, the members from Regina Coronation Park, 
the Battlefords, Rosetown Biggar, Saltcoats, Saskatchewan 
Rivers, and Lloydminster, all of us wish to say, celebrate with 
us Norwegian National Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Swift Current. 

Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in Swift 
Current at the Royal Canadian Legion hall, the community 
gathered together to celebrate business excellence, not just in 
Swift Current but in southwest Saskatchewan. The Minister of 
Learning attended what was an excellent evening. And if I may, 
Mr. Speaker, pay tribute not only to those who were nominated 
but specifically to those who won in a number of categories at 
the Swift Current Business Excellence Awards last evening. 
 
The New Business of the Year was Southwest TV News, Mr. 
Speaker. For customer service, Canada Safeway won the award. 
For community involvement, Wellington West was the 
recipient of the award. The Southwest Award — award now for 
the entire region for southwest Saskatchewan — went to Bono 
Holdings. 
 
The Young Entrepreneur Award — and there were four 
nominees in this category and a number of young entrepreneurs 
there last night — The Young Entrepreneur Award went to Arid 
Sea Films. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, last night the chamber of commerce 
inducted a number of businesses officially into the hall of fame. 
They honoured previous Heritage Award winners Stark and 
Marsh, Kurt’s Take-out & Catering Service, Standard Motors, 
Creative Video, Armstrong Implements, Treen Packers, 
MacBean Tessem. 
 
And they inducted a new heritage member into the Swift 
Current Chamber Business Excellence Hall of Fame. That was 
Kruse Glass & Aluminum. Congratulations to John and Kay 
Froese of Kruse Glass & Aluminum who have contributed 
mightily to that business and indeed to our entire community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last but not least, the Business of the Year 
Award went to L.R. Truck Centre/Tillage Village. 
Congratulations to the Raynards, Lyndon Raynard and their 
family, their team, their staff at that business. 
 
And congratulations to the Swift Current Chamber of 
Commerce and the Southwest Credit Union who were again a 
major sponsor of that event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Legislative Interns’ Study Tour 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our four 
legislative interns have just returned from a 10-day comparative 
study tour that took them to Ottawa and London, United 
Kingdom, and I’m sure provided them with invaluable 
first-hand knowledge of both parliamentary systems. 
 
While in Ottawa they met with a wide array of politicians, 
jurists, officials, and journalists, including NDP [New 
Democratic Party] leader Jack Layton; Speaker Peter Milliken; 
Clerk of the House of Commons, Audrey O’Brien; Justice 
Marshall Rothstein of the Supreme Court; United States Deputy 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

Chief of Mission, Mr. John Dixon; and Mike Duffy of CTV 
News. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in the history of the 
program, the interns travelled to the UK [United Kingdom] 
where they had the opportunity to learn about the origins of our 
democracy and state of political affairs in that country. 
 
While in the UK the interns met with MPs [Member of 
Parliament], visited the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association, toured the Palace of Westminster, held informative 
discussions with government and legislative officials on a 
variety of current issues. 
 
They were particularly impressed with the openness and 
hospitality they were shown in London, and by the eagerness to 
talk about politics in Canada and Saskatchewan, something our 
interns were more willing to share. Maybe they’ll tell us what 
they said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our legislative interns want to express their great 
appreciation to the members of the Assembly for their 
continuing support of the Saskatchewan legislative internship 
program. The knowledge and experience gained on the study 
tour and here at the legislature will be invaluable to them as 
they pursue their personal and professional goals. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Child Find Saskatchewan 
Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign 

 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 
25 is National Missing Children’s Day. On behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party, I want to express our support for Child 
Find Saskatchewan and the organizations in this province who 
work to keep our children safe. 
 
Each May Child Find organizations across the country host the 
Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign. Our green ribbon is the 
symbol of hope expressing our thoughts for missing children’s 
families and friends. Wearing the green ribbon demonstrates 
our commitments as parents, grandparents, members of our 
community, and legislators to do everything possible to keep 
our children safe. 
 
In this province Child Find Saskatchewan has continued to take 
the lead in protecting our children. Established in 1984, Child 
Find Saskatchewan is a charitable organization whose programs 
and services are funded through individual and corporate 
donations and delivered mainly by volunteers. With provincial 
offices in Saskatoon and volunteers active in Saskatoon, 
Regina, Moose Jaw, Estevan, Humboldt, Kindersley, Prince 
Albert, Wakaw, North Battleford, Yorkton, and Rosetown, 
Child Find not only locates missing children, it delivers 
educational programs and raises awareness about missing 
children. 
 

On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party I want to thank all the 
staff and volunteers of Child Find for their important work, and 
express our support for the Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Aboriginal 
Literacy Network [SALN] recently held its first ever Aboriginal 
Literacy Awards in Saskatoon. The awards were presented 
during the Pathways to Future SALN Gathering 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SALN had three objectives for the awards: no. 
(1) to honour and recognize individual and organizational 
efforts in the development, enhancement, and promotion of 
Aboriginal literacy in Saskatchewan; no. (2) to further promote 
Aboriginal literacy by acknowledging and celebrating 
achievements; and (3) to help fulfill the Saskatchewan 
Aboriginal Literacy Network’s public awareness mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, awards were presented in four categories. Lisa 
Marie Bird was presented the award as Learner and Mrs Bertha 
McKay was given the Literary Practitioner Award. The Elder 
Award was presented to Irene Jacques, and the Battlefords 
Family Health Centre Circle of Learning won the 
Business/Organization Award. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, a special honour went to Donna Woloshyn. 
And Geordy McCaffery was presented an honorary award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the winners at the 
Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Awards and the 
Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network for organizing such 
a wonderful event in tribute to the hard-working literacy 
advocates. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Hockeyville 2006 Competition 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The search for 
Canada’s most spirited hockey town is now under way. And I 
believe that Cypress Hills is the only constituency to have not 
only one, but two communities advancing to the third round in 
the Kraft Hockeyville 2006 competition. 
 
What is Hockeyville? It’s a contest designed to bring 
communities together in a demonstration of community spirit in 
the quest to win the title as Canada’s greatest hockey 
community. 
 
On June 11, nationally televised final voting and judging will 
determine which community will receive the grand prize. 
Included is the opportunity to host a live NHL [National 
Hockey League] game and funding for upgrades to their local 
arena and equipment. 
 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

Shaunavon’s Marcia Lind and Maple Creek’s Connie Burton 
spearheaded their individual projects but they’re quick to 
acknowledge the local volunteers stepping up to showcase their 
communities which have contributed to their respective 
successes. Key people have prepared video presentations, 
rallied the troops, challenged businesses and residents to sport 
colourful costumes, and have organized specialty events in each 
community. Enthusiasm and spirit are everywhere. 
 
The CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] has travelled to 
both communities to document their activities with portions to 
be aired on June 6 when the 25 finalists will be narrowed down 
to 10. 
 
Needing to remain impartial, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
acknowledge the best efforts put forward by both communities. 
Is it possible to have two communities representing southwest 
Saskatchewan in the national finals? Well we’ll see, but by my 
count to achieve this degree of success the constituents of 
Cypress Hills are already winners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Advertising 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other night I 
couldn’t find the remote control and had to watch a less than 
accurate Saskatchewan Party political advertisement in its 
entirety. I feel compelled to set the record straight. In the ad the 
leader of the Saskatchewan Party asks, is the government 
shortening health care waiting lists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Well I’m happy to tell the people of this 
province that we are investing $9 million in this budget to help 
the health regions do just that. He asks, is university more 
affordable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Obviously he’s forgotten that last year we 
announced a tuition freeze and that this budget continues to 
freeze for two more years. He asks, are they helping you cope 
with higher energy costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Morin: — This government helps residents with their 
home heating bills through the Saskatchewan Energy Share 
plan. This shows the Leader of the Opposition why we are 
investing time and resources publicizing this budget. Based on 
his new ad, he doesn’t know anything about it except that he 
voted against it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, his ad begs one last question. Does the 
official opposition even know how to spell Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Ms. Morin: — I ask this because Saskatchewan’s spelled 

incorrectly in one of their new TV ads. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
they are simply not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Education Property Tax 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier of 
the province whose name was spelt wrong in a NDP video at a 
recent convention of that party, Mr. Speaker. The question 
relates to the Minister of Finance’s leadership campaign that 
he’s continuing to fund at the taxpayers’ expense. You will 
know, Mr. Speaker, that this Minister of Finance is spending a 
half a million taxpayers’ dollars to advertise his budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what you will not find in that ad though is the 
hidden agenda of this NDP government to hike school taxes 
after they have promised, the Premier promised, to lower school 
taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the latest budget from the NDP 
means 63 out of 81 former school divisions will see a property 
tax hike as a result of this Premier’s budget. Mr. Speaker, the 
question to the Premier is this: why months ago was he 
promising meaningful school tax relief, and in this budget he’s 
increasing school taxes in 63 of 81 former divisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question, 
if the Leader of the Opposition voted for this budget, he would 
have voted for 67 million new dollars to rural property 
taxpayers in this year’s property tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — He’d have voted for 9 or 10 million new 
dollars to the funding of education, to the largest education 
budget in the history of the province. 
 
But that said, Mr. Speaker, I can’t resist in referencing some 
other comments I’ve just heard in this House. Can you believe 
it? He asks the question about the need of government to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan about the budget. Because what do we 
get from that Leader of the Opposition? Taxpayer ads, 
taxpayer-paid-for ads that are totally wrong, totally wrong in 
their fact. And then we find out today the Leader of the 
Opposition cannot even spell the name of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, get this. I’m handed a whole selection 
of MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] reports from 
members of the opposition. I’ll just quote the first one. It’s 
headed here, I’m quoting, “About Dan.” It says something here 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

about the NDP gover-ment. They can’t even spell government 
in their MLA news releases. Mr. Speaker, if you can’t spell 
government and you can’t spell Saskatchewan but you want to 
be the Government of Saskatchewan, you’d think you’d at least 
get one of them right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, maybe this 
Premier who obviously has a spell-check ought to get a truth 
check because here’s what he said, here’s what he said in Birch 
Hills. You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that that Premier went 
to Birch Hills to announce school tax relief for the province. 
Here’s the quote: 
 

Three years ago I very . . . publicly . . . stated that the level 
of education tax being taken from farmland . . . was both 
unfair and too high — a problem that has been with us for 
decades. 

 
He went on to say, “We are in a . . . position now, after a lot of 
hard work, to offer this . . . [long-term] solution.” What is that 
government’s long-term solution, Mr. Speaker? Sixty-three 
former school divisions, 63 of 81 are going to see a school tax 
hike. That Premier has no credibility. Why has he broken now 
only a three-month-old promise, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what I said in Birch Hills, 
I’ll say in this House, say on any platform in the province. We 
made a commitment to bring to the proportion across the 
province, 60/40 funding. We’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, with 67 
million new dollars. We also made a commitment, Mr. Speaker, 
to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the property taxpayers, that 
we would seek fairness and equity in the funding of education 
and we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in reference again to the opposition leader’s 
first remarks to the House this afternoon. He’s talking about 
individuals who may or may not be interested in the Premier’s 
chair. Well, I’ll tell you this, I’ll tell you this, there’ll be a 
member from this side of the House in this chair long before the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently the Premier has 
just confirmed that he is stepping down before the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wall: — Because that is the only way any other member 
over there will sit in the Premier’s chair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this question is for the Premier. He 
went to Birch Hills. He had a big press conference. He 
promised to do something meaningful about school tax. 
Unfortunately what he’s done is increase school taxes in 63 out 
of 81 former school divisions. And in the bargain now we 
know, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to be losing teachers — 
152 teaching positions lost because of this Premier’s plan. 
 
Why did he break his promise on school tax, Mr. Speaker? And 
what does he have to say to the teachers — 152 positions of 
which will be deleted by his budget with only 7 of the current 
34 school divisions reporting — what will he say to the teachers 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I say to the general public, we have 
sought to bring fairness and equity to the funding of education 
in this province. We have invested in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
67 million new dollars to bring relief to the farm families of 
Saskatchewan and what do we see? A leader and an opposition 
who vote against it, that’s what we see. 
 
And now we learn today, Mr. Speaker, we learn something 
about the opposition’s ability to spell. They cannot spell the 
name of the province in their televised ads. They cannot spell 
government in their MLA reports, Mr. Speaker. And now we’ve 
learned from the Leader of the Opposition they can’t spell and 
they can’t add because, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s about 20 years 
before the young men in the gallery or others may occupy this 
chair and even then it’ll be before the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an easy way to determine if 
the Premier is right. He has not had the courage yet to call the 
by-election in Weyburn-Big Muddy. He could forego the 
by-election and call a general election in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Wall: — And we’ll find out if he’s right. We’ll find out if 
he’s right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 150 teacher positions have been eliminated 
already with only 7 of 34 school divisions reporting. We have 
an email to quote from, from a teacher in Sunwest School 
Division, Gordon Waldner, who wrote, “The process of forced 
amalgamation has led directly to a wholesale reduction of 
teaching positions across the province.” He has been teaching in 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

Saskatchewan for 30 years, and he’s never seen his colleagues 
more worried. That’s what he says. He goes on to say: 
 

This weekend I know of four young, talented and skilled 
teachers heading for job interviews in Alberta. They’re 
afraid of losing their jobs . . . [they] want to be proactive in 
making sure they have employment . . . [this] year. 
 

Why under this government’s plan are we seeing massive 
property tax hikes across the province and fewer teachers, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again let me repeat. This 
government over a period of years has sought to address the 
unfairness of the education property tax on farm land and farm 
families in our province, Mr. Speaker. To do that, to do that, we 
have seen the reorganization of the delivery of education in the 
K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system, the most significant 
reorganization since the 1940s or the 1950s, Mr. Speaker, that 
to ensure there is fairness and equity for property taxpayers 
right across this province, right across this province. 
 
This has not been . . . It is not an easy transition, Mr. Speaker. 
Educators know that. Our school boards and regions know that. 
It is not an easy transition but one that was essential. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, after hard work, after the hard work of this 
government, over a decade and more, to put together a financial 
picture in this province after the ruination of that party in 
government, after that hard work, Mr. Speaker, we begin to 
have the resources where we can put those resources to 
education. In this budget, $67 million for the relief of property 
tax and, Mr. Speaker, the largest budget for K to 12 education 
in the province’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook 
 

Investment in Northwest Communities Wood Products 
 
Mr. Allchurch: —.Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Northern Affairs. Can the minister 
tell us the total government investment in Northwest 
Communities Wood Products so far? And can the minister tell 
us how many jobs have been created in northern communities 
as a result of this investment? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that question. 
And one thing that I want to say first of all is that this 
government is committed to working with northerners that they 
ensure they participate in any kind of northern development 
that’s happening in our area of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — And this includes the First Nations and 
Métis communities. The Northwest Community Wood Products 
are in Métis communities on the northwest side of the province, 
and this department has committed to working with them by 
giving them financial support. And they will continue to work 
with them in the future as well to ensure that they are part of the 
development and economic activity that’s happening in the 
North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we all agree that there should be investment in 
northern Saskatchewan for the communities there. But to my 
calculations, Mr. Speaker, the total government investment has 
been over $3 million. The number of full-time jobs created so 
far is 12. That’s $250,000 per job. This is not acceptable. 
 
To the Minister of Northern Affairs: what is the minister going 
to do about this sorry record? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, like I’ve said before, we will 
continue to work with northerners to ensure that they are part of 
northern development. 
 
One of the keys to success in ensuring that all people, especially 
the Aboriginal people, have access to the opportunity that’s 
available in the North is through education and 
entrepreneurship. Those are facts Mr. Speaker, and this 
government is committed. We will continue to work with 
northerners, whoever they are — and in particular the First 
Nations and Métis people — that they are part of development 
that’s happening in the North, Mr. Speaker. This government is 
committed to that and will continue to do that, unlike previous 
governments that were there in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to ask the Minister of Northern Affairs about a news release that 
was put out May 12, 1999. That document says, Northwest 
Communities Wood Products “will create 500 direct and 
indirect jobs.” 
 
To the Minister of Northern Affairs: 12 is a long way from 500. 
What happened? 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, like I’ve said already, we are 
proud of the work that northerners and this government are 
doing together in partnership to create job and education 
opportunities for northerners. And some of the opportunities are 
in the forestry area. 
 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

And a lot of the folks in the North don’t have access to equity 
or training or the expertise. And that’s what Northern Affairs 
and this government is continuing to provide and investing in 
the future of northern Saskatchewan and in the future of young 
people in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are committed to ensure that they are a part of what’s 
happening in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have spent over $3 million in northwest wood 
products, and all we have is 12 jobs to show. There’s something 
wrong with that. 
 
Last Thursday I raised these matters in committee with the 
Minister of Northern Affairs. I quoted from a progress report 
dated February 18, 2005. The report raised important questions 
about this project as how it is being managed. It spoke of a loss 
of control. It spoke of an upheaval with stakeholders. Neither 
the minister nor her deputy minister seem to know anything 
about the report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has she now seen the report? Does she know 
what’s in the report, and are these important questions being 
addressed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the questions 
that I have for the member across is that why they are so 
opposed to helping northerners participate in northern 
development, in this case forestry development? 
 
Like any other business and in particular where there’s 
vulnerable . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I’m finding it very difficult to 
be able to hear the responses. The Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Like any other businesses, sometimes 
there’s expertise and supports needed. And this goes for all 
areas, whether you’re talking about agriculture, whether you’re 
talking about forestry. You know, there is enhancements and 
tax benefits in a lot of case that are needed. In this case we are 
talking about the most vulnerable group in society in 
Saskatchewan here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is committed to working with northerners like 
I’ve said before, working with young people in terms of training 
and access to jobs, Mr. Speaker. They want to be business 
partners, not only employees. And that’s what this 
government’s committed to doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Effects of Summer Vacation Scheduling 
on Health Facilities 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
every summer as health care professionals take vacations, 
surgeries are delayed, beds are closed, which increases waiting 
lists and increases delays on surgeries, Mr. Speaker. This is just 
another symptom of the health care understaffing problems that 
we have in this province. It’s depressing. For example when 
nurses take holidays, beds must close because of the chronic 
shortage of nurses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can the minister tell us in this Assembly today: will any rural 
facilities be asked to discontinue emergency room services this 
summer? Can the minister also tell us how many beds will be 
closed in the tertiary centres of our major centres, Regina and 
Saskatoon, over the summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question. I think the member opposite knows that 
the regional health authorities are responsible for the day-to-day 
operation of the facilities across this province and staffing. And, 
Mr. Speaker, every single one of those health authorities 
recognizes the pressures that they feel during holiday time and 
summertime, and they put in place mechanisms to ensure that 
the public health of the people of Saskatchewan is taken into 
account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite spend a great deal of time 
trying to undermine the health care system, and they don’t take 
into account the many hours of work that individuals within the 
system are providing to ensure that care — quality care — is 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we put in 
place a budget this year that allows the health regions to do that. 
The members opposite did not support that budget. Mr. 
Speaker, how can they pull together the idea that you can do 
more with less and not care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is no doubt that the health 
care professionals, the ones that we have in this province, do an 
absolutely marvellous job. The point being is there’s not 
enough of them. The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses are saying 
that. There’s oncologists that are saying that. Endocrinologists 
are saying that. We don’t have enough health care professionals 
in the province. And as a result, because of this NDP 
government, patients are suffering. That’s the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has said that 
we need 600 new nurses to fill the vacancies. This government 
has done absolutely nothing on that, Mr. Speaker, and as a 
result this summer we’re going to see bed closures because of 
the inaction from this NDP government. When will they start 
taking the job of recruiting nurses seriously like SUN 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] has asked them to and meet 
the demands that are out there in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want the people of Saskatchewan to know that they can have 
confidence in this health care system in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, since my appointment 
following the very good work of the previous minister of 
Health, Mr. Speaker, since my appointment here I’ve taken a 
look at how many services have been provided to Saskatchewan 
people during that period of time. 
 
If we assume, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve been on this job for just 60 
working days, Mr. Speaker, 744,000 visits to physicians have 
taken place. 5,420 surgeries have taken place. 3,480 MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging] have been done. Mr. Speaker, the 
vast majority of those people realize there’s quality care 
provided to the people of this province, and every person in 
Saskatchewan should have confidence in the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Allegations of Financial Irregularities 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 
Premier. When did he personally become aware of the alleged 
financial irregularities at the Yorkton Tribal Council Child and 
Family Services agency? 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
can inform the Assembly that the Yorkton Tribal Council 
contacted our department. Many people don’t realize that the 
Yorkton Tribal Council provides services to 10 First Nations in 
child and family services. 
 
We are one of the partners with the Yorkton Tribal Council. I 
believe we have a $300,000 agreement, a service agreement 
with them. And the Yorkton Tribal Council contacted us to 
work with them in terms of looking through how their business 
practices were and looking for any type of financial challenges 
and so on and so forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted according to many of the media 
that the Yorkton Tribal Council gets approximately $5 million 
from the federal government. That is their primary focus. They 
work with many First Nations, but they do have a partnership 
with us. It is important to point out that they contacted us to 
help them solve some of the challenges that they may have. 
And we’re going through an intensive look at how they’re 
doing business and the success of the Yorkton Tribal Council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been informed that the 
Deputy Premier met with Byron Yuzicappi at his Yorkton 
office January 19 of this year. Mr. Speaker, Byron Yuzicappi 
was dismissed from the Yorkton Tribal Child and Family 
Services agency January 4. He went to visit the RCMP one 
week later. Now he’s making some very public and troubling 
allegations about financial allegations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the Deputy Premier meet with Byron 
Yuzicappi on January 19, and what did Mr. Yuzicappi tell him 
on that date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is very, very important 
that we allow the process to proceed. As that member fancies 
himself a lawyer, there are many, many allegations made 
against many, many people, and it is important to take the 
allegations seriously. But allegations are allowed due process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the important thing to point out here is that 
while the vast majority of the Yorkton Tribal Council work is 
with the federal government, we do have partnerships. And it is 
the Yorkton Tribal Council that approached us and asked us, 
could you help us solve our problems and go through the 
process of making sure that we do an audit to make sure our 
performance is there and so on and so forth. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that this is a third 
party that has a responsibility to 10 First Nations. They have 
asked us to help improve accountability. We will assist in every 
way, shape, or form that we can. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the Deputy 
Premier. We want to know what happened in that meeting, if 
that meeting took place, what information Mr. Yuzicappi gave 
the Deputy Premier, what his responses were, what 
undertakings the Deputy Premier made to Mr. Yuzicappi, and 
what came out of the meeting as a result of that meeting. What 
steps did that Deputy Premier make ? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, as I had 
pointed out, there are probably thousands of accusations made 
and allegations made every year. There are many, many 
allegations made. The appropriate response is to put it to the 
proper process and to ensure that you have a timely process to 
investigate all the allegations. 
 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out again that the Yorkton Tribal 
Council showed leadership in asking for our participation, even 
though we’re one-fifth of the partnership that they have with the 
federal government. They are responsible to 10 First Nations on 
Indian and family services. That is their true partnership in 
terms of working with many of these First Nations. 
 
So I’ll point out again. They had a problem. They came to us to 
help them go through an intensive look at how they do business, 
the progress that they have made. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
should be commended for that, even though we’re a small 
partner in the big scheme of things. Mr. Speaker, that shows 
leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, one thing we agree with the 
minister is the good work that’s being done by that agency. 
 
Unfortunately there’s some allegations of fraud and things that 
took place in that agency, and we have questions to the Deputy 
Premier about a meeting that took place. Will the Deputy 
Premier admit whether a meeting took place? Will he tell us 
what went on in that meeting? Will he tell us what advice he 
gave Mr. Yuzicappi? 
 
Mr. Yuzicappi states he did not receive follow-up after he came 
to the Deputy Premier with information. He states he did not 
receive a letter from the Deputy Premier. He has no idea 
whether his allegations were discussed any further. He has no 
idea whether those allegations were addressed in any fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps did the Deputy Premier or any of his 
cabinet colleagues take to examine these allegations or deal 
with this matter? Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll point out 
again, Mr. Speaker, that one of the things that’s so very 
important and the hallmark of this government is the fact that 
we had a lot of financial mess to clean up when we assumed 
government. We had to pay down a whole whack of debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are making good progress on that. 
 
Now we have to make sure that in the whole process of 
rebuilding Saskatchewan, left by that conservative mess over 
there, that we have quite a bit of work that we need to do. So 
I’ll point out, when the Minister of Finance put in all the 
internal controls to ensure that we strengthen the accountability 
of this government, we did that. 
 
And that example, Mr. Speaker, is certainly being spread out 
throughout Saskatchewan. And many groups are looking at us 
for leadership, and we’ll provide that leadership. In this 
instance, the Yorkton Tribal Council asked for our assistance. 
We’ll work very . . . [inaudible] . . . to see if there is any truth to 
the allegations. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, any allegations received by any member of 

this Assembly . . . There is a process, and there is time to 
investigate, and we are doing that work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Government’s Response to Commission on First Nations 
and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In November 
2001, this government established the Commission on First 
Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform. 
 
The commission was established with a genuine desire for 
reform and with the knowledge that government cannot 
accomplish that reform that is needed alone. The commission 
made more than 100 recommendations — recommendations 
echoed by the report of the Stonechild inquiry. 
 
The government wholeheartedly endorsed and accepted the 
themes of the commission’s recommendations: dealing with the 
underlying causes of crime; increasing the involvement of 
Aboriginal people and groups in justice processes; using 
alternatives to court and incarceration; and improving justice 
system responses. Throughout its report, the commission 
acknowledged the work that is already under way. 
 
In May 2005, my colleague, the former minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety, and I released the government’s action plan 
to respond to the recommendations of the commission. 
 
I would like to remind members of the reactions of the 
commission Chair, Chief Willie Littlechild, to our action plan. I 
quote: 
 

“There is reason to celebrate and be optimistic about the 
future as a result of the response to the Commission on 
First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform,” said 
former Chairman, Chief Willie Littlechild. The Action 
Plan that increases the number of partnerships is a very 
pro-active strategy. 
 
In congratulating Premier Lorne Calvert, Minister Frank 
Quennell and Minister Peter Prebble for the Governments 
expressed commitment, Littlechild calls and encourages 
all partners to continue working together to ensure the 
three year strategy achieves the desired outcomes that will 
create the desired healthy, just, prosperous and safe 
Saskatchewan. 

 
“I am very personally encouraged by the serious 
consideration and planning implementation of our 
recommendations. Immediate follow up was always a 
personal goal as Chairman and also that of my fellow 
commissioners,” said Littlechild. 
 
The thematic approach adopted by the Government of 
Saskatchewan response is a very effective way to address 
the challenges and dealing with the underlying causes of 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

crime as a priority. It will secure increasing involvement, 
use of alternatives and improve justice system responses. 
 
While there’s no implementation mechanism, 
implementing the Action Plan with regular progress 
reports by two implementation tables will be the critical 
next steps. “Using existing strengths to build on with the 
announced new initiatives are very encouraging, however, 
it will call for longer term strategy and sustained effort by 
all to ensure a hopeful future for our children and youth,” 
concluded Littlechild. 
 

Perhaps the most important feature of the action plan is that it is 
multi-departmental. It reflects the recognition that changing the 
circumstances that put individuals at risk of contact with the 
justice system cut across many government services and 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the action plan is a three-year strategy that maps 
out comprehensive long-term initiatives to help meet the needs 
of Aboriginal children, families, and communities. In 
2005-2006 more than $48 million was committed to the action 
plan. For 2006-2007, significant new funding in the order of 
$31 million is being invested. This is the sustained effort to 
which Chief Littlechild referred. 
 
While some of this new funding is directed to new initiatives, 
some will be directed to enhancing or expanding existing 
programs. A number of the initiatives outlined in the action plan 
are targeted specifically to First Nations and Métis peoples 
while others, though not targeted, will have a significant 
positive impact on Aboriginal people. 
 
To deal with the underlying causes of crime, this government 
implemented the Premier’s Project Hope, continued to 
implement initiatives such as SchoolPlus and expanded the new 
student data system. We supported economic development for 
First Nations and Métis communities and supported training 
efforts through the forestry training strategy and the multi-party 
training plan III for the northern mining industry. 
 
We provided quality affordable housing by adding 600 new 
housing units and renovating up to 700 low-income houses. 
And changes to the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement 
benefited 10,000 low-income people and up 3,000 individuals 
with disabilities. 
 
We’ve provided increases in the basic allowance and earning 
exemptions for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan and provided 
an increase in the Saskatchewan employment supplement to 
enable clients to keep pace with inflation. 
 
For 2006-2007 the focus in new initiatives is on crime 
prevention and further strengthening supports for families and 
individuals coping with substance abuse and its results. To 
increase the involvement of Aboriginal people and groups in 
justice processes, there were 20 new police positions in 
2005-2006 — 16 of these new positions involved Aboriginal 
recruits. 
 
We implemented a Cree court, a court where the use of 
Aboriginal languages is welcomed, a court that has a high 
degree of sensitivity to Aboriginal people. We are continuing 

our efforts to increase the number of Aboriginal persons 
working throughout our criminal justice system as judges, 
lawyers, police officers, and correctional workers. 
 
The province is supporting an additional 29 new police 
positions and developing a province-wide Aboriginal police 
recruitment strategy. Last week Don Bird was appointed a 
judge of the Provincial Court of Meadow Lake. Judge Bird is a 
member of the Montreal Lake Cree Nation and speaks Cree. He 
has extensive experience in many aspects of the justice system 
as a probation officer, a police officer, a corrections worker, and 
a Crown prosecutor. Since 2001 Judge Bird has been a member 
of the Cree court party and will now move on to establish an 
Aboriginal provincial court party in Meadow Lake which will 
travel to a number of court points in northwestern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To provide alternatives to court and incarceration, the drug 
treatment court in Regina will be fully operational by fall of 
2006. A domestic violence court was implemented in Saskatoon 
in October 2005. Victim services programs have expanded to 
the North, and a domestic violence court will be established in 
Regina. To improve justice system responses, work began to 
build a new provincial correctional centre in Regina. A chief 
coroner, deputy chief coroner, and chief forensic pathologist 
were recruited. 
 
The Police Act amendments that came into force in early April 
established a new public complaints model that operates under 
the direction of the five-person Public Complaints Commission. 
Beginning early this year we are increasing resources . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Ordinarily ministerial 
statements are to take from three to five minutes. I notice the 
minister has gone to about six. I would ask if he . . . He should 
request leave if he wishes to go on further. The Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this is the promised 
statement, annual statement to the legislature on progress on 
implementing the strategy plan in response to the 
recommendations of the Commission on First Nations and 
Métis Peoples and Justice Reform. It is an unusual 
circumstance, and I request leave to finish the statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to finish the 
statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The minister may 
proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you to my colleagues in the House. 
 
The Act, The Police Act specifically requires the Public 
Complaints Commission to include First Nations and Métis 
members. The commission has ensured there are similar 
representation among investigative staff. 
 
Beginning earlier this year we are increasing resources to solve 
historical and current cases of missing persons in Saskatchewan 



May 17, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

and enhance police and community responses to cases of 
missing persons. We want to ensure we are doing everything we 
can to help solve cases of missing persons and provide families 
with answers about their missing loved ones. 
 
We are also significantly expanding suppression of gang 
activity through the addition of police and prosecution 
resources coupled with funding for stepped-up surveillance and 
intelligence gathering. While we are putting more resources into 
enforcement and prosecution of gang activity, it’s also 
important to identify and understand the causes behind it. Our 
historical failure to include Aboriginal people in our social and 
economic institutions has created deep and troubling social 
problems that the justice system alone cannot possibly heal. To 
solve these problems will require the efforts of the entire 
community. The full participation of First Nations and Métis 
people is critical to the health of our communities and the future 
of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government is acting to create a healthy, 
just, prosperous, and safe Saskatchewan for all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports 
the ongoing reform of the justice system as a response to the 
Commission on First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice 
Reform. The Saskatchewan Party’s policy is that we need to 
restore trust and confidence in Saskatchewan’s justice system 
which we have indicated would happen with a comprehensive 
review of the justice system by a Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Clearly the more than 100 recommendations that came forward 
from the commission and the recommendations that came 
forward out of the Stonechild inquiry echo the need for such a 
comprehensive review. Along with the government we are 
supportive of measures that will deal with the underlying causes 
of crime. Most notably we need to address the issues of poverty, 
education, and drug addiction. 
 
Right now there are 44,000 children living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. If the Premier is serious about leaving no child 
behind and addressing the underlying causes of crime, he 
should start by addressing the needs of those 44,000 children. 
 
We have also urged the government to take action on the issue 
of addictions which we know is directly responsible for crime 
rates in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support some of the recommendations that are 
here. We are troubled that the minister has not yet completed 
his initiatives for additional police officers. We are troubled that 
we do not have long-term addiction beds. And we are troubled 
that we have not adequately dealt with the needs of our most 
impoverished people. 
 
We see a great deal of work left to do and we look forward to a 
Saskatchewan Party government that will do that work. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to move to motions for returns (debatable), return no. 574, and 
then to return to orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to proceed to motions for return, return No. 574, and then 
back to orders of the day. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
[14:45] 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Return No. 574 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member of Saskatoon Silver Springs, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 574 showing: 
 

A copy of the highway equipment storage strategy for both 
the north and south regions. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 574 showing: 
 

A copy of the highway equipment storage strategy for both 
north and south regions. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
would like to table return no. 574. 
 
The Speaker: — Return 574 is hereby tabled. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2006 

would table responses to written question no. 1,100 and 1,101. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to both 1,100 and 1,101 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of the policy field committees on the Economy as well as 
on Crown and Central Agencies, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:47.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1705 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1705 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1706 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1706 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1706 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1706 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1708 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
 Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
 Legislative Interns’ Study Tour 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
 Child Find Saskatchewan Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
 Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Awards 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
 Hockeyville 2006 Competition 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
 Saskatchewan Party Advertising 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Education Property Tax 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
 Investment in Northwest Communities Wood Products 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
 Effects of Summer Vacation Scheduling on Health Facilities 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
 



 

 Allegations of Financial Irregularities 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Government’s Response to Commission on First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 Return No. 574 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1717 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1718 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


