


















































Hansard: May 15, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 60A  MONDAY, MAY 15, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1657 
 May 15, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, members, it’s my 
pleasure to table the 2005 annual report from the Saskatchewan 
Children’s Advocate office, titled The Right Balance: Theory & 
Practice. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills and 
other communities in the Southwest concerned about the 
government’s failure to fund the drug Avastin. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
As indicated, Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are 
signed by individuals from the communities of Shaunavon, 
Webb, Wymark, Stewart Valley, and Swift Current. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon, 
Wynyard, Rose Valley, Foam Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. In fact, it’s interesting to note that I 
recognize some of the names even. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Swift Current area. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise on 
behalf of people from the Swift Current area who are very 
concerned about the government’s decision not to fund the 
cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to fund Avastin. Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this 
petition are concerned that forcing patients to pay for this drug 
is an example of two tiered health care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
A number of signatures on this petition come primarily from the 
community of Swift Current, although I also see Stewart Valley 
and Edmonton as locations. I’m pleased to present this petition 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from the 
communities of Warman, Saskatoon, and Martensville. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, this petition appears to be signed by individuals all 
from the community of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with concerns 
about the funding of the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signatures on this petition are from Martensville, 
Saskatoon. And I am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition regarding the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Swift 
Current. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
with my colleagues this afternoon expressing the concern of 
citizens about the lack of funding for the cancer-fighting drug 
Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon. And I notice as well two signatures from the city of 
Edmonton. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the lack of government funding for Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Swift Current and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
rise with a petition from people that are very concerned about 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] two tiered health system in 

reference to the drug Avastin. If you have the money, you can 
get it; if not, it’s not paid for. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Swift Current 
and Herbert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s two-tier health care system in regards to the 
cancer drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Hepburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise to present a petition from concerned citizens that are very 
concerned with the fact that the government is not funding the 
cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased to 
join my colleagues in petitioning the government on the drug 
Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Saskatoon and Dundurn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

and an honour to rise today to present a petition that this is the 
first time in the province’s history that the government has 
denied coverage of a cancer drug recommended by the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 5, 7, 27, 42, 65, 67, 638, and 
639. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the Leader of the Official Opposition, the member for 
Swift Current, I’d like to introduce a group of 14 people seated 
in the east gallery. These are people that have travelled from 
Swift Current, and most of them, I understand, represent the 
Pioneer Kiwanis Club of Swift Current. 
 
I’d like to acknowledge President Elmer Meyer, if he would just 
give us a wave. There’s Elmer. Welcome, Elmer. And another 
member up there that many people will recognize of that 
Kiwanis Club is Mr. John Wall, former MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Swift Current. And I’d like everyone 
to join with me in recognizing the people from the Prairie 
Pioneers Kiwanis Club of Swift Current. Welcome to your 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I’d like to introduce 38 grade 10 students 
from Mount Royal Collegiate in Saskatoon. They are in the 
west gallery. They’re here to do a tour of the Legislative 
Building. 
 
They’re here with their teachers, Pat Barry, Kristi Janzen, Chris 
Roy, and Julie Helps. This is a great school, and I hope they 
have a wonderful time here today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member for Saskatoon Centre in welcoming the 
students from Mount Royal Collegiate. My colleague is 
certainly right that it’s a great school. I attended Mount Royal 
Collegiate. And many of the students are from areas that I 
represent in the legislature, including Dundonald, Westview, 
Massey Place where I live, Hudson Bay Park, Westmount, and 
Caswell. And I certainly would like to join the member in 
welcoming the students, teachers, and chaperones from Mount 
Royal today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
Minister Responsible for Community Resources, I attended a 
press event this morning with the Saskatchewan Foster Families 
Association and I’d like today to take this opportunity to 
introduce some fine folks to you and through you. And joining 
us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Deb Davies, who is the 
executive director of the foster families association. With Deb 
is Paul Bunz, who is the president of the Saskatchewan Foster 
Families Association, and Larry Evans, who’s also with the 
Saskatchewan Foster Families Association. Say that three times 
fast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I just wanted to point out that I’m very delighted to have 
them here today and to also commend them for the excellent 
and hard work that they’re doing on behalf of the association. 
Welcome today. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, along with the minister I’d 
like to welcome Deb, Paul, and Larry to their Legislative 
Assembly. We know the great work they do for foster families 
across the province. And I just want to assure them that we will 
continue the support from this side of the House. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the Public 
Service Commission, the member for Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today joining us in your gallery are a number of public servants 
from various government departments. There’s 25 in total and 
they’re from Agriculture and Food, Community Resources, 
Corrections and Public Safety, Environment, Government 
Relations, Health, Highways, Justice, the Legislative Assembly, 
and the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve spent much of the morning at the 
legislature. They’ve received some in-depth briefings about our 
legislative history and also briefings around the building, 
including the Legislative Library, the Legislative Assembly 
Clerk’s office, Executive Council, and now they’re observing 
the House and then they will meet with members from both 
sides of the House this afternoon before they go back to their 
departments. 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

So I would ask all members of the legislature to welcome these 
public servants to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the 25 public service employees 
that are here in their Assembly. 
 
It’s a wonderful experience and program, I think, to have these 
professional people attend in a day of how the legislature works 
and to meet with various members of the Legislative Assembly. 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to realize that the laws of 
this province may originate in this Chamber, but our public 
servants are the ones who give it life and breath every day of 
the year to our citizens. 
 
So in thanking them we introduce them to the Assembly and 
welcome them here. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
rest of the Assembly 21 grade 12 students from Winston Knoll 
Collegiate who are in the west gallery. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Tana Mitchell, who regularly brings her class 
here. And I’m looking forward to meeting with them later for a 
good discussion about what they observe here and about the 
political structure in our province at this time. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all to join in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It is my pleasure, members, at this time to 
introduce to you our Children’s Advocate, Mr. Marvin 
Bernstein, who is here with Rick Jorgensen, the director of 
communications. 
 
The Children’s Advocate of course is an independent officer 
who acts as a voice for children and is committed to ensuring 
that the interests and well-being of Saskatchewan children and 
youth is respected and valued in our community, in government 
practice, in policy, and in legislation. 
 
Would the members please welcome Mr. Bernstein and Mr. 
Jorgensen to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 

Regina Volunteer Receives Kinsmen Award 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently a 
constituent of mine received a very prestigious award from the 
Regina Queen City Kinsmen. Mr. Rick Van Beselaere was 
presented with the Life Member Award in honour of his 
dedication and voluntary service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past I’ve had the pleasure of working with 
Rick on the Wascana Centre Authority board and know him to 
be a very generous person with a true thirst for serving his 
community. Of course Rick’s vigorous volunteer schedule is 
only manageable with the dedication and support of his spouse, 
Donna. 
 
As the Chair of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative I’m 
especially pleased to have this opportunity to recognize Mr. 
Van Beselaere. Volunteers are truly integral to our society. As 
the people of Saskatchewan know, more than 42 per cent of the 
people of our great province volunteer — the highest 
percentage of any province or territory in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for almost 80 years the Regina Queen City 
Kinsmen have lived up to their motto of “serving the 
community’s greatest needs.” From sporting events to seniors 
complexes, from food banks to clubs for youth and those 
differently abled, the Kinsmen of Regina open their arms to 
people in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
in congratulating Mr. Rick Van Beselaere, the deserving 
recipient of the Life Member Award for countless hours of 
services to his community, and the Queen City Kinsmen for 
their tireless devotion to volunteerism in our great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

National Police Week 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today marks the beginning of National Police Week. This week 
is dedicated to increasing community awareness and 
recognition of the vital role police officers play in the safety of 
both rural and urban Saskatchewan. This week provides us with 
an opportunity to show our appreciation for the outstanding 
men and women who make our communities more safe and 
secure. 
 
All Saskatchewan police officers put their safety at risk by just 
going to work each day. We saw recently in Ontario some 
officers are killed in the line of duty serving the public. For this 
ultimate sacrifice, all of Saskatchewan is truly grateful. Police 
officers also play an integral role within our communities, often 
donating their time for numerous charities and events. Effective 
law enforcement is a crucial element to maintaining our quality 
of life. And we must continue to ensure that our police have the 
financial, technical, and civil support necessary to carry out 
their responsibilities. 
 
I hope that this NDP government will live up to their 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

seven-year-old election promise to hire 200 more police officers 
to help keep our streets safe. I would like to ask all members of 
the Assembly to honour and recognize all police officers and 
the difference they make to our communities. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Prairie to Pine Awards Banquet 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had 
the opportunity to attend the Prairie to Pine Awards Banquet. 
For the seventh consecutive year the Prairie to Pine REDA 
[regional economic development authority] presented 
Excellence Awards open to all businesses and organizations 
operating in the villages and towns of the Prairie to Pine region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, awards were presented to exceptional businesses 
in seven categories. In the category of community involvement, 
the Excellence Award went to the St. Walburg Chamber of 
Commerce and the Heritage Award went to the St. Walburg 
Elks Lodge No. 389. 
 
Excellence Awards went to Bust-A-Butt Enterprises Ltd., and 
NorSask Liquidations as new businesses. The Paradise Hill & 
District Chamber of Commerce and the St. Walburg centennial 
committee won the Community Development Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie to Pine REDA Outstanding Service 
Excellence Award was presented to Bert Corbeil, Pastor Mike 
Firlotte, Sharon Funk, Marion Hougham, Gordon Smith, and 
Randy Domes. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Award of Merit 
was presented to Glass Treasures by Bonnie Saunders, and the 
Prairie to Pine REDA named Boser’s Greenhouse, Business of 
the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
in congratulating all of the winners at the seventh annual Prairie 
to Pine REDA Excellence Awards and in congratulating the 
Prairie to Pine REDA for all of its diligent work and for 
organizing such a wonderful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business Anniversary 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to extend our congratulations to the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business for the celebration of their 35th 
anniversary. 
 
In Saskatchewan the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] represents over 5,000 businessmen and 
women and works diligently to ensure that the concerns of 
small business are voiced. The CFIB has lobbied hard to help 
achieve goals like the scrapping of government-directed hours, 
raising the tax threshold for small business, and business tax 
reform in general. 

I would ask all members to thank the CFIB for presenting a 
strong voice for small business in Saskatchewan as 
businessmen and women are the engines of our province’s 
economy. Congratulations to the CFIB for 35 years of excellent 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Cycling Association Shamrock Tour 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Cycling Association is a volunteer, non-profit 
organization that promotes bicycling for sport, recreation, and 
transportation. The SCA [Saskatchewan Cycling Association] 
delivers safe cycling presentations at Saskatchewan schools and 
also organizes a wide range of cycling events. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, last year the association celebrated 
Saskatchewan’s 100 years of heart with an eight-day, 
border-to-border centennial ride from Lloydminster to Duck 
Mountain Provincial Park. Cyclists from all over Saskatchewan 
ranging in age from 12 to 70 took part, covering an average 
distance of almost 100 kilometres a day. By all accounts it was 
a great event, Mr. Speaker, so successful that this year the SCA 
is organizing another eight-day ride called GASP — G-A-S-P 
— 2006, the Shamrock Tour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, GASP stands for Great Annual Saskatchewan 
Pedal, and it’s the Shamrock Tour because the ride begins and 
ends in Prince Albert and will make three loops forming the 
shape of a shamrock. The first loop goes through Blaine Lake 
and Rosthern. The second is a trip to Prince Albert National 
Park and back, and the third will go through Nipawin and 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Shamrock Tour will travel through the prairie 
and parkland of north central Saskatchewan, which 
understandably is my favourite part of the province. Cyclists 
can enjoy the scenery, visit historic sites and museums, and 
sample the cuisine of communities along the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it promises to be a great trip, and I want to 
commend the SCA for organizing the Shamrock Tour and 
providing Saskatchewan cyclists this unique opportunity to 
experience all Prince Albert and the surrounding area has to 
offer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Provincial Awards to Melfort Special Olympians 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to recognize some very deserving Melfort people who recently 
received provincial awards. 
 
Rachel Lumberjack was named the Saskatchewan Special 
Olympic Female Athlete of the Year. Rachel has been an 
enthusiastic participant and ambassador to the Special Olympics 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

for five years. She enjoys many of the Special Olympic sport 
programs, but Rachel’s favourite sport is curling because of the 
many new friends she gets to meet. 
 
Scot Earl was named Saskatchewan Special Olympic Male 
Athlete of the Year. Scot also enjoys the friendships and 
experiences Special Olympic programs provide. He plays third 
for the Special Olympics Saskatchewan Melfort curling team. 
Scot and his teammates have learned how to overcome 
communication problems presented by Scot’s deafness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Special Olympic Saskatchewan Melfort 
curling team was also presented with the Saskatchewan Special 
Olympics Team of the Year Award. Rachel Lumberjack, Scot 
Earl, Daniel Fiedelleck, Rodney Mitchell, and Lorin Bussiere 
experienced many adventures together including winning gold 
at the 2006 Saskatchewan Winter Games. 
 
The Melfort Special Olympics bowling team coach, long-time 
champion and advocate for Special Olympics Saskatchewan, 
Elvina Hirsch, was presented with the Unsung Hero Award. 
Elvina devoted 17 years of loving care to the Special Olympics 
athletes and programs in Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these very special people from my constituency. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Pregnancy, Parenting and the Workplace 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
the International Day of the Family, a day set aside to highlight 
the importance of families. Therefore I think it’s a particularly 
good time to say a few words about a publication designed to 
help both employers and employees in Saskatchewan address 
the ongoing challenge of balancing work and family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most parents of minor children in the province are 
also members of the labour force, and so play two very 
important roles in building Saskatchewan’s future. The booklet 
is called Pregnancy, Parenting and the Workplace and it’s 
about helping parents live up to their family commitments while 
still meeting the responsibilities that they have in the 
workplace, and helping employers create a family-friendly 
workplace so important to decreasing absenteeism and 
improving retention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission and Saskatchewan Labour for co-chairing 
the publication partnership committee. And I want to commend 
the committee members, including Saskatchewan Health and 
the breastfeeding committee for Saskatchewan, for their 
contributions to this publication. As someone who knows 
first-hand the challenges of work and family, I know it’ll be a 
great benefit to both employers and employees in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 

Air Tanker Crash Near La Ronge 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I was saddened to hear the news yesterday that a 
northern air operations pilot was killed and two others were 
injured when the plane they were flying crashed near La Ronge. 
Our thoughts and prayers are with the family of the man who 
died in the crash as well as those recovering from their injuries. 
 
I understand the three individuals were participating in a 
training mission utilizing a plane recently acquired by 
Saskatchewan Environment for firefighting. 
 
My question is for the minister: can the minister tell this 
Assembly if his department is aware of the preliminary cause of 
the accident and what is the status of the other 580As? 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tragically 
yesterday one of the Saskatchewan Environment forest fighting 
planes went down just near the La Ronge airport. There are two 
580A airplanes in the fleet now with two more to be delivered 
from Conair Aviation in Abbotsford, British Columbia. The 
other plane is on the runway in La Ronge and is being held 
there. 
 
The status of the other pilots and planes that are in La Ronge 
now is being discussed by the staff today. The Transport 
Canada officials are arriving on the scene today. The whole 
crash site was cordoned off by the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police]. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s commonplace after a crash to ground the fleet, and that’s 
why I asked the minister if the status was . . . if the fleet is in 
fact grounded. And that’s why I was interested in knowing the 
preliminary causes of the accident because once the preliminary 
causes are out, then it goes to whether the fleet stays grounded 
or if in fact they can go back flying. 
 
But if the fleet is grounded, can the minister tell us what 
contingency plans there are for firefighting now that this fleet is 
temporarily out of service? 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 
Interagency Forest Fire Centre has been contacted, and our 
neighbours on both sides, Manitoba and Alberta, are on alert 
and ready to come and help us if we need to do that. There have 
been situations where our fleet has gone to Alberta to help them 
when they’ve had similar situations. And this is, well, not a 
normal procedure, but it is the ordinary procedure when an 
accident happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Recommendations of the Children’s Advocate 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the Office 
of the Children’s Advocate released his annual report. It 
contains many examples of where the NDP government has 
failed children of this province and to demonstrate that a lot of 
children are being left behind. The advocate also points out that 
many of his recommendations from previous years were never 
followed up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he commit to implementing 
the recommendations of the Child’s Advocate in a timely 
manner and to inform this House as to when this will happen? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I want to thank the Child’s Advocate for his great 
work. There’s no question that in the analysis of our department 
and how well we serve the people of Saskatchewan, we always 
ask for outside evaluation. And certainly from this perspective, 
inviting the Child’s Advocate to look at our files and to work 
closely with him and to ask for his advice, that’s one of the 
things that we want to do. 
 
And I want to point out today that the advocate has been doing 
a tremendous amount of good work in his early placement and 
that our department continues to take very seriously some of the 
issues raised by the Child’s Advocate. And I can point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that of the 25 recommendations that we’ve been 
working towards over the last five years, there’s one if not two 
of them that we’re having difficulty in terms of trying to make 
sure we have a successful conclusion. We’ll continue seeking 
advice from the Child’s Advocate in working towards 
resolution for many of these problems. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, his good works can only be 
done if the government implements his plans. I’d like to quote 
from the Children’s Advocate annual report: 
 

Our recommendations have often become stale-dated 
while we wait for government departments to complete 
their internal reviews prior to proceeding with our 
independent reviews. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious with this government’s track record 
some of the advocate’s recommendations get lost in red tape. 
I’d like to quote again, Mr. Speaker: “In fact we have seen 
delays of up to three years.” Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with 
children here, our most vulnerable resources, and we don’t have 
the luxury of time. 
 
To the minister: will he stand here today and tell this Assembly 
that he will implement the recommendations of the Child’s 
Advocate and in a quick and timely manner? Will he make sure 

that the children of this province do not get left behind? 
 
The Speaker: — Minister for Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve indicated, we are going to work very closely with the 
Child’s Advocate on many, many fronts. And as I pointed out 
earlier, this government established the Office of the Child’s 
Advocate. We’ve done that to make sure that every child is 
heard. And as the advocate has indicated in his report, the 
children aren’t the leaders of tomorrow; they aren’t the future. 
They are now. 
 
So I think one of the most important thing that I want to point 
out is, we welcome the auditor’s participation. We accept his 
recommendation, and we share the Children’s Advocate in the 
primary goal of ensuring the safety and well-being of every 
child in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll work closely together with the advocate, and 
we will move towards change. And as I mentioned of the 25 
recommendations that we spoke of, there are two that we’re 
working towards resolution on. We’ll continue that work. And 
again I stress we welcome his participation and thank him for 
his fine work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if working 
closely with the Child Advocate means that we wait three years, 
I’d hate to see what would happen if we weren’t working 
closely. 
 
The Children’s Advocate is simply trying to look out for the 
most vulnerable in our society. But he faces barriers. I’d like to 
quote from the report, Mr. Speaker: “There are a number of 
child deaths and critical injuries that we are not seeing because 
the current protocols used by my office and the government 
mitigate against being referred for review.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate is working with the best 
interest of our children in mind, but the NDP government is 
putting up roadblocks. Why is the minister and his government 
putting up barriers to the Child’s Advocate’s office? Why are 
they making it more difficult for him to help our children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again as I 
pointed out, having the Child’s Advocate actively involved in 
bringing forward recommendations and working towards 
resolution for all these challenges that we have pointed out over 
time is that this is our plan . . . is to make sure that we respect 
his role and we accept the advice and we move forward in 
making sure that we find some solutions to the problems that he 
has identified as quickly as possible. 
 
Of the 25 challenge areas that we spoke of, we are making good 
progress on 23. There are two of minor difficulties in terms of 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

our discussions. But we’re not arguing about the intent; we’re 
arguing about the process to achieve the best intention of 
protecting every child in the province. So it’s really not the 
intent that we’re having disagreement on; it’s really about the 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, It’s important to point out everything that the 
Child Advocate has spoken about, including child deaths, is 
something that we take very seriously. We’ll work closer with 
his office. And we will build a better and greater and stronger 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan children and families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Wait Times for Cardiac Diagnostic Procedures 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Valerie Paterson is 47 years old and has diabetes. As a result 
she’s developed some health problems. In March Valerie’s 
cardiologist told her that he wanted her to have an angiogram 
done. He said it should take a couple weeks to get this test done. 
Her name was put on the waiting list on March 6, 2006. She 
was told that waiting for an angiogram would be six months 
once she was put on that list. 
 
Six months, Mr. Speaker, for a diagnostic procedure for people 
suffering from cardiac problems. Mr. Speaker, why are patients 
in Saskatchewan being told they must wait six months for a 
cardiac test? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite is aware that the professionals who 
establish individuals’ places on waiting lists do a lot of analysis 
of individuals and their emergency or emergent needs. Mr. 
Speaker, this government has supported the development of the 
cardiac catheterization lab in Saskatoon, this year provided 
funds to in fact replace the lab, and a brand new lab in 
Saskatoon opened towards the end of February and in March. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to supporting those who are in 
need of a heart diagnosis and surgery. Mr. Speaker, the 
professionals make the decision as to where individuals lie on 
that waiting list. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Valerie Paterson 
couldn’t wait six months. In fact one month after she was put on 
the wait list, she had a cardiac incident with stroke and heart 
attack symptoms. She was rushed to emergency and admitted 
on April 10. 
 
Once admitted she spent another four days before an angiogram 
could be performed because there were other patients lined up 

in front of her. Some of these patients had been waiting up to 
three to four weeks in the hospital to receive an angiogram. 
Every morning the cath lab nurse reassessed patients to see who 
was most needy and who would get the procedure done that 
day. Finally after her condition continued to deteriorate, Mrs. 
Paterson was given the procedure which found that she had a 95 
per cent blockage in her main coronary artery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that patients who need an 
angiogram are waiting up to a month in the hospital before that 
procedure is done? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member knows from my first answer, the province’s 
commitment to working on cardiac activity in this province is 
significant. And in fact in this year’s budget, and in 
development with the regional health authorities, we have 
completely rebuilt the cardiac lab in Saskatoon. We also have a 
very good referral program with Regina and outside of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question that there continues to be 
more work to do. But, Mr. Speaker, the professionals on site 
within the regions provide the best care that they can and 
provide referrals when necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, people, patients with a 95 per 
cent blockage should be moved to the front of the list. They 
shouldn’t be told that they have to wait six months for an 
angiogram. 
 
In the time that Valerie Paterson was waiting for this angiogram 
that would determine the severity of her heart condition, she 
had to make two separate trips to the emergency room. Mr. 
Speaker, Valerie’s cardiologist told her that she needed an 
angiogram within a couple weeks; however the hospital said it 
would be six months. And the hospital then went on and told 
her not to keep bothering them, not to phone back. Because she 
couldn’t access a timely angiogram, she had to go to the 
emergency room twice. 
 
Can the minister tell this Assembly how this is good use of 
precious health care dollars that we seem to be lacking in our 
province? Wouldn’t it make better sense to ensure that patients 
like Valerie could get timely access to an angiogram for 
example instead of having to use those resources of the 
emergency rooms? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member opposite and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the professionals working within the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, including those in the 
cardiac care unit, want nothing but the best for the people of 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

Saskatchewan and are working very hard to ensure that we have 
the tools necessary to be able to provide that care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the professionals, in this case the cardiac 
specialists, will continue to work with the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority to ensure that we have the facilities and the 
equipment necessary to do the work to assist Saskatchewan 
residents. Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of confidence in the 
cardiac care unit at the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am assured that they will continue to work 
with the authority to put the tools in place. This government, 
Mr. Speaker, will continue to support the work that the regional 
health authority brings forward to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting Endocrinologists 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Valerie Paterson is lucky to be 
alive today. She believes that if she had been treated sooner, she 
wouldn’t have the extensive heart damage that she has. Mr. 
Speaker, as a type 1 insulin-dependent diabetic, Valerie 
Paterson requires ongoing care of an endocrinologist. 
 
She has come to the legislature today to tell the minister that the 
health care system is failing diabetics, especially in the 
Saskatoon area. She wonders why people who have chronic 
health conditions stay in this province because the health care 
system doesn’t seem to be able to meet their needs. Will the 
minister commit today to taking action so that diabetics can get 
the care they deserve and need in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have indicated to this House and the public at large in 
Saskatchewan previously that our efforts with regards to 
recruitment and retention of positions in this province is 
significant. Our commitment is ongoing, Mr. Speaker. I’ve also 
indicated that our commitment to ensuring that there are 
endocrinologists working in Saskatoon is significant as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the weekend I spent some time with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. And I committed to them 
that Saskatchewan Health will work closely with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and the College of 
Medicine to ensure that, on these hard to recruit specialists, Mr. 
Speaker, that we will ensure that our overall efforts are more 
aggressive and are intended to ensure that we meet the needs of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Funding for Avastin 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today on the front steps of the legislature patients suffering 

from colorectal cancer and their families assembled to deliver a 
message to this NDP government. They are asking for help 
from this government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
Combined with chemotherapy, Avastin has been proven to 
extend lives and is a standard of care for this disease. It’s been 
recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency for 
funding. The NDP continues to refuse funding for this drug. 
Will the minister reconsider his ill-thought plan and fund the 
drug Avastin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate and respect the courage and commitment shown 
everyday by cancer patients and their families in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, living with diagnosis and treatment is very hard, 
and that’s why this government has regularly increased funding 
to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and its drug program. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, over the last five years the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency’s drug program has seen funding increase by 22 
per cent in each and every one of those five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is why our decision on Avastin was a very 
difficult one to make. But, Mr. Speaker, that drug is still not 
universally available in any province in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
we believe that there is a role for the national government and 
the provinces to make together, through the common drug 
review and the national pharmaceutical strategy. Mr. Speaker, 
we will continue to monitor this program and will work with 
our other provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Avastin does not 
cure cancer. But what it does do is give people at least six extra 
months to enjoy and spend time with their family and friends. 
Bob Loeppky who’s in the gallery today, he’s already paid 
$10,000 of his own money for these treatments. He’ll be paying 
another $2,400 tomorrow as he goes for another treatment 
tomorrow. 
 
Given that this government is refusing to cover this drug, what 
can the minister tell these people that they should be doing? 
Should they be funding the drug themselves, or will he 
reconsider the fact that his government should be paying for 
this drug? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it smacks of two-tier medicine. People that afford 
it can get the drug, and people that can’t have to go without. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s appalling. Mr. Speaker, will this minister 
look into this situation again and re-evaluate and decide to 
cover the drug Avastin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I remind the member opposite that governments right 
across Canada — all of us provincial governments — are facing 
similar difficult decisions. And at this point in time, not a single 
jurisdiction in Canada is universally making Avastin available 
to its residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we made the decision earlier this year, it 
was based on three components. Mr. Speaker, the denial of the 
initial request. The second component was to review, monitor 
and evaluate changes that may occur while the drug is still 
available. And lastly, Mr. Speaker, make the drug available to 
those who could afford to pay it through the safe and secure 
administration of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all other provinces when a decision was made 
to deny the application of Avastin, they did not take the step 
forward to provide some compassionate coverage for those who 
could afford to do it. Mr. Speaker, today as I speak, the 
province of Ontario is looking seriously at the Saskatchewan 
model with a serious expectation of applying it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 27, the 
minister was asked if he would consider a copayment option for 
Avastin. The minister said at that time and I quote, “This is not 
a matter that we’ve considered up to this point.” Well it’s been 
three months since that request. Has the minister considered 
that option? Has he looked at other options and a case-by-case 
funding proposal, Mr. Speaker, because that’s what other 
provinces do. Or has he flat out rejected the people that we have 
here in this gallery needing Avastin? Is that what his 
government has done, or will he look at options? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the roll up to the decision that we and other provinces have had 
to make, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Cancer Advocacy Coalition 
released its report. One of the findings in the advocacy report 
was Saskatchewan has one of the most comprehensive drug 
coverage plans in Canada for cancer patients. The advocacy 
report acknowledges that, and I quote, “Unlike other provinces, 
Saskatchewan provides supportive drugs . . . to cancer patients 
from it global provincial cancer drug budget.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report suggests that Saskatchewan is the 
fourth-best cancer drug provider of all the provinces in Canada. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the support that Saskatchewan is giving 
takes into account what’s going on in other provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. We are monitoring this, and we support the 
development of a national . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The member 
for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Review of Infant’s Medical Treatment 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday the 
Minister of Health revealed that a pediatric oncologist from 
Alberta is now under contract to this government to review the 
circumstances in the baby Paige case. When these tragic events 
first came to the public’s attention, the official opposition called 
on this government for an independent review of that case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did it take three months for this minister to 
realize that this case does need to be reviewed independently? 
What was it in the internal investigation that has led them to 
call on a pediatrician from Alberta, a pediatrician oncologist 
from Alberta, to independently review this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
remind the member opposite that what I said on Friday was that 
we were having a pediatric oncologist from Alberta review the 
care path that resulted from diagnosis to treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not an independent review of the case. This 
is a second set of eyes, professional specialist’s set of eyes, that 
deals with diagnosis circumstances relating to baby Paige. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to say that baby Paige 
is responding to treatment, and our hopes, dreams, and best 
wishes go with her and her family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So far 32 people 
have been interviewed for a preliminary clinical report. But 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition called on 
somebody independent to come into the province and look at 
what has happened, he’s finally decided after three weeks to 
follow through with our recommendation. When you bring a 
pediatric oncologist from outside of the province to look at the 
care path, that is not an internal review. That’s an external 
review which we called for three weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. Why 
has it taken so long? What is it in the internal review that has 
led you to call on expertise from outside this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 
assure the member opposite and the people of Saskatchewan 
that there’s nothing in the internal review that would suggest 
that the second set of eyes on the care path was absolutely 
necessary. But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority decided that in order to ensure that the care path was 
followed according to normally acceptable procedures to 
pediatric oncologists that they would have a pediatric 
oncologist review that care path to ensure that one of the 
benefits and results of the investigation, Mr. Speaker, would 
ensure that anyone else presenting with the same circumstances 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

would have the benefit of the best practices available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are supporting the direction taken by the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority because the long-term 
goal in this case . . . baby Paige is number one, other people in 
Saskatchewan, number two. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 
important part of the review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Environment on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I am on my feet to ask leave to read a 
statement of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has requested 
leave to read a statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Environment. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Condolences on Airplane Crash Near La Ronge 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a heavy heart that I 
inform the legislature of a tragic accident. Early yesterday 
afternoon one of Saskatchewan Environment’s Convair 580A 
air tankers crashed near the La Ronge Airport during a training 
exercise. One northern air operations pilot was killed. Two 
others on board, a northern air operations pilot and a Conair 
training pilot, were taken to hospital with non-life-threatening 
injuries. 
 
The Premier has expressed his condolences to the families of 
those involved and my deputy minister and I went to La Ronge 
yesterday afternoon to meet with staff and to visit the accident 
site. 
 
I want to thank the staff and others in the community who 
responded to this emergency situation with professionalism: the 
emergency response and medevac crews, those who began the 
response to assist those emotionally affected by the tragic event, 
and those managing communications and support in La Ronge, 
Prince Albert, and Regina. 
 
The air tanker involved was one of two Convair 580As that the 
province recently took delivery on from Conair Aviation of 
Abbotsford, British Columbia. These planes are land-based, 
fire-retardant-carrying tanker aircraft. Alberta and British 
Columbia have been using Convair 580s for a number of years 
and the aircraft have served those provinces well without major 
mishap. 
 
We have forest fires every year in Saskatchewan and, every 
year, brave women and men step forward to fight them to 
protect our lives and our property. The three pilots involved 
were senior, experienced aviators, and each of them had more 
than the required training to captain an airplane of this type. Mr. 
Speaker, it is sometimes easy to forget how much training they 

have and how professional they are. It is also sometimes easy to 
forget how much courage they have. I think yesterday’s tragic 
accident underlines how dangerous their job can be and how 
much we owe them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the legislature to join me in 
expressing our support for the government staff who, as 
members of an extended family, are grieving the loss of their 
colleague and friend. I ask that you join me in wishing a speedy 
recovery to the two men who were injured in yesterday’s 
accident. And I also ask you to join me in sending our prayers 
and our condolences to the family of the pilot who died. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after some comments from a member opposite, I’d 
ask that we have a moment of silence in the Chamber. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 
great sadness that the residents of Saskatchewan learned about 
the death of an air tanker pilot in a training accident just north 
of La Ronge yesterday. 
 
All pilots who fly in our forest fire fighting fleet risk their lives 
to ensure the safety and protection of our northern forests. We 
are fortunate that these individuals have made the choice to 
serve in our provincial fleet. They deserve our utmost respect 
and sincere appreciation of the work they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fortunately, the two other pilots who were on 
board managed to escape with non-life-threatening injuries and 
are recovering in a hospital in Saskatoon. We wish them a 
speedy recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should also recognize the efforts of all those 
involved in the rescue of the pilots. I would like to join with the 
minister and all members of this Assembly in extending our 
condolences and prayers to the family, friends, and colleagues 
of the fallen pilot. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — At the request of the minister, I would ask 
everybody to rise for a moment’s silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — I thank all members and guests. Please be 
seated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 1,096 to 1,099. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 1,096 through to 1,099 inclusive 
have been submitted. 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — The estimates before the committee are the 
Department of Environment, vote 26, found on page 55 of your 
Estimates book. We have the minister with us and who will be 
joined by officials in due time. And I would recognize the 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Minister, the new 
federal government in Ottawa recently, and Minister Ambrose, 
the federal Minister of the Environment, last week made some 
further comments as far as her government’s plans to deal with 
the whole issue of climate change and particularly Canada’s 
commitment to the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
As you know, Minister, the former Liberal government signed 
on to the protocol and then when Russia was signed on to the 
protocol it became effective. And I believe there’s 160-some 
countries around the world that have signed on to the protocol. 
The current federal government seems to be of the view perhaps 
that some of the commitments made by the former Liberal 
government are unattainable and feels that perhaps we need to 
have a new plan to deal with climate change in Canada. 
 
And, Minister, I guess my question to you is: have you been in 
conversation with the federal Minister of Environment over the 
whole issue of climate change and the Kyoto Protocol? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. The simple 
answer to that is that we’ve had very brief conversation about 
this, and it hasn’t been a conversation that would go into great 
detail on the issues that are involved. I know that the federal 
minister is going to be in Regina next Monday and Tuesday for 
a meeting around bioresources and so at that point I plan to 
have conversations with her. I know that she has gone to the 
international meeting around the Kyoto Protocol, or is going 
this week. And so she will probably have some new information 
around there. 
 
I think frankly we are disappointed by some of the signals that 
we’re hearing about this, but I think we’re willing to wait and 
hear what kinds of plans that they have. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Chair, Minister, will you in your 
discussions with the minister, will you be raising the concerns 
that some people, some residents of our province have — and I 
think justifiably so — in that with . . . Canada has committed to 
an international treaty or agreement as such, and then we start 

backing away. I’ve had people talk to me about, you know, 
what is this doing for Canada’s reputation around the world. 
 
I mean, it’s one thing to say, well perhaps we disagree with, you 
know, the former government’s plans, federal government’s 
plans. And I mean they certainly talked about, you know, put a 
plan in place. But if you look at the facts, while the whole 
discussion and the ratification process of Kyoto was taking 
place, Canada’s greenhouse gas emissions were rising very 
rapidly, much more rapidly than many other countries, and in 
fact more rapidly than a number of countries who did not sign 
on to the protocol. 
 
But the concern that some citizens of this province have raised 
with me is that we’ve signed on — certainly it was under 
another political party who was in power at the time — but 
nonetheless Canada signed on to a worldwide agreement. And 
now if we’re backing away, what impact could we see by 
Canada doing that? 
 
And, you know, I guess I’m asking you for your opinion, if you 
have that concern. But more so I would like you to raise that on 
behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, raise that concern because it 
has been raised with me, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Our 
government is quite concerned about the recent steps that the 
federal government has taken, although they have indicated to 
us that they are going to set forward a plan sometime in the next 
six weeks. 
 
I personally have a lot of concern around Canada’s role in the 
international situation, and I think what we need to do is 
remember what is the ultimate goal here, which is to reduce the 
emissions worldwide to deal with some of the climate change 
issues that are related to emissions. 
 
In Saskatchewan we’ve been trying to develop a balance 
between taking appropriate steps around reducing emissions, 
but also recognizing that we have a number of industries in our 
province that require special work to deal with the emissions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that response. Climate 
change is an issue that there is a lot of differences of opinion. 
But I think most informed opinion realize that there is 
something happening to our climate and that we need to deal 
with it. And I think all levels of government need to be engaged 
on this issue. 
 
And I guess, I know whenever the issue or the subject of 
climate change is raised with your government, Minister, quite 
often members of your cabinet, colleagues, will point to what’s 
being done over at the U of R [University of Regina] with 
petroleum technology research institute or — I’m not sure if I 
got the name exactly correct — but with the sequestering of 
CO2 and using it to enhance oil recovery in our oil fields. And 
you know, that certainly is technology that needs to be 
applauded and used as a base to deal with this whole area of 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and so on. 
 
And I guess my question, Minister, would be: is there work 
being done within the province and particularly within 
SaskPower and Department of Environment and our 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

universities and any other bodies that have research capacity to 
develop systems whereby we can take the CO2 from our 
coal-fired power plants and use them in the same manner as 
what we’re using the CO2 that’s currently being used in the oil 
fields? And that CO2 is coming from, I understand, a plant in 
the US [United States] and it seems to me we are producing 
greenhouse gases — CO2 — in our province, particularly with 
our coal-fired power plants. And are we working on developing 
systems to take that and sequester it? 
 
The Chair: — Before the minister answers his question, I see 
that he has been joined by officials. And if he would like to 
introduce his officials to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay. Well maybe I’ll answer the 
question first and then we’ll . . . but well, I have . . . The 
officials I have with me are first, Alan Parkinson, the assistant 
deputy minister, he was here first; and then Lily Stonehouse, 
the deputy minister; Donna Johnson, our financial officer; and 
Dave Phillips, who’s the assistant deputy minister. So I 
welcome them here. 
 
And I will continue to respond to some of these questions 
around the whole issue of CO2 sequestration. And the answer to 
your question is yes. SaskPower has been working with the 
various industries around methods of sequestering the CO2 and 
looking at different places where this could be used. Other 
industries in southern Saskatchewan have been looking at this 
particular issue as well. 
 
What we are doing here in Saskatchewan as a government is 
working together with industry around a number of different 
possibilities. We’ve heard mention of the clean coal power 
projects or project, depending on the number that SaskPower 
may be involved with. There’s also a polygeneration project 
that has some aspects of this included in it as well. All of these 
things are being looked at very carefully, very seriously. 
 
One of the things that we are waiting for from the federal 
government is the confirmation that the $20 million deal that 
we had in the fall will in fact be continued. And our hope is that 
it will, because this is about providing power and dealing with 
the environment for the next 30, 40 years. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister. Part of the former 
federal plan was to set up a system of emissions trading or 
trading in carbon actually is what it was. There was an ability 
. . . or the plan was to pay those, well, farm producers because 
farm land is certainly one of the biggest carbon sinks that we 
have and also our forestry sector. But the plan was to match up 
the final emitters, large final emitters who were emitting a fair 
amount of carbon, and they would pay producers to sequester 
this carbon in the soil. 
 
And the reason I raise this, Minister, is I realize that this plan 
may not be in effect once the new minister releases her plan, but 
I just today, just actually just before walking into the House, I 
came across an article on the Internet where a number of — or I 
believe it was perhaps in one of today’s papers — where a 
number of companies were planning on setting up, were already 
doing business in Western Canada. And some of them are now 

pulling out of Canada and moving. One company’s moving 
back to the United Kingdom and that sort of thing. 
 
And this speaks to that whole issue of environmental goods and 
services; it’s a piece of that. And we discussed that earlier, 
where producers get paid for the environmental goods and 
service that they pay. The sequestering of carbon was a very 
significant part of that whole concept. Are you planning on 
raising that issue with the Minister of Environment when she 
visits here next week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — To answer the question, I think I have to 
give a little bit of an overview of what’s happening with the 
carbon sequestration trading of information. And for a number 
of years now there has been a limited market out of Chicago 
where these kinds of credits have been traded. 
 
Quite a few years ago SaskPower was involved with some of 
that. We in Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan Environment, 
received some money from SaskPower to allow us to replant 
some trees up in the northeast part of the province that were 
part of that concept as well. 
 
What is happening right now is that the Kyoto Protocol 
basically was going to provide an international basis for a 
common valuation of these kinds of credits. And that’s why 
there’s a number of concerns around the present uncertainty on 
the federal policy because it won’t be possible to do carbon 
credits just in Saskatchewan or even just in Canada, because 
this is a worldwide issue. 
 
In Europe they have developed some things that look like 
they’re a little bit broader in how they can do that. Now one of 
the really important or exciting parts of this whole issue is, how 
do you provide some certification or accreditation for the fact 
that carbon would be sequestered? And on that basis the 
international standard that appears to be developing is called the 
Weyburn standard and it’s the PTRC, the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre here in Regina which has the best 
information in the world around the reliability of statements 
about sequestration of carbon. 
 
And who’s interested in that? Well clearly industries are 
interested in that. Countries are interested in that. But more 
importantly bankers, people who run stock exchanges, 
corporate executives are, because they want to borrow money to 
get these carbon credits and they have to have something that 
can be comparable around the world. 
 
So this is a developing area where Saskatchewan and Weyburn 
and our work here at the PTRC at the University of Regina are 
world leaders. And we’re supportive of them. We’re going to 
continue to work with them. And ultimately the best solution 
will be a worldwide system of trading credits because then that 
can come back and it can be an advantage in our forestry 
industry. It can be an advantage in our agricultural industry. But 
until the rules are set in a way that everybody will accept, we 
are in a quite a difficult situation to make any government plans 
from Saskatchewan’s point of view. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, I 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

have a constituent concern that I’d like to raise. This couple has 
lived in Biggar for a number of years. They’re American 
citizens. They’re retired. He worked for the environment 
department in one or more US state, and she’s a retired 
schoolteacher. And they’ve moved up here. They took out 
options on farm land. They’re avid hunters. And they applied 
for citizenship to become a Canadian citizen and maybe 
because of their age, maybe because some health concerns, 
they’ve been denied. They’ve been very disappointed. 
 
But I understand, and correct me if I’m wrong, but the current 
regulations require a person to be a resident of Saskatchewan 
and a resident of Canada to purchase a Saskatchewan resident 
hunting licence. And they meet the residency requirement for 
Saskatchewan but are considered a visitor to Canada under the 
immigration status. 
 
Now non-residents cannot legally hunt many species of big 
game or coyotes. And he goes on to say that they have resided 
in Saskatchewan over six months each year, own a home, pay 
property taxes. They’re very involved in the community 
socially and have economic ties to community. And if this is all 
right, if there’s any loopholes or help that you can give these 
people as far as getting to purchase a resident licence and be big 
game hunters under their circumstance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The way that the department works to 
deal with the resident of Saskatchewan issue is that people are 
required to present a Saskatchewan health services card or 
evidence that they have a Saskatchewan health services card. 
 
I think the practical issue here is a federal immigration issue. So 
it may be one that they may want to contact their local Member 
of Parliament to see if there’s some response that could be 
there. Because it appears that if they had the status in Canada 
that would allow them to get a health card, then it wouldn’t be a 
problem. But it’s really that federal status that’s the issue. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well that is 
correct. That is the problem, and I gather from talking to them 
that’s not going to be resolved. They’ve been denied 
citizenship. 
 
But they have offered a process, and I’ll outline what the ideas 
are that you, as a provincial minister, could do to allow to get 
their licence. And I’ll just lay it out. 
 
The simplified process would be the validated landowner 
licence would be available to any person legally residing in 
Saskatchewan for at least six months each calendar year who 
can demonstrate residency, owns property and pays property 
tax, and has verifiable ties to the community, socially and 
economic, certified by an elected official. 
 
Availability of this licence type could be handled without 
fanfare with an annual press release and eventually included in 
the regulation synopsis at the next printing. This licence could 
only be purchased by personally appearing at the department 
office and providing required documentation of residency. 
 
The application fee would be the same costs as a non-resident 
licence so no loss of revenue would result, plus a $25 
processing fee. The department would issue a standard resident 

licence stamped as validated resident landowner. The 
application would apply for drawings and purchase tags, the 
same as resident licence holders from any licence vendor. 
 
That is their idea as I’ll pass it on to you. But they’re really 
caught between a rock and a hard place, you might say, because 
they cannot get citizenship, and they want to live in Canada. 
They want to live in rural Saskatchewan. And what they also 
would like to is buy land. Of course they cannot buy land as 
Americans either without, I guess, getting exemption from The 
Farm Land Security Act, which is not happening either. 
 
So again their concern . . . And they’re hoping to somehow 
have a process set up so people like them can still get basically 
a residency status even though they’re not Canadian citizens so 
they’ll allow this process to take place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well unfortunately the present rules don’t 
accommodate that, but the idea that they have is clearly 
presented on the record and we’ll take a look at it. But I think it 
would be unlikely that we would have a solution to their 
particular problems. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, I have questions about the flooding at Fishing 
Lake. It looks like the minister was anticipating this question 
and was probably waiting with great excitement to be able to 
tell me about the issue. 
 
I had the opportunity yesterday to go out to Fishing Lake and 
talk to the cabin owners both from the Leslie Beach, Murray 
Beach, and Chorney Beach areas. And I also had the 
opportunity to see the number of sandbags that have been put 
up in that area — 12,000 on one side of the lake, 15,000, and 
8,000. And they assured me that these sandbags are only good 
for one season as the sun will deteriorate them and they’ll have 
to do it again next year. 
 
I know that seven years ago, I believe it was, the last time there 
was the huge flood that was supposed to happen just once in 90 
years caused a lot of concerns. And at that time there was a 
proposal, or a number of proposals — I believe seven of them 
— developed to deal with the issue. And since then the 
individuals and the organizations that were concerned have 
decided that project number three, and that is the one where 
there is a gate put on to equalize the water that runs east into 
Hazel Lake and then into White Sand and into Assiniboia, is 
one that everybody is looking at. 
 
Can the minister give me an update as to what his department is 
doing in this area and where you are on the issue at this time? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for the question. The 
officials from the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority have 
been out to the Fishing Lake area and have been providing 
technical advice to the people there on the sandbagging that’s 
there to protect the cottages, and they will continue to do that. 
People will end up having to do the work themselves but they 
will continue to do that. So that’s what’s happening right now. 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

After the 1997 flood there were some discussions and some 
proposals that were outlined and there were a couple of projects 
that were identified. One was to change the natural outlet of the 
lake to create a ditch which would lower the levels. But that 
project was rejected because of environmental concerns that 
couldn’t be addressed or mitigated. 
 
There was another project that would divert some runoff from 
entering into Fishing Lake and it didn’t appear to have any 
major environmental impacts, but the project did not go forward 
because there were a number of objections from the Fishing 
Lake First Nation and some other problems that were identified 
around adequate control downstream from this project. So 
neither one of those projects went ahead. 
 
Since 1997 the Watershed Authority has been advocating a 
more practical solution which is that cottage owners should see 
about getting their cottages built above the high waterline and at 
a distance from the shore which would limit the potential for 
flood damage. So that’s been the recommendation since 1997. 
So they have been there and they are working with the people 
around the diking issues. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The constituents that 
I spoke to yesterday were very thankful for the help that they’ve 
had from the Watershed Authority. And they did advise me that 
project number three which basically would equalize the water 
at 529.7 between Fishing Lake and Hazel Lake could be put 
into place quite simply by basically putting in a gate, and when 
the level comes to 528 feet that they could close the gates. 
 
At the time this proposal would require no more surveys, no 
more planning. It wouldn’t even require a lot of waiting that . . . 
From the conversation I had yesterday, I understand that really 
the main objection was Fishing Lake First Nations. And the 
group has met with the chief and some of the band members in 
the last week, and they actually have another meeting this week, 
and it sounded like Fishing Lake was more . . . the First Nations 
was actually leaning towards supporting this proposal. It would 
cost very little money, and it really wouldn’t impact the First 
Nations, and it probably would help them because they are 
concerned about the water in their own reserve as well. 
 
So basically what the people around Fishing Lake are asking for 
is, if there is an agreement with First Nations, is there going to 
be any kind of a roadblock with the department? From my 
understanding the surveys and all work that had to be done had 
been approved, including okays from Fisheries and from 
Environment and all the departments it would have an effect on. 
 
So we do know that the amount of water right now is 24 inches 
higher than normal and that it only evaporates about 8 inches a 
year. So even if we don’t have a whole lot of water this summer 
or snow this winter, we do know that next year there’s going to 
be a problem with ice. Ice causes more damage than the actual 
water did and high winds, so the people are trying to prevent the 
problems that they know can occur if we don’t do something 
with it. And from all accounts, the simple solution is just a gate 
between northeast and northwest of one and two, ten 
thirty-three. And I’m hoping that your department has looked at 
this proposal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Chair, I’m pleased to respond to 

the question. I in fact have had a conversation with the chief as 
well, a number of weeks ago, and he indicated that they were 
taking another look at this. And if the conversations that can 
take place in the community have some common perspective on 
all of this, that makes a great deal of difference in sorting out 
how this can be dealt with. 
 
I can’t make any comment here without the technical advice 
from the Watershed Authority and then also the Environment, 
and obviously probably some of the Fisheries and Oceans from 
the federal government could be involved. But the proposals 
were looked at quite thoroughly before, and if this falls within 
that ambit, well then I think there’s a good possibility that 
something can be resolved. 
 
And I do concur with the member that the water levels will be 
remaining quite high this year and next year. So to get a 
common purpose to have a solution for this or at least a partial 
solution I think is everybody’s concern. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I do appreciate 
it. And I guess I understand that you can’t say today, right now, 
we can go ahead with it. But from my understanding, there was 
a considerable amount of work done seven years ago by your 
department, and there isn’t any reason to believe that things 
have changed a lot, except that the water levels have continue to 
increase. So if we do manage to find the First Nations in 
agreement with this, we’re hoping that something can be done. 
 
The gate itself, I understand their proposal a number of years 
ago was about $50,000, and if that’s all we need to do is put a 
gate on that culvert . . . and I am aware of what that would 
mean. That’s what I used to do before I was elected, is work 
with the C&Ds [conservation and development authorities], so I 
am aware of what the control structure would be like. 
 
But in the meantime, we’re also hoping that there’s an 
opportunity to put a temporary block in this fall if the okay can 
be gotten to ensure that we don’t have more of a problem next 
spring if there is a huge increase in water again. So I’m hoping 
that even if it’s a matter of something as simplistic as plywood, 
it can make a huge difference if you put it in front of this 
culvert. 
 
So I would ask for your response on that and also to ask if you, 
once you’ve had an opportunity to talk to the cabin owners after 
they’ve spoken with the First Nations, if you can get back to us 
as quickly as possible. 
 
The Chair: — A few more officials are present, and they are 
guests of the Assembly. So if you would introduce them for us, 
that would be wonderful. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. Thank you, Deputy Chair of this 
committee. I have also with me Bob Ruggles who is the 
assistant deputy minister, and I have Dale Hjertaas who is the 
vice-president of the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. And 
they and others have been helpful in sorting out some of these 
questions. 
 
I would like to now respond to the member and say that getting 
people together, working on a common purpose, is a very large 
part of sorting this out. But ultimately how it’s done will require 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

the engineers and hydrologists and others who are there because 
when water is diverted, then there are consequences other 
places, and those are the things that need to be looked at. 
 
But I know everybody in this particular situation is quite willing 
to work together to see what can be done. And that’s clearly the 
perspective from the officials in the Watershed Authority and 
Environment as necessary. And I guess I can’t speak for the 
federal government officials but I’m sure they would be helpful 
as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thank you for 
these. I’m going to take the information back to the cabin 
owners, and I just want to give you my assurance if there’s 
anything I can do when it comes to the organization back at 
Fishing Lake, please call me because I think if we can work 
together, this can happen fairly quickly this year, and I think it’s 
imperative. 
 
I’d like to thank your officials for the work they’re doing. And 
hopefully by fall we can say we won’t have to worry about 
spring. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Minister, we have an 
area in the province that has too much water in one of its lakes. 
And not just too far away we have another area where people 
are quite concerned about the level of water in the Crooked and 
Round Lake. 
 
We’ve discussed this before and you said there was ongoing 
discussions. I guess what I’m asking for is an update. Are we 
getting close to an interim agreement with the First Nations that 
are affected by the . . . around Crooked and Round Lake? And 
perhaps you could comment on that. I may have one or two 
other questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The response is that we’re very hopeful. 
People are working very hard — lawyers on both sides of this 
issue as well as the technical people, the engineers and others. 
And so everybody’s working very hard, and that’s a 
continuation, and I think a hopeful sign for us as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, are you prepared to comment on the 
possibility of an interim agreement for this coming year, as 
we’re in the second year of a two-year interim agreement with 
the First Nations communities that are affected by the water 
levels in Echo and Pasqua Lake? And I have an understanding 
that perhaps we may be able to reach an interim agreement with 
those First Nations communities around Crooked and Round 
Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that my previous comments about 
being hopeful and people working very hard also apply around 
the interim agreement issue because clearly interim agreements 
are building blocks towards a final agreement. And people are 
working very hard, and we’re hoping to get some of those 
agreements done soon. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I realize, Minister, that it’s difficult perhaps to 
comment without jeopardizing some of the talks that are going 

on. Just one final question on this issue. If an interim agreement 
is possible and if we look at the interim agreement on Echo and 
Pasqua that’s in effect . . . there was funding requirements both 
from the provincial and federal government. If the First Nations 
would agree to an interim agreement with some funding, is your 
government prepared to come up with provincial funding for an 
interim agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that very short but direct 
answer. 
 
Minister, last Friday we discussed the whole issue of 
biomedical wastes and the disposal of them, how they’re being 
handled in the in province. And you indicated that there is a 
plan which involves your departments, Sask Health, and local 
governments, for handling and disposing of biomedical wastes. 
I wonder if you could elaborate on that and explain what the 
plan is and how it operates. I also understand that biomedical 
wastes are deemed to be hazardous wastes and perhaps you 
could clarify that. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for that question. I 
have as of today’s date delivered to your colleague, the critic for 
Health, a copy of the Saskatchewan Biomedical Waste 
Management Guidelines which is about, I think, a 60-page 
document. And this is a document that’s created by the 
departments of Environment, Health, and Labour, and it has 
very detailed procedures that set out how biomedical waste is to 
be dealt with. And it goes through and defines all the different 
kinds. The guidelines are from 1998, and they are very detailed 
as I’m sure you will see. 
 
They address all the different biomedical waste groups. They 
address the handling, the packaging, the transportation, and 
storage issues, as well as the strategy for dealing with various 
wastes that are encountered in a medical situation. This 
information is what the health regions utilize to develop their 
own internal policies and procedures for each hospital or each 
clinic. And so that’s the process and the procedure that’s done. 
And there are different levels of concern or contamination, and 
procedures are set out there as to how they’re dealt with. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, could you be somewhat more precise as 
far as the disposal? Are biomedical wastes . . . You had 
indicated on Friday that there is a landfill, a privately owned 
landfill site in Saskatoon that is — I take it from your 
comments — been permitted to deal with biomedical wastes. Is 
that in fact . . . are those the facts? Are there other landfill sites 
within the province that are permitted and approved to deal with 
the disposal of landfill or biomedical wastes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for that question. The 
segregation of these hazardous wastes, that is done in a whole 
number of different classes and a whole . . . Only a small 
portion of the wastes at a health care facility are actually 
biomedical waste. So effectively the classes that are described 
. . . and I’ll give you all the different names to give you some 
idea: animal biomedical wastes, cytotoxic chemical wastes, 
human anatomical wastes, human blood and body fluids wastes, 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

microbiology laboratory wastes, sharps wastes, and special 
precautions wastes. 
 
And I think each of these different areas have slightly different 
procedures as to how they should be dealt with. And some of 
those particular products would go to different disposal sites. 
Some of them may go to the same site. But there’s procedures 
for all the different areas. And I’m not sure if I can answer all 
your very specific questions about those, but we can try. So 
thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, minister, for that explanation. I guess 
my questions are pertaining more towards the type of wastes — 
human fluids and blood products, sharps — some of, I guess, 
considered the most hazardous. What are the regulations that 
are in place in this province for handling of those very 
hazardous waste products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. And once 
again you’ll allow me a opportunity to educate you and the 
public around how this works. 
 
There is a regulatory framework to deal with this. The disposal 
of wastes in Canada, which includes biomedical wastes, is 
primarily subject to provincial control. And as such a number of 
statutes have evolved within in Saskatchewan which either 
directly or indirectly govern the treatment and disposal of the 
wastes in the province. 
 
So the different pieces of legislation that are here in 
Saskatchewan include The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, The Municipal Refuse Management 
Regulations, The Water Pollution Control and Waterworks 
Regulations, The Clean Air Act and regulations, The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act and regulations, The 
Dangerous Goods Transportation Act and regulations. And then 
on top of that, there are municipal bylaws that would be 
possible to pass under our urban municipalities Act or rural 
municipal legislation. 
 
There’s no direct reference to waste in The Public Health Act, 
but it does provide power to local authorities, the medical health 
officers, to abate health hazards. And so that could include them 
making comments or rules around disposal practices. 
 
So all of these different pieces of legislation could deal with a 
particular substance or problem. And as I said before, municipal 
laws may apply, and in some rare circumstances, there may be 
some federal rules that apply. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, under the regulations, is it permissible 
to incinerate things like blood products, human fluids, the 
by-products of surgery within our hospitals? What are the 
regulations as far as incineration of those type of wastes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that there are a very 
few hospital incinerators still in operation in the province. 
There’s not . . . There aren’t as many as there used to be 
because of the high maintenance costs. They’re quite expensive 
to operate and use and also the emissions controls that are 
required. And some of those rules around emissions would be 
provincial laws, but also federal laws. And the department has 
in this rules or in some of the other rules, a list of the kinds of 

materials that can be incinerated. 
 
Most of the hospitals in Saskatchewan use independent 
contractors to treat and dispose of biomedical waste as required. 
And some hospitals will do some pre-treatment on-site before 
it’s delivered to their disposal or the waste disposal companies. 
 
We know that some of the most toxic substances in Canada all 
go to an incinerator in Alberta just west and north of Edmonton. 
And so it’s possible that some very small quantities of medical 
waste would go there, but that would be unlikely. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So just to be clear, Minister, did you say that we 
have a few incinerators located . . . and they are located at 
hospitals that do incinerate some of the most toxic wastes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the response to that question is that 
the hospitals also comply with the rules, and they would only 
incinerate those kinds of substances which would fall within the 
guidelines and rules of the department. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, to your knowledge then there aren’t 
any incinerators in the province that are — other than perhaps 
the ones you referred to at the hospitals, that is — are permitted 
or licensed to deal with the most toxic of medical wastes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to the question is that 
there isn’t very much incineration of products in the province 
other than those hospital places. There may be a couple of 
incinerators that deal with incineration of lab cultures and 
animal wastes, but right now any biomedical waste that can’t be 
treated by the facilities in our province are shipped out of the 
province. Typical the biomedical waste has been shipped to 
Alberta, Ontario, or North Dakota. The federal government 
tracks cross-border movement of hazardous waste. And of the 
facilities that Saskatchewan Environment permits, currently 
there are approximately 44 tonnes per year composed of 
anatomical, pharmaceutical, and cytotoxic wastes being shipped 
to North Dakota, and 7 tonnes of pharmaceuticals waste being 
shipped to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I understand that 
the environmental protection Act, the federal Act, is being 
reviewed, and if my information is correct it’s in the second 
year of a five-year review. And my question, Minister, is what 
involvement have you and your department have . . . do you 
have in this review process as far as bringing forward concerns 
from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The method whereby we participate in 
this kind of a review is through the provincial committee. The 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment are 
involved. And this particular committee includes every 
province and every territory and also the federal ministry. And 
it happens that this year I’m the president of that organization 
on a national basis and this particular, the particular issues 
related to the environmental protection Act have been the 
subject of discussion. So our Saskatchewan Environment 
officials involved with the review have submitted a proposal to 
that review committee. 
 
Ultimately it is the federal government’s responsibility around 
changes to the Act, but the traditional way of doing that has 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

been working in conjunction with all of the jurisdictions in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, there has been some concerns about this 
Act and the review process expressed to me. And they deal with 
the issue of virtual elimination, in other words of tracking toxic 
substances. And I believe in the Act, or at least the proposed 
changes that are dealing with measuring toxic substances and 
then legislating that, you know, a very small amount will only 
be allowed and so on. 
 
And the concern that’s being expressed is that the more . . . or I 
guess our ability to measure these substances. As they improve 
with the advances of technology, we may get those levels down 
to such a level of detection that’s so small that’ll virtually 
eliminate the use of some of our common products; like road 
salt will be eliminated because it’s deemed to be a toxic 
substance. And with the whole measurement system that’s 
being proposed, there’s some real concerns being expressed. 
And I wonder if you’ve heard those concerns, and if you are 
bringing those concerns forward at the federal level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that your question has identified 
one of the problems with the existing legislation which is being 
reviewed, and that’s the fact that under the legislation there’s 
only one category which is toxic. And so some of the proposals 
that have come forward have included more categories which 
would then allow for more appropriate rules for the different 
categories. 
 
So that’s the kind of issue that’s being discussed on a national 
basis. And we’re hopeful from a Saskatchewan perspective that 
we will get better rules which will allow us to protect the 
environment. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Hart: — So just to clearly understand, Minister, the level 
of involvement that you and your officials have. You’ve 
mentioned that you are working through the council of 
environment ministers. Do you have officials within your 
department working with other officials from other provinces 
on these specific issues? If you just give me a sense, Minister, 
of what level of participation Saskatchewan has in this review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The involvement that we have from the 
department includes staff from the environmental protection 
section of the department. And we have officials that sit on the 
committee through the Canadian Council of Ministers of 
Environment. 
 
We also have people who sit on the steering committee or the 
management committee as it relates to some of this legislation, 
the CEPA [Canadian Environmental Protection Act] legislation. 
And then that work is then reported to the ministers and will be 
discussed at the next ministers’ meetings, probably in June and 
in September. 
 
The other aspect of this that is not always recognized is that 
there is a full-time office in Winnipeg that has the role of 
coordinating this work across the country and fielding many of 
the issues and making sure that everybody participates. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister, for that answer. I have 
had a meeting with the environment committee of the chamber 
of commerce, and this was one of their issues that they . . . And 
I’m sure they have certainly presented their concerns to you. 
And I think they have some, you know, very legitimate 
concerns. 
 
I don’t think we’re advocating that we throw the . . . you know, 
water down environmental protection. But I think we need to 
make sure that whatever rules and regulations and legislation is 
in place that it is . . . you know, find some middle ground that 
we can continue to operate and businesses can operate. And that 
we don’t eventually find ourselves in a situation where things 
that we use and really are harmless, but because of some 
oversight in drafting of regulations, may be deemed to be toxic 
and so on, Minister. 
 
Minister, my colleague has some questions from 
Shellbrook-Rosthern, and I will turn the questioning to him. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I would just like to comment on the 
last question that was hidden in the words of my friend 
opposite. He made reference to the consultation with the 
committee, the environment committee of the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce. I’ve met with them as well so I’ve 
heard a number of these concerns raised. And it’s my 
understanding that they met with a group of deputy ministers 
related to the economy within the last two weeks around some 
of the same issues. 
 
I’d also like to inform the House and public that this particular 
Bill and the changes involved are at the parliamentary 
committee in Ottawa right now under discussion so that there is 
review at that level as well. So thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials again. I just have a couple set of 
questions. I hope it won’t take too long. And it’s regarding the 
hunting regulations and the hunters’ guide at a particular area 
just south of my hometown of Spiritwood. I believe it’s in zone 
54. And it’s to do with the, first of all with the amount of 
wildlife in that area, especially deer. And also a bigger problem 
is the amount of elk in that area. And when I look at the guide, 
the last couple years there’s only been 25 tags for that specific 
area. 
 
There was a meeting in Spiritwood where councillors and 
reeves got together to discuss issues in the area. And somebody 
from Prince Albert, his name was Denis Engele from SERM 
[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management], was 
also there at that meeting, and a biologist out of Meadow Lake 
— and I just forget his name, pardon me for that. But anyway 
we raised that issue with Denis Engele and the other official in 
regarding to the hunting licences for elk and wondered if the 
licence could increase from 25 to a possible 75 or 100, 
whatever. Now in regards to that, there has been surveys and 
there is an abundance of elk in that area; probably in the 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

neighbourhood of 4 to 500 or so. So 25 does not do justice to 
that area. 
 
One of the things that concerned me with one of the answers 
from the regional biologist was the fact that, in order to change 
the hunting regulations or the numbers to the hunting 
regulations in that area, two things need to be looked at. One is 
the sportsmen, and one is the First Nations. Mr. Minister, can 
you comment? 
 
Yes, I agree that the sportsmen have a say and the First Nations 
have a say. But what I’m saying is, to the landowners in that 
area, what about them? They’re the ones that have to put up 
with the damage done by the elk and they get very little if any 
compensation to this problem. And it’s a growing problem, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The process that’s normally used is to get 
information from many sectors so clearly that includes the First 
Nations. It looks at the previous year’s records around hunting 
in that particular area, but it also relates to information received 
from landowners, ranchers, or farmers around some of the 
numbers of animals that are there. 
 
And it is a bit of a process to change these quotas, but given the 
fact that you’ve raised this here and they’ve had some public 
meetings, I think people will be looking at this and seeing if 
there can be some other quotas set in this particular area. So it is 
a process, and people are trying to gather information from a 
number of different places, but the landowners and the ranchers, 
farmers are not excluded. In fact their information is welcomed. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you for that answer, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Chair, just maybe to spinoff from that in regards 
to the amount of wildlife in that area, especially deer, and it was 
also mentioned at the meeting in Mayfair where your assistant 
minister was. The question was also raised at that time. 
 
One of the things I want to read to you and that . . . in regard to 
last year. A letter came from a southern Saskatchewan 
landowner in regarding white-tailed and mule deer. And that is 
in regards to farmers, landowners that own their land in rural 
municipalities and wondering if the government has been 
looking at allowing outfitting in the south, south of the forest 
fringe, especially for farmers and ranchers who own their own 
land and have an abundant of wildlife on their land. 
 
Has the government looked at this? And if you have, what is 
your comments in regarding to allowing some kind of outfitting 
to take place on farm and ranchland south of the forest fringe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that question that once 
again allows me to give a bit of an explanation about what’s 
going on. There are a number of requests around setting up 
some other ways of organizing the hunting. Saskatchewan 
Environment and Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food officials 
met with some representatives from five different RMs [rural 
municipality] and two regional economic development 
associations in the month of March this year to basically hear 
from the proponents around some ideas that they had. 
 
And the meeting was, I think, a positive meeting in that they 
could talk about this. And the issues that were raised and 

discussed were around non-resident hunting being one of the 
several tools that the community and the farmers and ranchers 
in an area could use to generate some extra revenue for their 
local area. So that was one of the issues. 
 
A non-resident hunting licence is a drawing card in a way. It 
generates a lot of other economic opportunities when people 
have that ability and that’s whether it’s camping or angling or, 
you know. So there are other kinds of things that can be done. 
So a person might do some hunting one day and then do a 
number of other activities in the community during the week 
that they’re in the community. And so this becomes then a 
drawing card as part of a tourism package. 
 
And there also was a sense from this group of people that they 
didn’t want to use the existing licensed outfitters, but they 
rather wanted to do it in some community fashion. So that was a 
point that was raised. 
 
Now the issues that come out of this for the government will be, 
what are the potential impacts that it may have on resident 
hunters access to private land. That becomes one of the issues. 
So a Saskatchewan person who wants to hunt now, normally if 
they get the approval from the landowner, can go and hunt there 
because they’re a Saskatchewan resident. So this setting up 
some kind of a control process for non-resident hunters on a fee 
basis could then cause some problems for Saskatchewan 
hunters. 
 
And also there was a clarification in this particular instance that 
what they’re really interested in was the trophy class 
white-tailed deer buck. That was a big drawing card in this 
whole area. 
 
So ultimately the issues and where the balance has to be 
developed is between the resident hunters and the non-resident 
hunters — that’s the non-resident having contributing maybe 
more dollars, but not being here on a year-round basis — and 
what is that balance between these groups of users of the 
provincial wildlife resource. 
 
And we know from many conversations — whether it’s with 
some of the organizations in the province, wildlife federation, 
or from the outfitters association — that there are many 
differing views about this. And so we’ll continue to listen to 
various proposals. But it’s not as simple a task to change what 
has been the traditional structure in Saskatchewan as some 
people would purport it to be. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. One thing 
I know for a fact is the fact that yes, we’ve got to look at the 
outfitters. Yes, we’ve also got to look at the wildlife federation. 
But I think what we also must consider is that the landowner 
himself, the landowner himself needs to come up with some 
kind of extra revenue for a resource that they look after. 
 
And I’m looking at this amount of damage wildlife cause to the 
farmer, ranchers, and the ag producer. And yet through Sask Ag 
and Food they . . . if a person puts in a claim for wildlife all 
they can get is 80 per cent. In Manitoba and Alberta it’s 100 per 
cent coverage, but yet in Saskatchewan it’s only 80 per cent 
coverage. So this is one of the things I think that the minister 
needs to address with Sask Ag is they change this policy from 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

80 per cent coverage to 100 per cent coverage as Alberta and 
Manitoba has. 
 
Also when we look at the outfitters and the sportsmen, 
especially with the sportsmen saying they don’t have access 
then to this farm land, well if they would just go and ask the 
farmer permission to hunt, I’m sure most of the farmers would 
allow them to hunt. But a lot of the problems with the hunters is 
they come out and they think that they can just go on the land 
whenever they want and do whatever damage they feel like. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The biggest question is, though, that the farmer, rancher, the 
producer has to have some compensation for allowing the 
wildlife to be on his land and having this outfitting, of some 
sort. And I know, I understand, Mr. Minister, that there is some 
problems with that that needs to be addressed. But maybe you 
could be started with just provincial people that want to hunt, 
that there can be some outfitting guidelines for the farmer, 
rancher, to allow outfitting on his land south of the forest fringe. 
And then if it works good, have out of province. But right now 
just for the province of Saskatchewan hunters it may not be a 
bad idea because it would give some revenue in the hands of the 
farmer, producer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I will accept your comments as a 
suggestion in the debate. And it is another perspective that . . . 
And as I indicated before, officials have been looking at this 
and listening to the various proponents of different perspectives. 
So I appreciate your comments. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. Minister, your 
predecessor in Environment initiated a green strategy and 
extensive consultation process last fall. There was a series — as 
I don’t have to tell you — there was a series of six meetings 
across the province. And the understanding . . . I attended a 
number of them and it was my understanding, and I’m sure the 
people that attended, that you would be bringing forward a 
green strategy for the province. 
 
To this point in time, we haven’t seen any formal document 
tabled. And I’m just wondering, Minister, where that process is 
at and when we can see some results of that consultation 
process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the simple answer to that question is 
we are working very hard on this particular project. And it’s 
something that I know officials and I have been working at 
from the government perspective. Also we’ve been working 
right across government with every department to get 
perspectives to add on to all of the information that we have 
from the public. And we’re planning to bring forward our green 
strategy very soon. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, one of the areas that’s in limbo is the 
whole area of solid waste management, and particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan with the regional waste management authorities. 
Last year there was a need for an injection of cash just to keep 
some of those authorities operating. 

What is the status this year with these authorities? Have you 
been in talks with the association and with individual authorities 
as far as the viability of their operations for this current year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I met with your former colleague, Mayor 
Wally Lorenz, just last week, and this was the topic of 
discussion. He was here as a representative of the Association 
of Regional Waste Management Authorities of Saskatchewan, 
and the specific topics talked about related to, well, the 
long-term plan, the medium-term and short-term plan. And we 
are working with them to make sure that we have a long-term 
plan. 
 
What we’ve been getting, information from different groups 
including management people, engineers, and others around 
how our waste is managed in Saskatchewan, it’s not a simple 
choice. One of our big challenges obviously in Saskatchewan is 
a relatively low volume of waste and long distances, and so we 
end up having to evaluate all the things that we do in light of 
that. 
 
But the conversations are ongoing, and we are working very 
diligently to end up with an overall plan that we think will serve 
the province well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I understand that one of the issues 
with that organization and I believe with the larger municipal 
governments who deal with a larger volume of solid wastes is 
the whole area of paper fibre. And there certainly has been 
discussions and a call for a stewardship program in that area. 
And I know discussions were under way. Where are we at as far 
as a stewardship program for paper fibre in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Saskatchewan Environment has been 
working on a solid waste management strategy, including a 
multi-material recycling program. And there are key 
stakeholders that are part of an advisory committee. I met with 
that committee approximately six weeks ago. They met again 
last Friday. They are working with advice and information from 
a number of professionals, whether it’s engineers or 
management people, around a number of the products. 
 
And so the types of material that are being discussed include 
paper, metal, clear glass, and plastic, as we already have a 
system for the recyclable bottles and cans, aluminum cans, and 
also now for paint. But there are some other products that end 
up in landfills. There’s also a discussion around what one does 
with materials that are compostable and how that fits into the 
overall structure. 
 
The goal is that they will come forward from their advisory 
committee, which includes members nationally — some from 
Toronto, some from Vancouver — representing some of the 
lines of material which are part of the overall process. And 
we’re looking for a report from them hopefully by the end of 
June which would give some strong suggestions about how we 
might handle this in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, as part of those discussions, are the 
milk containers, are they part of the discussion? It just seems to 
me we have deposits on various other beverage containers, 
including fruit juices and those sorts of things. And yet the milk 
containers, there’s really no incentive for consumers — no 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

financial incentive — for them to recycle milk containers. And I 
was just wondering if they are part of those ongoing 
discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The milk containers — and I assume 
you’re talking about the cardboard milk containers and the 
plastic ones — are not presently included in the deposit system 
where we pay a fee and then get some money back when we 
return them. So they have been included in the discussion 
around paper and plastic in the multi-waste issue. And that is 
the kind of question that is part of the discussion. 
 
One of the great challenges that arises in this whole area is that 
at some points of time some of the recycled materials have a 
fair industrial value, and people will actually pay for them, 
whether that’s paper or whether it’s shredded plastic. Other 
times they don’t. We’ve run into a specific issue right across 
Canada, but especially in our area, as the US dollar goes up, 
that also affects the price . . . or as the Canadian dollar goes up 
against the US dollar that affects the price that we get because 
some of the customers for some of these recycled products are 
in the United States. 
 
So it’s an area where very smart people involved at the 
municipal waste side — whether the city of Saskatoon, city of 
Regina, or in some of the private waste disposal companies, or 
in some of the other industries which produce these packaging 
materials and others — all of them are working together, and 
we’re anticipating some very good advice around a plan that we 
can ultimately implement. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minster, last year it was necessary for your 
government to put a cash injection of I believe around $700,000 
into the Regional Waste Management Authorities. Are you 
anticipating that there’ll be a need this year for a further cash 
injection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — When I met with the group last week this 
was one of the issues that was up for discussion. The $700,000 
that was provided last year primarily dealt with accumulated 
debt. And all of the various regional waste management 
authorities were able to gather together their financial 
information to show the accumulated debt. And not all of them 
needed some assistance, but the $700,000 was provided and it 
dealt with that accumulated debt. 
 
Some of the same kinds of issues are arising this year, and 
there’s a willingness — and that’s what we indicated to them — 
to get the information and share it to see what requirements 
might be there in this year or next year. And so those kinds of 
discussions are ongoing. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, if I understood you correctly then, it 
sounds as if there will be a need for additional revenue or a cash 
injection to that organization so that they can continue to 
operate and do what they are intended to do. And the need for 
extra revenue, is that because of the depressed prices of the 
recyclables, or is it a structural problem where municipalities 
are only able to pay a certain amount for waste management 
services and the authorities aren’t able to operate with the 
revenue available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well these are exactly the kinds of issues 

that are being discussed, but I would identify probably the 
greatest cost increase relates to the transportation cost, which is 
a fuel cost. So that is clearly something that has changed quite 
dramatically from last year, and also the fact that some of the 
products that come from the recycled materials have less value 
going back into the operation. 
 
I think what happens on a national level is we need to compare 
the kinds of costs that we have in Saskatchewan for disposal of 
waste with some other jurisdictions in Canada. And I think that 
we are, in typical Saskatchewan fashion, very efficient and 
careful how we do these things. And we’ll continue to try to 
have that balance of using the dollars that we do commit to that 
in the most efficient way, as well as being as environmentally 
friendly as possible. And in Saskatchewan we can often do 
things in a more efficient way than other places. So thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Chair, I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials for the information they provided this afternoon. And I 
certainly appreciate their willingness, the minister and his 
officials, their willingness to answer the questions that we have 
asked and for that I thank them. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I move 
we report significant progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that we report progress. Is it the pleasure of the 
committee to do so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is agreed. We will recess. I want to 
thank the officials from Saskatchewan Environment. And we 
will recess now for a few moments while we await the officials 
from Learning. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The members of the committee will 
come to order. The estimates before us are the estimates for the 
Department of Learning, and I’d like recognize the minister and 
invite her to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. With 
me today are various officials from the Department of Learning. 
To my right is Wynne Young, deputy minister. To my left is 
Larry Steeves, the associate deputy minister. To Larry’s left is 
Naomi Mellor, executive director, education finance and 
legislative services. Sitting directly behind Naomi is Nelson 
Wagner, executive director of facilities. Directly behind Larry is 
April Barry who is the executive director of early learning and 
child care. Directly behind myself is Don Hoium, executive 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

director, accountability, assessment and records. And sitting 
behind Wynne Young is Karen Allen, executive director of 
corporate services. 
 
That’s the officials that are here with me today, Mr. Chair, and 
we look forward to questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. So the estimates 
for Learning are before central management and services. Are 
there questions? I recognize the hon. member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And welcome, Minister, and to your officials. It’s a pleasure for 
us to have I believe an hour and 45 minutes of time together to 
consider the estimates for the Department of Learning. 
 
I have a number of colleagues, Minister, that have specific 
issues that they’d like to raise with you, and I’d like to allocate 
this first period of time to their concerns. So, Mr. Chair of 
committees, my colleagues would like to ask questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the minister, 
thank you for an opportunity to raise some questions that have, 
in some cases, provincial import and in other cases, very 
specific to my own constituency. 
 
Madam Minister, with the importance of the role played by 
regional libraries in the province of Saskatchewan, would the 
minister be able to indicate for us whether or not her department 
provides financial support for regional libraries throughout the 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. What 
we do within the Department of Learning, we have a vote, 
provincial libraries. And what this unit does is develop 
legislative and policy framework for the operation of 
Saskatchewan public library system. 
 
We administer a variety of grants and act as a coordinating 
agency for the system. Information technologies, some sharing 
of services. So I mean, I could go into a little lengthier of a 
definition, but I guess the best way for us to do this is, a 
majority of our focus is maximizing the co-operative use of 
information technologies and establishing public access to 
information databases, virtual reference services, and 
coordinating interlibrary loans. 
 
So it’s a lot of the accessibility areas. So if there’s something 
specific that you would like to ask, we would work at getting 
you a more specific answer. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, from the response you gave it 
would seem that most of the direction of the department as it 
relates to regional libraries is administrative and support, as 
opposed to direct financial involvement or direct financial 
assistance. Is my understanding correct? If not, could you 
identify the amount of money that the department allocates to 
regional libraries? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I don’t have a lot of specific detail as to 

the regional libraries here with us today. I mean, you will have 
the numbers for total budget of $9.365 million and also 
transfers for public service, and this ties into the accessibility 
and information sharing. And there was a 2 per cent increase in 
the grant, and funding for the CAP [community access 
program], previously funded within the department. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — If the minister has additional detail that she 
would like to provide or share with us, we would be happy to 
receive it. 
 
The issue of accessibility and the role that regional libraries are 
playing in rural Saskatchewan seems to be increasing. It’s 
interesting that in this modern day of technological advance you 
would think that maybe hard book activities would be 
diminishing but that doesn’t seem to be the case. And so I guess 
the question becomes, has the minister or her department given 
consideration to possibly increasing the funding that is going to 
help underwrite program delivery in regional libraries in future 
budgets? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What I will say to you is, I actually have 
toured the Palliser Regional Library that is housed partially in 
Moose Jaw and went through a very good afternoon of meeting 
with the board talking about the issues that they have. There 
was the 2 per cent increase, but there’s a lot of issues. 
 
And you’re accurate, and when you say, you know — and you 
think of all the technologies and BlackBerries and wireless 
Internet and Internet — that the call for books may be reduced, 
but in most cases, in a vast majority of cases that’s not accurate. 
People still like books. We still like to be able to sit and read 
books whether it’s for resource, whether it’s for pleasure, 
whether it’s for hobby — whatever the reason. What’s 
accessible on the Internet, many of us still like to read it in hard 
copy and to have a book to read. 
 
One of the big pressures for the regional libraries is the cost of 
transporting books from one location to another. And there is 
some issues, I know, with some changes that have been 
proposed from the federal government having to do with a book 
rate, postage that may be charged because many of the regional 
libraries and the branches that are in smaller communities still 
may rely on Canada Post. If they don’t have a courier service, 
Canada Post is the only access they have for shipments of books 
as they’re being moved from one location to another. 
 
So there’s a number of concerns that are out there. But the 2 per 
cent increase was included in this year’s budget, and these are 
issues that we will continue to work on and look at because I 
know people right across the province of Saskatchewan rely on 
libraries. And they are an important resource in the 
communities where they reside, and we need to maintain that 
service. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chair, it sounds like the minister is quite 
sympathetic to the needs of rural libraries and the people that 
they serve, and I think we would await with some anticipation 
their consideration of the financial requirements for regional 
libraries in the future. 
 
I’d also like to note that it’s pretty hard to curl up in front of a 
fire with a nice BlackBerry, and maybe a book is indispensable 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

in that respect. But nevertheless I’d like to move to another 
topic if I may, Madam Minister. 
 
I have a school in my constituency that has faced its limitations 
in terms of student population. And in order to achieve a level 
of viability, the school has undertaken a very aggressive 
recruitment process, going to international countries and 
identifying students that would like to come to the community 
and be there as international students to get their education here 
in Canada, to participate in the community life. 
 
[16:15] 
 
It’s not an exchange program as such. It’s a recruitment effort to 
bring those individual and hand-picked students to the 
community. In many instances the student population wouldn’t 
exceed probably 40 or 50. And I guess the concern that I would 
like to bring to the discussion today is that when those students 
are recruited — and they pay a substantial fee in order to access 
the educational opportunities in these schools — that’s income 
that is badly needed in that particular school. And yet there is 
the concern that any funding that might come from the 
provincial government through the enlarged school division 
now will be reduced to offset the increased revenues that are 
generated by these international students. 
 
I’d like an assurance from the minister today that that simply 
will not happen — that what would be the outcome or the result 
of cutbacks to offset those monies would be penalizing the 
initiative of the school that has undertaken this particular 
program. Can the minister give us that assurance today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well I have to say the member opposite 
has started off with a couple topics that hadn’t been top on our 
list here to bring along information for. With the information 
that we have here, yes it does look like that tuition that is paid 
into a school is looked at as other-source revenue and would be 
looked at with all other other-source revenue that will come into 
that school division and would be deducted from the foundation 
operating grant. I mean this is one of the difficulties, one of 
many difficulties that comes up when we are looking at 
simplifying the foundation operating grant and removing some 
of the inequities that have existed and been kind of added into 
the foundation operating grant over the years. 
 
So you’re accurate. It would be deducted. You know, it would 
be something that could be looked at as we’re reviewing the 
foundation operating grant as the members opposite are aware. 
The first half of the foundation operating grant has been 
removed or we are about halfway through. Those changes were 
implemented this year. We are looking at working our way 
through the rest of the foundation operating grant over the next 
short while and having it implemented in the next budget year. 
So this is something that could be looked at through that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chair, through you to the minister, I’m 
wondering if there isn’t an opportunity for the department to 
look at these kinds of, kind of, unique circumstances in a 
special way. What you’ve got basically is a very small school in 
a tiny, remote community that is threatened with closure 
because of the decline in rural population and the assimilation 
of one farm by another and the growing land base that is 
associated with some of these farms. So the school is under 

threat from declining numbers and possible closure. 
 
The administrator in that school and some of the community 
people saw this recruitment activity as an initiative that would 
help offset the inevitable, I suppose is the best term to describe 
their situation. And by including the income that they generate 
by undertaking this rather extensive and unique effort to save 
their school, we’re really penalizing their initiative. And I don’t 
think that that’s the kind of thing we want to see happen. 
 
Now I’m not sure that this kind of example is going to be 
replicated in small schools throughout the province. It may only 
happen in one or two or half a dozen or so. But where you have 
that kind of determination on the part of the administration and 
the community to save their schools by this recruitment of 
international students — who are paying substantial monies to 
come to the province to benefit from our education and from 
good quality instructors that are already there — there might be 
a necessity on the part of the department to consider the unique 
circumstances of those types of schools. And if the minister 
could give us some undertaking to do that, I think that would 
help assuage a lot of the fears that surround this particular 
initiative. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. As I previously 
stated, phase 1 of the review of the foundation operating grant 
is complete and we’ve seen with this budget that phase 1 has 
been initiated. Phase 2, we are going into a process of 
consultation to finish doing a review of the foundation 
operating grant. 
 
What we want to look at is any of the . . . I mean this includes 
the special circumstances that may exist in any of the school 
divisions, whether on the expenditure or revenue side. There 
will be a consultation process that we will go through with the 
divisions, with the directors of education, and there will be 
opportunity for this board to make representation to the 
department when we’re looking at phase 2, and put their case 
forward as to the issues they have and how they see being able 
to work this into their division and an asset in their division. 
 
So that’s part of phase 2, a review of the foundation operating 
grant. And we would be more than happy to include this as one 
of the topics that needed to be touched on. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, on the other side of the coin, 
I have another situation that’s developing in my constituency 
where some international students who have become clearly 
aware of the quality of education we offer in this province have 
come to communities in my constituency, have taken up 
residence with local people, and are attending local schools 
without paying a premium. And they’re just there as new 
attendees at the school. 
 
The concern, I think, is that they come, they don’t pay a 
premium for the educational service because they’re maybe 
related to somebody in the community or whatever. But there is 
a scenario here where you’ve got some of these students who 
take advantage of the educational opportunities we provide with 
no additional fees. But there is a cost associated with delivering 
education to them as it relates to providing English as a second 
language. 
 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what the position is of 
your government and your department on assisting with the cost 
of English as a second language in these circumstances. If there 
is no provincial funding for this type of opportunity, then the 
cost falls back on the local taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well you have brought a few difficulties 
to this kind of question. The regulations were just changed not 
that long ago to avoid this type of situation. When you have 
fees that are charged to international students that may be here, 
part of the reason for those fees is to cover these extra costs, 
whether it will be English as a second language, whatever the 
circumstance may be. So if it was being done properly, these 
extra costs would not fall back onto the taxpayers in that 
division. So this is something else that we’re going to have to 
look at in our regulations and maybe add into the phase 2 
review process. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, I’ve 
got a school, the Three Lakes School, and it’s in the town of 
Middle Lake. And it’s part of the new Horizon School District. 
And it’s got K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12]. 
 
And the roof has been leaking. And it’s at the point where 
they’re setting out 5-gallon pails. They’ve done their B-1 form, 
sent it in, inspector’s been out. He inspected and said it’s one of 
the worst roofs he’s looked at. And they’ve patched, patched, 
and patched. They’re concerned now with what’s going to 
happen with . . . mould or something’s going to happen next. 
And the big question is, when do we get a roof? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite, we may need to 
get a little more information from you. If there’s been a B-1 
submitted it’s not something that we recall here right now. So it 
may have been fairly recent . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No? 
 
Anyway there’s just under $10 million that is budgeted for 
these types of projects. There’s a number of them. Roofs are 
fairly common when it comes to block funding so it’s . . . Just 
to let the member know, it’s not on a first-come, first-served 
basis. So what I need to do is get a little bit more information 
from you to do a bit of background on this. If you’re saying it’s 
not a recent issue, we should have information on it somewhere, 
but not on my fingertips here. Middle Lake is . . . Okay. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Madam Minister, the school is called Three 
Lakes School and it is in the town of Middle Lake. And their 
concern is . . . I mean we definitely need the roof fixed. It’s a 
growing school which is rare in rural communities. We added 
on a classroom, a mobile classroom the other year. They added 
a second mobile classroom on and the school is still growing. 
We’re in the Bourgault circle so a lot of the people that live in 
the area are employed at Bourgault Industries so the outlook for 
the school is good. 
 
The gymnasium had a leaking roof and of course the real 
answer is a pitched roof and that’s what they did on the 
gymnasium — put on a pitched roof. And that would be the 

correct answer for this one too with a school that’s going like it 
is. We should have a pitched roof. And I’m looking forward to 
an answer on when we can get it because it’s needed. The big 
concern is, yes it’s leaking, but what do we do if mould sets in 
and then we lose the school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well there’s a fairly formal process that 
goes through. I just want to assure the member that it’s not done 
on a first-come, first-served basis. It’s done based on need. So 
what we will do, we will get information from the department 
and we can pass it along to your office here at the legislature. 
Okay? 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. It’s been inspected even, so it’s not 
just the B-1. The inspector has been out and he said it’s one of 
the worst roofs around. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, and your officials, I’d like to ask you some questions 
about the proposed school in Oxbow. I believe the B-1s have 
been sent in and approved. Just wondering when the finances 
will be made available to start construction. 
 
And I know the community is interested in expanding the 
school construction that has been proposed by the department. 
One of the teachers that I was talking to was particularly 
interested in having an expansion of the industrial arts area. His 
information to me was that the industrial arts area will be 
shrunk under the current design from what he previously had in 
the high school, and he would like to have that enlarged as well. 
 
So I’m just wondering what the status is and what the process is 
in the design programs when the department does the designing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, for 
your patience. My understanding is that the Oxbow project is 
almost done its planning stage. The dollars were put forward for 
that, and that stage is almost complete. The member will know 
that we have a system of assessing major capital projects and 
the requests that are put forward, and they are priorized on a 
list. 
 
The top priority for sure is health, fire, structural safety — and 
that is divided into three subcategories. Basically health and 
safety are the top priorities. Also if it is a federal agreement or a 
federal partnership with the federal government, there also may 
. . . it will put it into that category. Priority 2 is critical space 
shortages. Priority 3 is structural repair, building systems, and 
building restoration. Priority 4 is non-critical space shortages. 
 
The Oxbow project is currently sitting at the top of the priority 
1 A-list. Funding is committed for this year. This list is 
reviewed every year for priorities and other projects that may 
come forward. But as it sits currently, Oxbow is at the top of the 
list, and as soon as resources become available it would be . . . 
That’s where it is right now is at the top of the list. So I mean if 
we . . . Hopefully no other priorities come forward where it may 
be health and safety or other issues that are a higher priority 
because as it sits Oxbow would on the approval list. 
 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I know 
that there was some serious problems in the gymnasium last 
year or the year before. Maybe it happened twice where they 
had structural problems that they actually had to evacuate the 
kids out of the gymnasium and not use it for a period of time. 
 
When it comes to a new school and the design of a new school, 
is the criteria for every school the same? Do they all have to 
meet the same criteria, or are there some exceptions where 
some schools may get one type of construction — certain 
different things within the facility — and another may get 
something different? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Actually you know, I forgot a piece of 
the question you asked previously. You’d talked about the 
industrial arts and the shops — the Oxbow project. Those type 
of facilities would be purely numbers driven, so it would 
depend on enrolment at the school. Now that kind of ties in with 
the question that you just asked. 
 
Yes, there are basic guidelines and core guidelines that are 
required for facilities. And there is flexibility, and some of that 
may change, depending on the enrolment in the facility, also 
program delivery within the facility and the age, what type of 
school it is. So while there’s a number of variables, yes, there 
are, there are basic guidelines for facilities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So there is some flexibility within the 
system to allow for design changes that may be proposed to a 
division regarding a particular school. Would that be correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes, the school can move space within 
the facility guidelines depending on the variables that may be 
there: enrolment, type of school, program delivery. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay thank you. This project is 
combining four schools — the Oxbow Elementary, the Oxbow 
high school, I’m told the Alameda School as well, plus Glenn 
McGuire, which is a special-needs school. So I’d like to ask a 
few questions about the Glenn McGuire School. 
 
What is the department’s policy on special-needs students? 
Does the department have the desire that those students remain 
in their home community and therefore are trained in that home 
community school? Or does the department also approve 
schools where a special-needs student may be in a residential 
setting where they’re attending one school rather than the 
individual schools within their own particular communities? 
 
[16:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I think the member will know and be 
well aware of the program changes that have taken place over 
the last number of decades. The McGuire School was initially a 
residential . . . well is a residential program. 
 
And we see more and more now that families would prefer to 
have their family member as close as possible to them and to 
home. So while we may be moving away from that, most 
families, I think, would want their children to be as close as 
possible to home but still being able to access as many services 
as they can for their child. That’s, I think, a trend that we’ve 
seen over the years, and I think you will . . . I mean, that’s just 

the way that this facility is going also. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Well it certainly would 
seem to be the way that the department is moving with this 
facility. Yet the parents whose children are in that facility want 
it to remain as a residential community where they have access 
to the new school so that they can integrate into the whole 
student population but, nevertheless, have their residential area 
in close proximity so that they can access that. 
 
The parents that were there . . . there was a meeting down in 
Oxbow a couple of weeks ago. A good number of the parents 
that have their children in the Glenn McGuire School wish their 
children to remain in that school under a residential setting. And 
yet the changes that the department is making don’t facilitate 
that. And so are there any other residential schools as part of 
education across the province, because these parents certainly 
wish it to continue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite may be aware that 
there has been a decision made by the board to close the 
residential program, and the department is committed to 
working with the parents. There has been contact with parents 
up until very recently. It’s still continuing on. And we’ve made 
the commitment to work with the parents to look at other 
options and what may be there to suit the needs of the families 
and the family members. So we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, when you talk about 
working with parents, that’s good. But in what vein are you 
working with parents? Are you working with parents to take 
that child that’s in Glenn McGuire now and put it into the 
school where their parents are resident? Or are you looking at 
working with the parents to maintain the residential component 
of the Glenn McGuire School? 
 
You take a look at moving those students from the Glenn 
McGuire into their home communities. You’re looking at 
having at least one special ed teacher there. You’re looking at 
having an aide for every one of those students. You’re looking 
at changes to the facilities that may be needed in the case of 
those individual schools, depending on the severity of the 
impairment that the student may have. You’re looking at, I 
think in most if not all of these cases, making changes to the 
school buses to provide lifts in them for wheelchairs. So you’re 
looking at some major costs throughout the system to take those 
8 to 12 students and put them in the various communities from 
which they were resident. 
 
Have you looked at that as well as the difference between the 
cost of making those changes and providing those teachers in 
every one of their community schools versus having a 
residential setting where I believe there are two to three 
full-time staff employed at Glenn McGuire and I think about 
four aides as well to look after those students? 
 
So you’re looking at some major costs to move those students 
out whereas it may be beneficial to have them in the residential 
setting where most of the parents want them to be. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, one of the things that I do 
want to say is part of this work that goes on is with the families 
but also with the school division in the area. And the member 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

opposite really laid out a couple of options and some of the 
difficulties that go along with each of those options. But I 
believe that we need to work with the families and with the 
division and come to the best solution for that child as we can, 
for that student, whomever is in McGuire. We need to make 
sure that their needs are looked after and that there are other 
options that are fully explored before any final decisions are 
made. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Deputy Chair, and 
Madam Minister, and your officials. I appreciate the 
opportunity to ask you about three separate issues today. 
 
And I’m going to start with the school in my constituency, 
Porcupine Plain Composite School, that has been looking for 
expansion and some major work done on it in the last few years. 
It’s one of the schools that I believe has a lot of hope in the 
future because of the enrolment and the potential enrolment, but 
they have some needs within the physical building itself. 
 
The people are very much looking forward to the opportunity to 
enhancing the school. It’s used as part of the community, and 
it’s still the heart of the community. And I’m wondering if you 
could tell us where this school is on your list of schools that are 
deemed to be valuable in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The Hudson Bay, Porcupine Plain high 
school and according to the list that I have, it is replacement of 
the high school. It is on the major capital request list as a 
priority 3. So it is fairly far down on the list of priorities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. When you say fairly far down, I 
need to have a more definite answer. Can you give me an idea 
of what the number is and, more specifically, what year we’re 
looking at? 
 
And I’ll tell you, our concern is of course when it comes to 
school closures — and it’s happening right across the province 
— the number of students is important but also the shape the 
school is in is also one of the considerations. And if the school 
is allowed to deteriorate, then it’s going to be far easier for 
somebody to say, we’ll just move the students rather than fix up 
the school. So you’re going to have a lot of support from people 
in that area if the minister and her department determines that 
this list is much closer to the year 2006 than it is to 2010. Thank 
you, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I would again remind the member 
opposite, to be a priority 1, it has to be a health, fire, structural 
safety issue. Health and safety is the top priority on the list. 
Priority 2 is a critical space shortage. The Hudson Bay project 
would fall in as a priority 3, so it would be structural repair, 
building system, building restoration. 
 
So we look at priority 1 as the ones that have the highest 
priority of having funding allotted to those projects. So when 
you’re on the priority 3 list, chances are pretty slim at this point 
in time. Now when the member is asking for, is it next year, the 
year after, is it 2010, when can I see this project move up and 
be a priority 1, this list is reassessed yearly. There will be 

projects added. They will change, their priority will change. 
And it also depends on the funding that is allotted to capital 
projects. So there’s many other factors that can come into play 
on how a project is on the list and when it may move up and 
when it in fact may have funding committed to it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. I say thank you for the answer, not 
for the real answer, because I’m sure this isn’t going to make 
the people happy in my area. In fact probably an attack of black 
mould is something that would make them happier because it 
would move it up the list. 
 
My next question is regarding a young person that was at my 
house yesterday. It was a First Nations young lady from 
Saskatoon who is now attending school in Yellow Quill. She 
hadn’t been going to school in Saskatoon for a year and a half 
and she’s 16 years old and she moved back to Yellow Quill 
because she has a relative who is making sure she goes to 
school now. 
 
I had asked the question the last couple of years about student 
numbers and tracking. And I’d been given some assurance that 
September of last year there was going to be student numbers. 
And it sounded that things were going to come in place so we 
could be sure that our First Nations students, that everybody 
had a student number, but specifically that students moving 
back and forth between reserve schools and urban schools or 
small-town schools would be tracked. 
 
The young people that are not in school, as the minister knows, 
are most at risk of everything that we’re all scared of. And this 
beautiful young person that was at my place yesterday should 
have every potential in the world but for a lack of education. 
And we spent most of yesterday afternoon talking about the 
chances she had to fulfill her dreams if she didn’t have an 
education. 
 
So my question to you is, is the tracking system in place? If it’s 
not, when is it going to be in place? When can we be sure that 
we are giving our young people who have to go to school, that 
it’s mandatory that they be in school, we can make sure that 
they are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. This is something that’s come up in question period a 
couple of times. And it’s nice now to have a little more time 
when I can give you a little more complete of a answer, and do 
a little more of an explanation as to how this process has come 
about. 
 
Previously . . . well still, the school divisions have the 
responsibility and have traditionally kept the numbers of 
students within their division. It has not been something that’s 
been done within the Department of Learning. 
 
[17:00] 
 
What we’ve been working on is a tracking system that will put 
in place a provincial program. So we’ve begun in Saskatoon 
where we have had a sign-on by all the schools. We’re running 
a pilot project. Currently we have about 95 per cent of the 
public schools that are signed on to the project that have been 
adding their information to it, but we only have a level of about 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

63 per cent of the First Nations schools. 
 
So part of the problem is we do a verification of numbers 
through the health system, but the health numbers can’t be used 
for tracking within the school system. So you have a variety of 
school divisions that have all had their own numbering system 
and system that they have kept track of students. Also within 
the First Nations community, First Nations schools and through 
INAC [Indian and Northern Affairs Canada] have also had 
maybe the same system, but not the same numbering system as 
what we have been using. 
 
So what we’ve been working on is compiling this into a 
consistent system where we have a clean set of data where we 
don’t have duplication of students, duplication of names, maybe 
something as slight as a spelling difference that may cause a 
duplication of a student’s name. 
 
Like I say, we’re at about 95, 98 per cent of all of public 
schools that are signed on and we have about 63 per cent of 
First Nations schools that are on the system. We hope to have 
100 per cent coverage of the province by this fall and then we 
will be able to get some true numbers. 
 
What we’ve been doing . . . And I know the other day in the 
House I mentioned numbers between 1,000 and 1,500 students 
may not be attending school in the city of Saskatoon. Those are 
numbers that were put out, not by the department because we 
have never put out a number because it’s never been our 
responsibility to keep numbers of students within school 
divisions. That’s been something that’s been the responsibility 
of the division. So those were from a community group that had 
taken on this project and was looking at the issue in the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
So what we hope to do by this fall is to have more accurate 
numbers. And then we’ll be able to move ahead planning and 
looking at what’s the best way to make sure that there is that 
ever important connection between students and the school 
system, family and the school system, and what do we need to 
do to make sure that that connection is built and re-established 
or established with these young people or children that for some 
reason have not been part of the system so far and have not 
been receiving the education that they need. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I concur 
with what you’re saying. It’s just that it’s taking too long. We 
started talking about it, I think, the first time in the House when 
I was the critic for Education about five years ago. And we 
talked about that. And even when we were on the committee 
dealing with children that were being exploited in the sex trade 
. . . And we have to be able to attract these children. 
 
And especially our concern are the First Nations children 
because after September 30 when the schools do their numbers, 
there really isn’t the same prevalence or importance to making 
sure that we know where they are after that. We don’t want 
them just to be seen as a number for making sure they get 
money into a school division. That’s not the point of it because 
we have a responsibility past that. And I know the minister feels 
the same. 
 
And my last question is about the Pleasantdale school that is 

closing. There was an article in the paper about it. There’s lots 
of good points for the Pleasantdale school, or good issues, and it 
made a difference on many hundreds of children’s lives. But 
they have one program going that I thought was excellent, and 
they taught Cree at the school. 
 
The students from Kinistin First Nations came to the school to 
get their high school education, and that school offered Cree. 
And now I’m concerned that it will no longer be available to 
them. I know that Kinistin they’ll have their own school system. 
But it should be an option, and I’m wondering if that school 
division is looking at it in some other schools. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I just want to let the member opposite 
know that our director of First Nations and Métis education, 
Darren McKee, has been working with the division. I agree 
with you that this is a very important opportunity in the 
province of Saskatchewan that we need to recognize the special 
nature and some of the advantages that we have here and that 
we can promote here. And I think having Cree and Aboriginal 
languages within the school system is one of those. So with Mr. 
McKee involved, I’m sure this will be recognized as an 
advantage that it is. And it’s an opportunity for many students 
and will need to be continued on. So thank you very much for 
your comments. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Minister, I’ve just 
received a copy of the letter from the Lemberg Town Council to 
the new Prairie Valley School Division. And in the letter the 
council expresses great concern about the fact that their local 
bus contractor will not have his contract renewed. And also they 
are very concerned with the plans of the school division to have 
maintenance at the school in Lemberg done by their employees 
out of Regina. 
 
And so they’ve written the school division and expressed their 
grave concern over the fact that services that are available 
locally will no longer be used by the school division. In fact 
they’ll all be centralized out of the school division office here 
just out of Regina. And I’ll just quote a couple of sentences 
from their letter, and I’m quoting: 
 

Needless to say, council and indeed all the residents of 
Lemberg and district are extremely angry and upset over 
this blatant move to centralize everything in Regina and 
leave rural Saskatchewan with nothing other than a tax 
bill. 
 

And then another sentence, Minister, is: 
 

In your effort to save tax dollars with these proposed 
changes, you will in effect cost rural Saskatchewan more. 
Every time we lose a resident or a business in our town, 
the tax base shrinks. And when the tax base goes down, 
the mill rate goes up. 
 

Minister, I would like you to respond to the concern. How 
would you respond to the concerns expressed in this letter from 
the town council of Lemberg? 
 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I would thank the member for his 
comments. But I would like him just to actually kind of have a 
look at it, maybe read it over again — not right now but 
sometime when you got a few minutes. You talked about your 
local division and a local bus contract. Those are local 
decisions. Those are decisions that are made by the board. 
 
One of the things we had talked about in the early, early 
discussions about the school division restructuring . . . I know 
many people talked about saving dollars, and there was 
questions asked a number of times in this House. What were the 
projections? What would be saved? What would be kind of cash 
in your pockets at the end of the day? 
 
And any of the answers that I heard, and any of the information 
that I’ve seen since I have been Minister of Learning, is that 
that was never the intent. It was more efficient use of the 
resources that we have to provide equitable services right across 
the province of Saskatchewan, to put in place the regional 
pooling so we would see more equitable spread of the resources 
that were there. I believe that is still as valid as it was when this 
whole process was initiated. 
 
So to your local community, the letter was written to the 
appropriate group — to the board. Those are the folks that make 
the decision as for the contracts and where they access their 
services from. So I really don’t have any comment on that, but 
that’s the appropriate place to send the letter. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I think you’re missing the point here. 
They’re expressing concern about the increased cost of 
delivering education services to their community and all other 
communities within the school division. Because if you’re 
bringing a plumber and a carpenter out of Regina to do 
something that a local contractor could provide with no travel 
costs, that’s one of their concerns. 
 
And their larger concern is that every time you centralize and 
amalgamate, it leads to erosion of services and the erosion of 
economic activity in rural Saskatchewan. And I think what 
they’re saying in their letter is that you need to be cognizant of 
this and perhaps provide some direction to the school divisions 
— these mega divisions — that wherever possible, provided 
that it does not cost more, that they should be utilizing local 
contractors and local services within communities. It could be 
part of rural economic development or at least minimizing the 
impact of the erosion of services and erosion of business in 
rural communities. And I think that’s the point they’re making 
and they felt that this should be raised at the board of education 
level, but also with you, Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — No, and I thank the member opposite for 
raising the concerns. But I will say again, I mean local boards, 
local communities, local services within those communities — I 
believe that is understandable right across the province. We all 
know that you need to access services in your community if you 
want to maintain them, if you want to use them. It’s more viable 
in many cases and I’m sure that that will be something that the 
board will look at when it is looking at contracts and looking at 
decisions that it’s making in those communities. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Chair. To the minister: 
Madam Minister, it’s my understanding that the Department of 
Learning grants daycare licences. I’d like to know if that’s 
correct and what the criteria is before a daycare licence is 
granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes, we do. We do the licensing. As the 
member may be aware, this unit was just moved into the 
Department of Learning in February of this year. We feel that it 
is a very good fit within the department and that early learning 
and child care is appropriately placed. We do do the licensing. 
 
There’s a number of criteria — much, much too lengthy for me 
to recite here and now. There is a fair bit of regulation. The 
licensing will depend on space, will depend on need, will 
depend on meeting a fair number of regulations to do with 
health and safety, fire code, space — again for children 
depending on the ages. It’s fairly involved. But along with that 
licence will come funding for spaces and a pile of responsibility 
for those young citizens of Saskatchewan. So yes, it’s much too 
lengthy to kind of run through here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, about a month ago you should have received 
in your office a letter from a couple in the southeast corner of 
the province regarding a daycare licence that was lifted. 
 
And if I understand correctly, you indicated the daycare 
program had just been put into your responsibility in February. 
So a lot of what transpired would have transpired before this 
came into an area of your responsibility. However, a follow-up 
would have come from your office. At that time, back in the fall 
a couple had applied for, had gone through as they indicated the 
process of applying for and had gone through the screening, the 
training, the long hours of work, the extra insurance, and were 
granted a daycare licence. 
 
[17:15] 
 
And unfortunately last fall a accusation was made against the 
couple which resulted in their daycare licence being lifted. The 
question they have to ask though, is when they went through the 
process — and, Madam Minister, you may or may not be able 
to answer this, but you can let me know — when they went 
through the process of applying for, they’d gone through all the 
screening, they were told at the time as well that there would be 
adequate services in place if they ever had a problem. When this 
accusation was raised, nobody was there to assist them. 
 
And the Department of Learning, it took a long time. In fact it 
was just later this spring they finally got back to the couple and 
said, well we’ll reinstate your licence but we’re going to send it 
out to you in the mail. And the couple asked the question, well 
how come nobody was willing to even come and talk to us 
personally? 
 
Now the issue that arises is the fact that an investigation was 
undertaken. Within a week the RCMP said there’s nothing to 
substantiate the accusation and their recommendations were that 
the couple should have had their daycare licence back. It wasn’t 
granted. As a result at the end of the day when Learning says 
we’ll reinstate the licence, we’ll just send it out in the mail, 
what has transpired is everything is dragged out over a period of 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

months. The daycare’s no longer operating. In fact the couple 
are no longer together. It’s actually a sad story. 
 
I’d like to know, Madam Minister, what the department did in 
response to this letter and how they did the follow-up. It seems 
to me that where the couple said there’d be the support 
mechanism there, it never was there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Chair, I have to say to the 
member I don’t have a lot of this information. Well I don’t have 
any of this information specific to this case. I know there is a 
whole process that goes through when there is a complaint, the 
investigation that is followed through on. 
 
And I know there’s always a concern that maybe we’ve 
overreacted, but I would hate to think that we didn’t react 
quickly enough or stringently enough and put at risk children. 
So there’s always that balancing act, and it’s always a difficult 
process to go through. 
 
But what we will do, I will get a little further information from 
you after, and I can get a more detailed answer or response to 
your questions this afternoon and get it back to you, because we 
don’t have any of the detail specific to that case here with us 
today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. And 
I’ll get a photocopy of this shortly so that you have it before, 
your officials have it before the end of the debate on Learning. 
 
But I guess, Madam Minister, and I’ll ask this. I won’t prolong 
the questioning, but I think what I’d like from you is, in view of 
this information that I’m going to be sending over and how 
everything transpired, what the department . . . now that you’re 
responsible, what you can learn from it and how we deal with 
this down the road because I don’t think a couple or anyone — 
it doesn’t matter what part of the province — should have to go 
through what this couple went through. 
 
Like the lady said, I was given a phone number for victim 
services. That’s after she’s been devastated. When I called, 
victim services said get a lawyer. What kind of response is that? 
Like, this is so inhumane. And that, I think you’ll see — as you 
go through the letter — that where they were assured all these 
services would be available, they weren’t available. 
 
So what I would like, just to ask of the minister if you could get 
back to me and also if you could do a follow-up with this 
couple, because that was the understanding I had indicated. 
When they called, I had asked them to send the letter to your 
office, to DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment] — and this, I’ve got the copy and we can get 
back to them, because I think this is an issue that needs to be 
dealt . . . We need to protect children, but we also need to 
protect individuals from accusations whereby they have no 
recourse to follow-up. 
 
And in this case as well, without charges, as the lady said, I 
can’t even go to court to prove my innocence unless I go to 
court and take in a lawsuit which she’s not able to do. So 
Madam Minister, I’ll look forward to your response. Thank 
you. 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — We will look into that and get a little 
more detail on it, and then we will pass it along to your office 
what we can. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
Thank you for entertaining the questions from my colleagues on 
issues that are various and from various parts of the province. 
 
Following up on our last session, I appreciated the minister 
sending over last session appendix B, the 2005 mill rates for 
different divisions. As the minister knows, the date for setting 
mill rates for 2006 was on May 8. Does the department have 
updated information in terms of the mill rates for 2006, and 
could we ask for a copy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes we do. And we actually . . . We had 
had a discussion this morning that we had passed you the 
preliminary kind of document. So we do have a document — 
same set-up — that is the final mill rates, and we can table it so 
you will have a copy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh is it? 
Oh. It’s our only copy. We’ll get a copy and send one over. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. I very 
much appreciate that. 
 
In the time we have left to us, I want to touch on a couple of 
general topics. One of the realities of our province that have 
been discussed in question period and elsewhere is the changing 
demographic of our student population. And for whatever 
reason — I won’t get into that tonight — but for whatever 
reason there’s a significant loss of students in various parts of 
the province. It’s more marked in rural, various rural locations, 
but it’s also a reality in the urban centres. 
 
Minister, have you looked forward in terms of forward planning 
or looking ahead and saying, if these demographic trends 
continue in this location, it’s going to likely mean that the 
school in that location is not going to be viable in a year from 
now? A year ago, going into the future, has there been some 
work by the department to try to anticipate what the impact is 
on changing student demographics on the viability of schools in 
the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — This is an area where the department 
looks at projections about three years out, same as the school 
divisions will. We will work together. Depending on the 
process, whether someone’s looking at new facilities, I mean, 
there will be work done looking at projections out. 
 
I was thinking of this the other day. I went out to visit my 
mother where she originally was born and raised. She come 
from a family of 13. She had a family of four of us, and I have a 
family of two. So you know, there’s many reasons for numbers 
going down. Birth rate is one of those. While the member 
opposite may not have wanted to look at that during question 
period, it is a factor that has a big effect on the school system. 
 
So it’s something that we do projections on, but three years, 
maybe out as far as five. But we don’t have a highly 
sophisticated system to go, you know, past that. We’re really 
making some loose projections at that point. 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I recognize that there are a 
number of factors that all influence these trends, and certainly 
Saskatchewan isn’t the only jurisdiction in the world where 
they’re occurring. I mean to differing degrees, depending on 
other issues, they have greater or lesser impact. 
 
The question is, is when we’re looking forward, we also then 
are going to be faced with the reality of trying to comprehend 
what is going to happen in terms of transportation. That as these 
demographics unfold, they’re potentially are going to be areas 
where we get into a huge geography and a huge challenge of 
transportation times on busing or things of that nature. 
 
And I’m wondering is the department looking at the concept — 
and I don’t know what the right word would be, but I would call 
them schools of necessity — where it may not make a whole lot 
of sense based on the enrolment that a school is in a certain 
physical, geographical location but because it is unfair and 
unreasonable to transport students, especially elementary school 
students beyond a certain length of time, that a school has to be 
there in some form. And I’m wondering if the department is 
starting to look ahead to that because it sort of gets to be too 
late when all of a sudden the realities are all in front of us and 
we haven’t did any fore planning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite will know that in 
phase 1 of the foundation operating grant review, you know, a 
number of factors were simplified and clarified. 
 
Phase 2 will include the factors where . . . [inaudible] . . . 
isolated and small school factors that are in there. We recognize 
the importance of these issues. Currently you will know that 
these are decisions that are made locally by the boards, but 
those factors remain and will be reviewed in phase 2 of the 
foundation operating grant. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I appreciate the 
department’s commitment to changing these factors or formula 
in terms of the foundation operating grant. But I think that some 
decisions are going to have to be made that may not have the 
kind of influence on these factors as we would like, that it’s 
simply a matter of necessity. 
 
And that’s why I call these, potentially, schools of necessity, 
that it may not fit snugly and easily into the foundation grant 
formula. But it simply reflects the fact that you can only bus 
children so long in a given day and there’s going to have to be 
compromises and recognition of that in some way. And I’m not 
confident enough that a simple formula is going to properly 
address that. 
 
The other potential component for dealing with this issue in the 
broad context is — again I might not be using the right 
terminology but — what I would call virtual schools, schools 
that are virtually computer based or computer driven, Internet 
linked, and things of that nature, distance education potentially 
linked. As again we get these expanding geographic realities, 
are we going to have to look at some of these creative 
alternatives in terms of providing a proper curriculum to 
students in some of these remote areas? 
 
[17:30] 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member will know that there is a — 
well may not know — that there is a fairly sophisticated 
e-learning component within the department, and not only just 
for remote or isolated schools but it can be for . . . and not just 
Internet but also through satellite can be accessed. And not just 
for schools that may be smaller or more isolated, but also can 
provide some expanded curriculum or expanded elective 
courses for students that may be in locations that don’t have 
access within their region to more unusual courses or different 
options that are available in larger centres. So that’s there. 
 
But also I just want to remind you that phase 2 of the 
foundation operating grant, when we are looking at the review 
of it, there will be some extensive consultations that will be 
looking at this whole area of isolated schools, small schools, 
what’s needed, what opportunities are there, what options are 
there. So that’s something that will be involved in the phase 2 
review. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in terms of 
the work, is there a spreadsheet or anything of that nature that 
outlines this anticipated demographic shift to students going 
forward? Has the department got to that stage of actually 
developing something specific in the geographic regions or the 
new school divisions, and if they have, is that available? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There is a provincial report that’s 
updated semi-annually that does projections for the province as 
a whole. And it’s public information, so we can get you a copy 
of that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. The province as a 
whole, is it broken down by these new reorganized school 
divisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — No, the only projections we do are 
provincially. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I would suspect the calculations to get a 
provincial number come from the various school divisions, so it 
would strike to me that this number provincially doesn’t just 
happen. It’s a total of the various local numbers. So is that 
spreadsheet available? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The information isn’t collated by 
division. The only way we have it is provincially. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. While we’re, in the 
available time that’s left to us, continuing on demographics, the 
other side of the coin of course of the student changing 
demographics is also the teacher demographics as well and how 
those match up. I mean does the department, again broken 
down by school division, have an outlining of the teacher 
workforce and their ages and their time to superannuation? And 
is that available? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — For the member opposite, we do a 
supply-and-demand study when it looks at staffing every five 
years. And one is due to be done, a study, this summer with 
expectations that the results will be out early in ’07, either end 
of this year, December not likely, probably more apt to be out 
in early ’07. 
 



May 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Is it an all-or-nothing once every five years? 
Surely that you update this and it’s a rolling kind of a 
projection, or is it you live and die with the projection that was 
done five years ago? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — This study that is done every five years 
is commissioned by the Board of Teacher Education and 
Certification really to help the universities establish what they 
will need in the coming years. 
 
So there isn’t a rolling process that we would do, but there 
would be more of a . . . probably a rolling set of information 
that would be done by the school divisions to know what their 
needs are individually as to retirements and what needs to be 
brought in and what program changes there would be. So the 
once every five years is accurate for this study itself. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, is there 
work done by the department or coordinated by the department 
to make sure that, you know, in this time of change . . . There 
certainly is the changing student demographics. There’s school 
boards that are reducing their professional staffing component. 
These adjustments are occurring pretty much across the 
province in one form or another at a greater or lesser extent. Is 
there . . . 
 
My concern is that no one is keeping an eye on this whole trend 
or . . . if it’s only evaluated once every five years because there 
could be . . . And we know that in the setting of the spring 
budgets that there are divisions that have reduced their teaching 
component by some significant numbers. The concern that I 
have is, are those divisions looking beyond their own situation 
to say there’s going to be a place for these teachers, as you 
know the way that teachers’ seniority and time of service within 
the division is an important component. So as you approach 
retirement, doesn’t mean you’re the teacher that may be part of 
the staffing reduction. It could be one of the newest, younger 
teachers that are just located to that community are the ones 
who are not going to have their position retained. 
 
And so I’m concerned about dislocation and sort of having a 
forward-looking kind of vision of what’s likely to happen 
because it can be fairly devastating. And after it’s done, you 
lose some of the younger teachers whose seniority wasn’t 
sufficient to retain their position. And two years later the 
demographics occur such that teachers are retiring, and all of a 
sudden you’re looking at rehiring. And that makes a very 
cumbersome, difficult process. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite has really hit on 
something that is . . . I mean it’s important, especially currently 
when we are looking at the restructured divisions. While I know 
there has been a number of divisions that have been raised in 
the paper as looking at some major changes in staffing, one 
thing that I would say is that through the discussions that we 
have had through the various divisions, there is a hope I think 
through all of them that being able to look at attrition, whether 
it’s retirements, whether it’s managing vacancies, that it will not 
be as severe as what many had first projected. So we’re going to 
continue to work with that. We won’t know final numbers until 
the end of this month, early in June. 
 
[17:45] 

You know I have to make the comment that when there’s an 
opportunity for teachers to move around when they’re . . . And 
you know and in your own comments, you made the comment 
about, it’s the teacher with the least seniority that is more apt to 
get bumped or not have a spot to go to in September. In a larger 
unit and in a larger division, there is going to be more 
opportunity for movement. There is going to be more 
opportunities that are there then what there would be in a small 
division. 
 
So I know that being in this difficult spot of change, we’re kind 
of in the middle of it here and now. The boundaries have been 
drawn. The new boards are in place, but there is still a huge 
amount of work that needs to be done. I believe we are on the 
right path. I know the school divisions believe that. We’ve seen 
some very good work that’s been done within the divisions, but 
there’s still a fair bit to go. 
 
And I know the divisions are busy. And I know the teachers are 
kind of in waiting to see what is going to happen. And while 
that’s regrettable to leave anyone in that situation — I know 
that’s a concern of mine — but they’ve worked through this. 
They have been great and kept up the quality of education that 
goes to students in our classes. And I know this will be very 
good at the end of all this. 
 
Are you calling me out of time already . . . waving . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, but whenever you want to wrap up 
that would be okay. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Deputy Chair, she’s 
waving her pen at me, so I’m assuming I’m out of time, and I’m 
supposed to hurry up and sit down. I would like to thank the 
opposition for their questions. And I would also like to thank 
the department for a great deal of work that they have gone 
through in the last while with the restructuring and the many 
changes that have taken place, and also for shepherding a new 
minister through, which isn’t always the easiest task. So thank 
you very much to the department. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I too 
would like to thank the officials and the minister for answering 
our questions over the course of these estimates and look 
forward to working with the department and conducting 
ourselves in a professional way in the best interests of the 
students and the children of this province. And I think everyone 
will be well served if we endeavour to make sure that that’s the 
focus and the priority. So thank you very much. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Chair, I move the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The committee has moved that we rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2006 

The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The committee has 
requested that I rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the House Services Committee as well as the 
Human Services Committee, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:50.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1657 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1659 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1660 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Volunteer Receives Kinsmen Award 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
 National Police Week 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
 Prairie to Pine Awards Banquet 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Canadian Federation of Independent Business Anniversary 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Saskatchewan Cycling Association Shamrock Tour 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Provincial Awards to Melfort Special Olympians 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Pregnancy, Parenting and the Workplace 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Air Tanker Crash Near La Ronge 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1662 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
 Recommendations of the Children’s Advocate 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
 Wait Times for Cardiac Diagnostic Procedures 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
 Recruiting Endocrinologists 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
 Funding for Avastin 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1665 



 

 Review of Infant’s Medical Treatment 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Condolences on Airplane Crash Near La Ronge 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1667 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................1668, 1672 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1674 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1677 
  Gantefoer .......................................................................................................................................................................1678, 1685 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1678 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1680 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1680 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1682 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1683 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1684 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


