


















































Hansard: May 01, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 50A  MONDAY, MAY 1, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1431 
 May 1, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have in 
my hand this afternoon a petition regarding the cancer drug 
Avastin. I am pleased to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I have in front of me is signed by 
people from the community of Christopher Lake; Comox, BC 
[British Columbia]; Prince Albert. I believe that’s it. Thank 
you, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One again I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills who 
are very seriously concerned about the condition of Highway 32 
running between the communities of Leader and Cabri. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the full page of signatures today are from the 
community of Cabri. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the situation of agriculture in our province 
and across the nation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the provincial 
government works closely with the federal government to 
develop a simple and effective farm income assistance 
program that will adequately serve both Saskatchewan and 
Canadian agricultural producers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Lemberg, 
Wolseley, Kendal, Indian Head, and Glenavon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These concerned citizens come from the city of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of people wanting funding for a 
new cancer drug. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these signatures on these petitions are from the 
communities of Cudworth, Wakaw, Watrous, and Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents concerned with the availability and funding for the 
cancer drug Avastin. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that I represent today in this effort 
are all from the city of Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about the cancer drug 
Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2006 

The people who have signed this petition are from Porcupine 
Plain, Bjorkdale, Crooked River, and Melfort. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
have a petition to fund Avastin signed by people who believe 
that forcing patients to pay for this drug is an example of two 
tiered health care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was given to the opposition by people 
from the city of Prince Albert. And I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of P.A. [Prince 
Albert]. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of funding 
for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all, I believe, 
from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I follow with a 
petition to fund Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

The signatures on this petition are from Henribourg and Prince 
Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Prince 
Albert and general delivery, Albertville, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present this petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, I believe they are all 
from the community of Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
a petition with citizens concerned with the safety of Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Muenster, 
Dana, Bruno, Saskatoon, Martensville, and Cudworth. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned by the fact this government is refusing to 
fund the cancer-fighting drug Avastin. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 



May 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

from the city of Prince Albert, and I’m pleased to present on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens concerned about 
this government’s refusal to fund the drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Christopher Lake 
and Saskatoon. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens of the Meadow Lake constituency 
who are concerned about the safe driving conditions on 
Highway No. 3. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and Turtleford. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people across 
Saskatchewan who are disappointed that Saskatchewan and 
Prince Edward Island are the only provincial jurisdictions that 
do not have a dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live in the provincial constituencies of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, Saskatoon Nutana, and Swift Current. 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise today with a petition from citizens of Prince 
Albert that are very concerned about the NDP’s [New 

Democratic Party] two tiered health system. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are five pages of signatures from Prince 
Albert, and I’m proud to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Rabbit 
Lake and Richard. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the people that are concerned 
with the government not funding the cancer drug Avastin. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of 
Albertville, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to present a petition. It’s the first time in 
the province’s history that the government has denied coverage 
of a cancer drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2006 

Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding the funding of the 
drug Avastin. Mr. Speaker, I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Albertville 
and Saskatoon. I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned with 
the government’s refusal to fund the cancer drug Avastin. It is a 
tailor-made example of two tiered health care. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens of Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 7, 8, 64, 67, 639, 644. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 47, The 
Business Names Registration Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 47, The Business Names 
Registration Amendment Act, 2006 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Business Names Registration Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 40, The 
Income Trust Liability Act, 2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 40 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 40, The Income Trust Liability Act be now read a 
third time and passed until its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: can the minister indicate 
what the $248,000 announced by the Department of 
Learning on April 20, ’06 for air quality upgrades to St. 
Patrick School in Swift Current will be used for? 
 
Similarly, can the minister indicate how much money the 
department has paid in ’06-07 for repairs and renovations 
to Saskatchewan schools that have found to have mould or 
other problems that can affect the health and safety of 
students and staff? 
 
Can the minister indicate how much money the department 
paid in ’05-06 for repairs and renovations to Saskatchewan 
schools that have been found to have mould or other 
problems for those years, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And with respect to the specific issue of St. Patrick School in 
Swift Current, I do give notice that I shall on day no. 55 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: can the minister indicate (1) 
how much money has been provided the Holy Trinity 
Roman Catholic School Division for air quality upgrades 
over the last year, what action the school division has 
taken and will be taken with funding provided by the 
department to improve air quality, and how much of the 
funding is new as of this calendar year? 
 

There are a number of very specific questions as well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Minister of Learning regarding the current state 
at St. Patrick School and the air quality there for students and 
teachers, which I will also table. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Community Resources: 
can the minister indicate the date that the Government of 
Saskatchewan discovered the first instance of fraud by 
Evelyn Hynes? 

 
Second question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

Is there any record of the RCMP contacting the 
Government of Saskatchewan concerning a pardon for 
Evelyn Hynes at any time she was an employee of the 
Government of Saskatchewan? 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the second day of 
North American Occupational Safety and Health Week. First 
launched in June 1997, NAOSH [North American Occupational 
Safety and Health] Week represents an agreement between 
Canada, Mexico, and the United States to promote safe 
practices at work. It seems especially fitting to mention this day 
today, Mr. Speaker, because today is also May Day — an 
international day of observance for the economic and social 
achievements of organized labour. 
 
The theme for this year’s NAOSH campaign is: Review. 
Refresh. Revitalize. It promotes the continual need to develop 
and incorporate occupational health and safety practices, 
processes, and procedures at work and in our daily lives. The 
NAOSH organizing committee of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
includes the Northern Lights and south Saskatchewan chapters 
of the Canadian Society of Safety Engineering, the Government 
of Canada, Saskatchewan Labour, the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour, Saskatchewan Safety Council, Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board, IPSCO, Saskatchewan safety 
associations, and the community networks partnership. 
 
The committee hopes to increase the understanding of benefits 
of investment in occupational health and safety, to raise 
awareness of the role and contribution of safety and health 
professionals, and to reduce workplace injuries and illnesses by 
encouraging new safety and health activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of all of us to promote safe 
practices at work. I would like to ask all members to be vigilant 
in promoting safe workplaces across this province in 
observance of North American Occupational Safety and Health 
Week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Recognition of Outgoing and Incoming 
Lieutenant Governors 

 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a day for 
mixed emotions. We are very pleased to congratulate Dr. 
Gordon Barnhart on the announcement Friday of his 
appointment as the new Lieutenant Governor for the province 
of Saskatchewan. At the same time, however, we recognize the 
end of the excellent tenure of Dr. Lynda Haverstock as Her 
Majesty’s representative in our province. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity on behalf of the official 
opposition to thank the outgoing Lieutenant Governor for her 
excellent service to this province during her six-year term. 
Although Dr. Haverstock’s dedication to her role as Lieutenant 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2006 

Governor and to our province will be fondly remembered, her 
tenure as Lieutenant Governor will be marked by her passionate 
advocacy of the arts and culture and programming for same in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. Haverstock not only promoted and supported local artisans 
but helped educate Saskatchewan people about the work of our 
own citizens by citing poems or making references to a 
Saskatchewan artist during many of her province-wide speaking 
engagements. I was very pleased when Dr. Haverstock’s term 
was extended through the Saskatchewan centennial year, as 
were members on this side of the House. She travelled the 
province bestowing the Centennial Medals upon thousands of 
deserving recipients and helped us celebrate this milestone 
anniversary in true Saskatchewan style. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I offer her our gratitude for 
six years of excellent service to the province and our best 
wishes for the future . . . for her future — for Dr. Lynda 
Haverstock, for Harley Olsen, and her family. 
 
Today though, Mr. Speaker, is also a day to congratulate Dr. 
Gordon Barnhart on his appointment as our new Lieutenant 
Governor. Dr. Barnhart served this legislature for 20 years and 
has always been a supporter of Saskatchewan. We know this 
first-hand from the work he did with the Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program and how he has personally 
encouraged and helped many young people to stay in the 
province and fostered their interest in the parliamentary 
democratic system. I believe he will continue to work with our 
province’s youth in this new role, and we look forward to 
working with him. Congratulations to Dr. Gordon Barnhart and 
all the best in his new role as the Queen’s representative in our 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Moose Jaw Warriors Win Eastern Conference 
Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw 
Warriors are Eastern Conference champions and they’re 
moving on to the Western Hockey League championship series 
against the Vancouver Giants. The dream is alive and well in 
Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan. 
 
So far, Mr. Speaker, the Warriors beat the Brandon Wheat 
Kings in six, knocked off the Calgary Hitmen on the road in 
game seven, and tamed the Medicine Hat Tigers in five. And 
now it’s time to be giant-killers. The WHL [Western Hockey 
League] finals begin in Vancouver on Friday and Saturday, and 
then it’s home to the crushed can in Moose Jaw for games next 
Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday. To put it mildly, Mr. Speaker, 
the place will be rocking. Nobody ever accused Moose Jaw 
Warrior fans of being either quiet or shy. And there will be no 
point in calling to Moose Jaw during the games, Mr. Speaker, 
because we’ll be glued to CHAB radio 800 by the thousands. 
 
The Warriors have all the signs of champions. We’ve got a hot 
goalie in Joey Perricone, and the WHL’s best offence is hitting 

on all cylinders. Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Warriors are 
Saskatchewan’s team, looking to be the best in the West and 
then on to the Memorial Cup. I ask all hon. members from 
across the province to join together to cheer the Warriors on to 
victory. We’re number one. Go, Warriors, go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation 
Celebrity Dinner 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
pleasure Saturday evening of joining 700 Saskatchewan 
residents including my colleagues the hon. members from 
Carrot River Valley; Saskatoon Southeast; and the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone, the opposition Health critic, at the 14th 
annual Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation Celebrity 
Dinner in Saskatoon. Other community leaders in attendance 
included the mayor of Saskatoon, several city councillors, 
Member of Parliament Lynne Yelich, and many members of the 
Saskatoon health and business communities. 
 
The Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan 
was founded on the belief that children in our province deserve 
the best possible health care. The CHHF [Children’s Health & 
Hospital Foundation] of Saskatchewan is committed to 
optimizing pediatric patient care and research. Their goal is to 
see a children’s hospital designation within an existing hospital 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is the only 
province in Canada besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that 
doesn’t have a children’s hospital. For 14 years the Children’s 
Health & Hospital Foundation have been calling on this 
government to fund a dedicated children’s hospital. 
 
One thing was made very clear to the members who chose to 
attend the event Saturday night. Saskatchewan residents are 
tired of waiting for a children’s hospital. They are fed up with 
promises and press releases. And they know one thing for sure: 
the only thing stopping Saskatchewan from having a children’s 
hospital is politics and the provincial election cycle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to thank executive 
director Brynn Boback-Lane and her entire Children’s Health & 
Hospital Foundation team for year after year after year putting 
the needs of Saskatchewan children first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 

Iron Workers Local Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, April 29 I had the honour of being an invited guest at 
the 50th anniversary celebrations for the Iron Workers Local 
771. In 1956 the local began with 15 members and today it 
serves 400 men and women. 
 
The local grew because it had and continues to have strong 



May 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

leadership that has a vision of the future. Local 771 stuck with 
the principles of providing safe working sites and fair wages for 
its members while earning a reputation with contractors in 
providing workers to the job site who believed in an eight hours 
of work for eight hours of pay. 
 
The reputation of the members for Local 771 for being 
hard-working, dedicated, and committed is known throughout 
the industry. Bert Royer, business manager, hosted over 1,000 
members, spouses, and guests that gathered at the Delta Hotel 
in Regina. 
 
Presentations were made by Walter Wise, general treasurer, 
Washington, DC [District of Columbia]; Fred Marr, vice 
president, of Sarnia, Ontario; and Donald Oshanek from 
Western Region, Calgary, Alberta. The evening concluded with 
the local president, Charlie Gumulcak, presenting pins and 
watches to numerous members for their years of service, 
followed by a dance. 
 
Congratulations, Local 771, on your 50th anniversary and I 
wish you many more years of serving the construction industry 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Hazel Dell Supports Hansen Family 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to talk goodness is not good, only 
to do it is. This is the Chinese proverb which very aptly applies 
to the community of Hazel Dell and the surrounding area. 
 
Last Friday night approximately 200 people from Hazel Dell 
and that area gathered for a potluck supper to raise money to 
help with the travel and medical expenses as well as living 
expenses incurred by Mike and Michelle Hansen as they take 
two months off work to care for baby Paige as she starts her 
leukemia treatments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural communities are notorious for helping those 
in need. And when it is one of their own, the outpouring is 
absolutely astounding. Michelle’s godparents, Larry and 
Marlene Dyky of Hazel Dell, in less than a week organized 
events which raised over $8,100. 
 
Hazel Dell is a hamlet of approximately 20 people. Their 
community and surrounding area has weathered drought, frost, 
extensive snowfall, and then flooding. Yet they came together 
and offered their support to their neighbours’ children and 
grandchildren who had a greater need. 
 
Paige’s grandparents were amazed with the community’s 
support and expressed the appreciation of Michelle and Mike 
for the financial and moral support they’ve received. They also 
express their appreciation for the hard work, compassion, and 
care provided by the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from Humboldt who worked diligently for baby 
Paige . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Ms. Draude: — A constituent of the MLA’s of Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our pioneer forefathers depended upon and 
supported each other for their very survival. Even though we 
are now a very transient population, these traits of compassion 
and support have not been lost. Mike, Michelle, and Paige and 
their extended families are truly appreciative of this care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Telus Cup 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to congratulate the Prince Albert Mintos, the 
Telus AAA midget champions of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The Mintos won an absolutely 
thrilling game yesterday — 5-4 in triple overtime defeating the 
Calgary Buffaloes, Mr. Speaker — a big blow for Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert had a 4-2 lead with eight minutes 
left when Calgary stormed back and tied the game. Mr. 
Speaker, the Mintos remained unfazed and played an amazing 
overtime of 42 minutes and 36 seconds before captain Ron 
Meyers scored what well may be the most famous goal in Minto 
history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Mintos went through the Telus national midget 
championships undefeated with a seven and oh record in the 
semifinals. They defeated the Quebec champions 8 to nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the Mintos captured 
an incredible year as they won their first Midget AAA title and 
then won the western regional hockey championships. The 
Mintos’ playoff record, Mr. Speaker, this year is amazing — 19 
wins, two losses, and one tie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the players on this team come from Prince Albert 
and many other communities throughout Saskatchewan. These 
young men represented our province in a very professional and 
competitive manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to coach Tim Leonard and his 
assistant coaches; to the Cobra, Danny Taylor; and other 
training staff, management, and of course, Mr. Speaker, their 
parents and supporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the players did well. They served our province 
well. They served our community well. The Mintos truly are the 
2006 national midget champions. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2006 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Health Care Review Commissioned by Minister 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — On Friday the Minister of Health failed to 
shed any light on what went wrong in the case of baby Paige. 
All the minister could tell us is that a review identified 
problems in three areas — communication, coordination, and 
accessibility — but he was short of any details. 
 
The minister said that he would not receive the clinical review 
from the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority until late in the 
afternoon and that he would review it over the weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has now had a few days to take a look 
at that review. In the terms of coordination, we don’t even know 
if another health region was contacted to see if baby Paige 
could get diagnostic testing quicker somewhere else in the 
province. Can he tell this Assembly what went wrong in terms 
of coordination? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite is correct. I received the report late Friday 
afternoon. I did review it over the weekend. The report certainly 
provides opportunities to ask additional questions, Mr. Speaker. 
The report was conducted and written. Interviews were 
conducted and written over the course of a 72-hour period of 
time. The review took a look at the clinical circumstances 
surrounding the events in a time frame presented with regards 
to baby Paige. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not yet interviewed or consulted the 
family with regards to this report. There are additional 
questions to be asked, and we will not release any full-time 
information until we have consulted further with the family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that it’s the 
family that could answer the question on coordination, but we’ll 
try another area that the minister identified that would need 
improvement on Friday, and that was access. 
 
I don’t think the minister needed any kind of report to tell him 
that access was a major problem in the case of baby Paige. We 
know that Paige’s family had been told that they would need to 
wait up to three weeks for a bone scan at the Royal University 
Hospital. We know that the family had been told that they could 
not get an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] because it wasn’t 
working at the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us what he learned from the 
report about problems with access? Can he give us details about 
why diagnostic tests were not available to baby Paige in a 
timely fashion? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I want to say to members of the public that, acting on my 
behalf, the deputy minister, the provincial medical consultant, 
the provincial quality of care coordinator, and the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority have conducted an internal review 
under the auspices of the quality of care process. And, Mr. 
Speaker, more than 32 members of the Saskatoon Health 
Region have been interviewed at this point, and there is a 
considerable amount of information contained within that 
report. 
 
That information, Mr. Speaker, I believe needs to be shared 
with and to a certain extent corroborated by members of the 
family before we discuss this matter through the media to the 
public. Mr. Speaker, the corroboration of the information 
available to us, I think out of respect to the family, does have an 
impact on the way in which the family understands what 
happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to try one more 
time, and we’re going to ask questions about the problems with 
communication. Again I don’t think that the minister needed a 
review to tell him that something went very wrong in 
communication. 
 
No one in this family was told that going out-of-province was 
an option. The quality care coordinator that they contacted told 
them to go back to square one which was their family doctor in 
Humboldt. A phone call from the Hansen’s doctor in Humboldt 
to a pediatrician in Saskatoon was never returned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, can he tell us what problems the 
review found with the lack of communication? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As members opposite will know, the Chair of the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority has issued an apology to the family 
with regards to patient baby Paige. Mr. Speaker, everyone, 
everyone within the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority and 
everyone within this government is very much interested in the 
long-term care for baby Paige Hansen. Whether it’s inside this 
province or outside this province, the best possible care 
available to her will be provided. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we have launched a 
review. We’ve received some preliminary findings. Out of 
respect to the family, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that we 
share that information with the family before we share it with 
the members of the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 



May 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the minister 
talks about how much his members of his government care and 
how much they want to respect the family because when I 
raised this issue on Friday, the Minister of Finance yelled across 
the floor: who died yet? Well, Mr. Speaker, is that what it takes 
before action is taken, for someone to die? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Order. 
Order, order, order. Order, order. I would ask members not to 
reflect upon other members in any way across the floor. All 
questions should go through the Chair and be responded 
through the Chair. Order, order. Order. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I personally 
listened to the tape on Friday, and I hope the Minister of Health 
will distance himself from his colleague’s remarks. We’re 
talking about an 18-month-old baby who could not get timely 
service in a Saskatoon hospital and this family . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The family was forced to flee to Edmonton 
where diagnosis was made in 24 hours. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
clear that there are a number of things that went wrong in this 
case of baby Paige. Can the minister tell this Assembly what 
he’s going to do to rectify all of the problems that took place in 
this case. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I would once again 
request — not only request but demand — that there be no 
name-calling across the floor of the Assembly. Now the Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to remind members opposite and more importantly 
members of the public that Saskatchewan has a nationally 
recognized, renowned process of critical incident reporting. I 
also remind the members that this particular case is not 
considered a critical incident at this point in time — no adverse 
circumstances. But, Mr. Speaker, we are utilizing the process of 
critical incident reporting to ensure that we answer all of the 
questions in this case and we get as much participation from all 
those involved in the process as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no politics. Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing 
but the interests of baby Paige and future children in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing in this review except 
the interests of baby Paige to ensure that we understand what 
happened in her case and to prevent anything like this from ever 
happening again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think this was a critical case. 
We’re talking about an 18-month-old baby who could no longer 
walk. She had swollen legs and arms. She was screaming in 
pain. I think this was a critical case. 
 
On Friday the minister said that he would not be releasing the 

clinical report to the public. While we understand that there are 
privacy issues concerned we believe the public has a right to 
know what went wrong in this case and what the government is 
going to do to fix the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday the minister was vague on details about 
what went wrong. He was vague on what he was going to do 
about it and he was vague about a public report. Mr. Speaker, 
can the minister tell this Assembly when a public report will be 
made available, what the terms of reference for that report will 
be, and who is going to be preparing that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, first and foremost the fact of 
the matter is an investigation is currently under way, an 
investigation that was launched immediately upon knowing the 
case existed. Mr. Speaker, this government considers the 
circumstances around this report, the circumstances revolving 
around this incident, to be worthy of an investigation. Mr. 
Speaker, there are some very important people conducting this 
investigation. It is our intention to release information to the 
members of the public as soon as they are available, Mr. 
Speaker, in a way that will have some value not only to the 
members of the public, but in terms of finding ways to ensure 
that these sorts of circumstances do not happen again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed not only to resolving this case, 
but also to involving the public in the release of that 
information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
April 19 we raised the case of Emily Morley. Her family came 
to the Assembly and told this Assembly that their mother would 
have to wait 3 months — 12 weeks — for her first visit to an 
oncologist. Emily Morley’s daughter that day expressed 
concern that her mother may die before even seeing the cancer 
specialist for the first time. 
 
On Thursday of last week, Emily Morley had her first 
appointment. The prognosis is not good. Emily has been told 
that she has three months to live. It seems that the daughter may 
have been right. Had her family not intervened, it is quite likely 
that Emily Morley may have died before even seeing an 
oncologist for the first time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this Assembly what his 
government is doing so people do not have to wait 12 weeks to 
see an oncologist in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has been working for a 
considerable period of time to deal with waiting lists, both 
internal to the agency and external to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are indeed pressures facing the system between referrals 
from family physicians to surgeons, from surgeons or 
specialists to the agency. Mr. Speaker, some time before this 
case was raised, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency put in place 
a task force to deal with these types of issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that task force has been working. Additional 
resources have been put into the cancer agency. The new patient 
office has been put in place. Clinical associates have been hired 
to allow oncologists greater opportunities to meet with new 
patients. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and 
the health regions have taken this issue seriously and are 
already acting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Emily Morley’s case is not unique, Mr. 
Speaker. Had it not been for her strength and courage, and 
especially the strength and the courage of her family to come 
forward with this issue, she may still be waiting for that first 
initial appointment. 
 
The national standard for wait times for physician referral to 
oncologists for the first time is four to five weeks. The minister 
said a couple weeks ago that we used to be at nine and a half 
weeks, but there’s more and more evidence every day that that 
is just completely inaccurate, that it’s a 12-week wait-list to see 
an oncologist for the first time. 
 
On Friday I raised the issue of Margaret Sundquist from 
Watrous. She had been told she’d have to wait 12 weeks or 
longer for the first visit, that there were over 50 cases in front of 
her before she could see an oncologist. Mr. Speaker, this is 
absolutely unacceptable in the province of Saskatchewan. What 
can he do to ensure these people do not have to linger on 
wait-lists for 12 weeks just for the first visit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
addition to the matters that I outlined a few moments ago, I can 
indicate to the members of the public that all cases referred to 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency are triaged, which means, 
Mr. Speaker, they are all reviewed and assessed on the basis of 
urgency. Mr. Speaker, there is virtually no waiting list for some 
types of cancer. Mr. Speaker, there is a longer waiting list for 
other types of cancer. 
 
Based on a review by the professionals, appointment times are 
set based on the type of cancer and the expectation of cure or 
palliative care requirements. Mr. Speaker, the cancer agency is 

very much aware of the implications of their review process. 
They take that very seriously, and I tell the people of 
Saskatchewan for those people with urgent cases, there is no 
waiting list in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s incredible when you 
talk about Emily Morley who has now been told she has only 
three months to live. If that isn’t urgent, I don’t know what is. 
Her wait was 12 weeks to see an oncologist for the first time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem of baby Paige case was isolated into 
communication, coordination, and access. Mr. Speaker, there 
are some problems with communication, I believe, from this 
Department of Health. According to the Saskatoon cancer 
agency, no patient has been referred out of province for 
treatment or to see an oncologist in a timely matter. Why is that 
happening? 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister commit that his department will 
inform the cancer agencies around the province to automatically 
send people out of the province if it’s going to be a 12-week 
wait to seen an oncologist for the first time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
Members will come to order. Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have discussed the issue of waiting lists with the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency and physicians and specialists in this province 
over the last little while, Mr. Speaker. Everyone agrees that the 
ideal circumstances for reduced waiting lists, Mr. Speaker, have 
not yet been met. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and others 
in the province have taken steps, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 
those waiting lists are reduced. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I again tell the members of the 
Saskatchewan public that on cases that are triaged — in other 
words, assessed and deemed urgent — Mr. Speaker, there are 
no waiting lists in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Interprovincial Trade Agreement 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Friday last week, a 
landmark deal was struck between the provinces of British 
Columbia and Alberta. The two largest provinces in Western 
Canada signed a deal on interprovincial trade and investment. 
The agreement creates the second largest economic region in 
Canada in terms of significance, maybe one of the most 
important economic region on the continent — on an 
energy-starved continent. And once again, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP government missed the boat. This NDP government 



May 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

apparently had nothing to do with this particular agreement 
reached. 
 
To the Premier: where was he during this process? Why was 
Saskatchewan, under his leadership, not at that table, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to thank the member for the question. It’s a rare 
opportunity that one has to get up in question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan, along with 
other governments in Canada, continues to work through a 
committee on internal trade, ministers of internal trade, 
pursuant to direction from the council of the federations — the 
first ministers — to pursue trade liberalization in Canada. We 
do so on a sectoral basis, and we will continue to do so. We 
look forward to reviewing the agreement between — which is a 
regional agreement — between BC [British Columbia] and 
Alberta to see what implications it might have for all provinces 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m shocked frankly the Premier’s 
not going to address it, address this question. I’m more 
surprised by the minister’s answer. They’re going to watch 
what happens in British Columbia and Alberta. 
 
They know, they should know — certainly we’ve been saying 
for some time — about the emergence of a new West that’s 
happening across our country as political and economic 
influence is migrating to Western Canada. And we have a 
chance in this province to play a leadership role in that new 
West. But under this NDP government, Saskatchewan of course 
is being left behind. 
 
The Premier of Alberta had this to say after the agreement was 
announced, quote “. . . he hopes other western provinces will 
see the potential of the agreement and sign on.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Premier this question: will he show 
leadership on this issue? Will he ensure that our province is 
playing the leadership role that it should be in a new and 
emerging West within Canada, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the member’s concern, even his 
feigned outrage. I believe he used the word shocked. Might I 
point out to the member, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve had in excess 

of 30 question periods by my reckoning, something in excess of 
three subject areas in each of those question periods, so we’ve 
had in excess of 100 subject areas. Well obviously, 
notwithstanding the member’s shock, it hasn’t made it to his top 
100 list of issues of concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again we will continue to work with all of the 
provinces in Canada on a sectoral basis to see what we can do 
to promote trade between all of the provinces in Canada, 
including our two partners to the West, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that, that when it 
comes to matters of economy that particular government 
continually waits for this opposition, this Saskatchewan Party to 
show them the way. We’d hope they’d have an original idea on 
their own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan under this 
government is being left behind. BC last year created 84,000 
jobs; Alberta, 68,000 jobs. In our province the NDP killed 
5,200 jobs. The premiers of BC and Alberta are talking about 
78,000 more jobs as a result of this interprovincial agreement 
on trade, Mr. Speaker, that we were no part of. 
 
It’s amazing. Only the NDP, Mr. Speaker, could turn a 
landlocked province into an island. Will the Premier show some 
leadership on this issue? Will he stand in his place in the 
Assembly and inform Saskatchewan people how he intends to 
show some leadership within Western Canada for our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if the people of 
Saskatchewan depended on the opposition party for economic 
leadership, well they know what that got us a couple of decades 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week, last week unobserved by the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party this province posted the third largest 
GDP [gross domestic product] growth in Canada of 3.2 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, we are at the council of the confederation 
table. We’re part of the internal trade talks, and we’re looking 
for those significant arrangements that suit and fit the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan first — we don’t just go to Calgary to get our 
ideas, and we for sure don’t go to the Saskatchewan Party to get 
our ideas. We get our ideas from Saskatchewan people. And, 
Mr. Speaker, those ideas have put this province in a position 
now of being the third strongest economy in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re getting stronger. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2006 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this NDP government 
have presided over the worst out-migration record in the 
country. They lost 5,200 jobs in the middle of a boom — in the 
middle of a boom, Mr. Speaker. I know that people across this 
province are waiting for this government to take more of its 
lead from the Saskatchewan Party, and failing that, they’re 
waiting for a provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, feature this. At this table, 
British Columbia and Alberta are working to reduce barriers to 
trade interprovincially which the Conference Board of Canada 
says costs our country tens of billions of dollars. That’s what’s 
happening at that table. Our Premier, apparently at the kiddies’ 
table, wanted nothing to do with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: why wasn’t he there? Why 
wasn’t he at this table? Was he invited to be there? Was he 
invited to participate in this emerging new West? And if not, 
why not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear that I 
meet regularly with Premier Campbell, Premier Klein, with 
Premier Doer, with Premier McGinty, regularly with the 
premiers of Canada, Mr. Speaker. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
we don’t go elsewhere, we don’t go elsewhere to find ideas. 
 
Now we’ve had another example of revisionist history here 
again today from the Leader of the Opposition. He wants to talk 
about a period of time when out-migration was at its largest. 
Well he should know. He was working in the building when 
that period of time occurred, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we were going to take economic advice, 
would we take it from that cranky, confused caucus over there? 
I mean one minute you’ve the member from Thunder Creek 
telling us what we should invest in the economy; we should 
take equity partnerships. Then you’ve got the leader saying, no, 
no, no; government should never take equity partnerships to the 
economy, should never participate with workers or 
organizations, businesses, or communities. We’re not going to 
take our advice, Mr. Speaker, from that Leader of the 
Opposition, that confused, cranky opposition across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling answers to written questions 1,054 to 1,063 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,054 through to 

1,063 have been submitted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to introduce a motion relating to substitution on a policy field 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Chair on Human Services Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Hon. Opposition House Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 108(5) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the membership of the Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Human Services may be transferable in accordance 
with the guidelines for temporary substitutions except that 
any member who substitutes for the Chair shall not preside 
when the Deputy Chair is present, and further, that the 
membership of the Chair may be transferable only for the 
purpose of the said committee’s meeting on Monday, May 
1, 2006. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 108(5) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the membership of the Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Human Services may be transferable in accordance 
with the guidelines for temporary substitutions except that 
any member who substitutes for the Chair shall not preside 
when the Deputy Chair is present, and further, that the 
membership of the Chair may be transferable only for the 
purpose of the said committee’s meeting on Monday, May 
1, 2006. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — In order to accommodate the presentation 
of volunteer medals to deserving Saskatchewan citizens this 
afternoon as well as to accommodate the policy field 
committees on Crown and Central Agencies and Human 
Services, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 



May 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1434 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
 Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Recognition of Outgoing and Incoming Lieutenant Governors 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Moose Jaw Warriors Win Eastern Conference Championship 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
 Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation Celebrity Dinner 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1436 
 Iron Workers Local Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
 Hazel Dell Supports Hansen Family 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
 Prince Albert Mintos Win Telus Cup 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1437 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Review Commissioned by Minister 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1438 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1438 
 Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1439 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
  



 

 Interprovincial Trade Agreement 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1441 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1441 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1442 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Chair on Human Services Committee 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


