






















































Hansard: March 21, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 24A  TUESDAY, MARCH 21, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 701 
 March 21, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 
present a petition on behalf of communities along Highway No. 
32 from the community of Leader, I guess, right through to 
Cabri. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the communities represented by this petition today 
are those of Leader, Prelate, Burstall, Eatonia. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of the people in the Kuroki-Fishing 
Lake area who are concerned about Highway No. 310. The 
prayer asks this government to recognize the economic 
difficulties that a highway in disrepair causes to a community. 
 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 
Fishing Lake, Wadena, and Ponteix. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have several 
pages of a petition of citizens concerned with the conditions of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to upgrade and widen Highway No. 
5 from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Jansen, 
Muenster, St. Gregor, and Middle Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition today from constituents opposed to possible reductions 
of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 

long-term care home, and the ambulance services maintain 
at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens of Sonningdale, Biggar and district, 
and also Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway No. 20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Nokomis, Simpson, Watrous, 
and Imperial. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 
petition regarding the widening of Highway No. 5, the highway 
that runs through my constituency. Mr. Speaker, I will read the 
prayer for relief: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Muenster, 
Humboldt, and Lake Lenore and St. Gregor. Mr. Speaker, I so 
present. Thank you very much. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to sessional papers no. 5, 7, 13, 27, 
and 64. 
 
And according to order the following petitions for private Bills 
have been reviewed and found to be in order. Accordingly they 
are read and received: 
 

Of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Inc. in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to repeal The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995; and 
 
Of the Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan in the 
province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to broaden 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

the society’s powers to perform charitable acts and to 
increase its powers to distribute funds for charitable 
purposes. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall give notice on 
day no. 29, ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: when 
was Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 20 closed? 
What were the reasons for the closure, and when will that 
section of highway reopen? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you two people 
today and, through you, to the rest of this House. We have in 
the west gallery, accompanied by one of my ministerial 
assistants, Melanie Dolton, Melanie’s brother, Wade Dolton. 
 
And Wade was raised on the farm near Preeceville. He holds a 
bachelor in electrical engineering and a specialization certificate 
in computer science from the University of Saskatchewan. 
Since graduating in 2002, Wade has worked at the Canadian 
Light Source Inc. synchrotron in Saskatoon in the engineering 
and technical services department, performing duties in the 
electrical design and controls and instrumentation. In his spare 
time, Wade enjoys playing ultimate Frisbee. 
 
And it’s very important to note that his birthday was yesterday, 
March 20. So congratulations to Wade and welcome. And I’d 
ask others to join me in welcoming Wade. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Also accompanying them, Mr. 
Speaker, is my cousin, Grace Alcock. Grace carries the 
distinction of being the elder on the Wartman side of this 
generation. And, Mr. Speaker, I know in discussion with Grace 
that she understands where I’m coming from on this. Elders 
bring wisdom, experience. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that 
when she came down to the front desk that Ray looked at her 
and said, oh that must be Mark’s younger cousin. Anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, I was very pleased to have Grace come to visit today. I 
don’t get to see her very often. 
 
She’s built a career as a teacher in Medicine Hat. She and her 
husband both came from Saskatchewan, raised their children 
there. And I’m sure that I could say on her part she’s very, very 
glad to come and visit this wonderful province of 
Saskatchewan. Grace, nice to have you here. I’d ask others to 
join me in welcoming her. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery, a gentleman who is visiting the Assembly today from 
Regina, Murray Carswell. I’d like to invite the members to join 
me in welcoming Murray to his Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
centre. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to today recognize the International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination. And as we know, it’s a day that’s 
steeped in origins of intolerance, oppression, and fear. 
 
Why March 21, Mr. Speaker? Well on March 21, 1960, the 
police opened fire upon a group of peaceful demonstrators 
protesting apartheid in Sharpeville, South Africa. And 
tragically, Mr. Speaker, on that occasion, 69 people died and 
another 180 people wounded — many of them women and 
children. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the 40th anniversary of the 
United Nations’ campaign to raise awareness about the 
devastating impact that racism has on individuals, families, 
communities, and nations. 
 
On Saturday I, along with some of my colleagues, attended the 
seventh annual Spring Free from Racism family day here in 
Regina. Mr. Speaker, it’s a wonderful event. People get out and 
really celebrate. And over the years of the event, people have 
made friends, and the Littletents came up to talk to me, and 
that’s the kind of thing that happens there. And if attendance is 
any indication of support, this is a very successful event. And I 
want to commend Barb Dedi and the organizers and participants 
for all their good work on this. And as well around the 
province, many schools, community organizations, cultural 
associations, businesses are holding events to recognize this 
special day. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, one of the things people forget 
is that the most successful economies around the world are 
those with tolerance. So let’s all join in and be a tolerant 
society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the government today in recognizing the 40th anniversary of the 
United Nations’ proclamation for the date of International Day 
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, being March 21. 
In Canada this day has been recognized since 1969. 
 
We’d all like to believe that we aren’t racist, but in reality each 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

and every one of us has a difficult time not falling into the trap 
of stereotyping different races, quite often to the detriment of 
that particular race. Nobody is immune, and we all must accept 
the challenge of counteracting our racist thoughts and actions. 
Conflicts continue to arise because of a lack of understanding of 
the culture and/or lack of resources or a lack of education. 
 
Langston Hughes, in his book The Black Man Speaks, says: 
 

I swear to the Lord 
I still can’t see 
Why Democracy means 
Everybody but me. 

 
As legislatures we uphold the concept of democracy. It is 
incumbent upon each one of us to strive to overcome racism 
and ensure that democracy is for everyone, not just the 
dominant race. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this day of the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and on every day of the 
year, we must all unite to condemn all policies and practices of 
apartheid, racial discrimination, and segregation, including the 
practices of discrimination. We must remember and act upon 
the words of Martin Luther King, Jr. when he said: 
 

I refuse to accept the view that mankind is so tragically 
bound to the starless midnight of racism and war that . . . 
bright daybreak of peace and brotherhood can never 
become a reality . . . I believe that unarmed truth and 
unconditional love will have the final word. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Regina Christian School Senior Boys’ 
Basketball Team Wins Gold 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 
Christian School has been a part of Regina for the last 21 years. 
Three years ago I was happy to be of some assistance when the 
school was moving to its present location, and since then I’ve 
followed the school’s activities with interest. 
 
And I’m very pleased to share with the Assembly today that the 
Regina Christian School’s senior boys’ basketball team, the 
Grizzlies, have had a very successful season. Mr. Speaker, not 
only did the Grizzlies place second in the Regina small schools 
city finals two weeks ago, but last week they placed first in the 
2A schools regional playoffs. 
 
This past weekend the Grizzlies played the Kinistino Blues in 
the Hoopla provincial basketball finals for 2A schools and won 
the gold medal by a score of 76 to 68. By all accounts, it was an 
intensely played game with the lead changing hands several 
times. Mr. Speaker, all the boys worked hard in order to achieve 
the distinction of being the best 2A senior boys’ basketball team 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

I do want to make special mention of the hard-working, 
vigilant, and appropriately intense Geoff Glasspell, who led the 
team as coach and helped the boys rise to the challenge. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in congratulating the 
Regina Christian School Grizzlies on their very successful 
season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Bladworth Elks Club Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 
the Bladworth Elks Club celebrated their 25th anniversary of 
service to the people of Bladworth and area. The big event was 
held at the Bladworth hall and saw the attendance of many past 
and present Elk members as well as dignitaries such as Elks’ 
grand exalted ruler of Canada, Mark Montgomery. 
 
Also in attendance was a past provincial president, Gerry 
Cooper, who was also a past national sports director. Gerry 
Cooper was one of the ones that helped get Bladworth formed. 
Him and Mr. Greeson were coming to Davidson to form a club, 
but they made the stop at the Bladworth bar, and the rest is 
history as they say. So with meeting there the local, Jim Prpick, 
who was the first exalted ruler, they managed to sign up 50 
members and started a club that day. 
 
Our local Elks’ ruler, Tim Bruch, handed out years pins for 
years of service and conducted a very good event. I’ve been a 
proud member of the Bladworth Elks for many years. This 
dedicated group has always come to the aid of residents in need 
of emergency help such as house fires or serious illness. The 
Elks have been at the fore of hosting provincial Elk events, such 
as twice hosting the provincial Elks curling playdowns in the 
past decade. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The celebration was a huge success with a local dance band, 
Neon Blue, providing excellent entertainment. The Bladworth 
Elks Club will continue to do a great job supporting this 
community in the larger effort at the provincial Elks level of 
public service. I will continue to be a proud part of my local 
Elks club — a club that puts people and community needs first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Dreaming in Colour 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last week I had the great good 
fortune to attend a gathering at the Regina Performing Arts 
Centre of students and teachers from five schools in my home 
neighbourhood, north central Regina. We were there for a 
celebration of community that marked the culmination of an 
innovative project called Dreaming in Colour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project was made possible by a partnership 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

between Regina north central schools, the National Film Board, 
the United Way of Regina, and Action for Neighbourhood 
Change, and it was brought together under the leadership of 
Common Weal Community Arts. 
 
Five professional artists — Josh Goff, Danny Fernandez, Val 
Kinistino, Mike Josza, and Errol Kinistino — went into the 
schools and held a series of workshops with students all based 
on the theme: what do I like about my neighbourhood? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project provided students from Kitchener, 
Wascana, Herchmer, Albert, and Sacred Heart the opportunity 
to explore their ideas and feelings about themselves and their 
community through painting, theatre, hip hop, and graffiti art. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the students, teachers, and 
artists, and the project managers, Heather Abby and Damon 
Heit. Everyone clearly worked together very well to make the 
Dreaming in Colour a real success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project brought out a lot of pride and respect. 
Here’s one small sample from the grade 3’s and 4’s of Albert 
School, and I quote: 
 

This is our community, it’s our responsibility 
Teachers, friends and family, knowledge trust and honesty 
Terrific kids is what we are, all of us are shining stars 
 

Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Theatre Performance in Radisson 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My wife and I had 
the pleasure of attending a play written by Jim McLoughlin 
from Livelong. The play, Four Chairs, was presented by the 
Radisson ’71 Seniors Club. 
 
The play is about a very elderly lady named May. She lives on 
her own. She has visitors. Some come out of duty. Others come 
out as part of their job, and others come for their own reasons. 
May tries, but relates to none of them. It is the memories of her 
family life of years ago that keep her going. She is torn between 
life that is lived in her tiny home and a life lived in her 
memories of her family. This play is an odyssey of May’s 
journey into these realms. 
 
The journey is played out during the last two weeks of May’s 
life. The play is in May’s home, in her living room, and kitchen. 
 
Many thanks needs to go out — especially to Jim McLoughlin 
who wrote Four Chairs — director, Louise Cochran; set 
designer, Darryl Amey; costumes, Joyce Schultz; sound and 
production, Lloyd Loraas; special effects, Chris Tyreman. The 
cast, May is played by Vi Kyliuk; home helper, Judy Herter; 
Ms. Clegg, Louise Clark; Dora, a student, Chandra Torralba; 
Father Bob, Derek Murphy; and nurse, Doris Daku. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many thanks needs to go to the community of 
Radisson, the town of Radisson, Radisson Recreation Board, 

and especially the Radisson ’71 Seniors Club who also provided 
the dessert — a very, very tasty dessert — to everyone who was 
at the play. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Chamber of Commerce Hosts Business Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
recently I attended the Yorkton Chamber of Commerce 
Celebrate Saskatchewan Awards . . . 475 people in attendance, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to indulge the House with some of the 
names of the winners. 
 
The Community Merit Award winner was Garry Schmidt from 
the KamBuster’s Racing Club, Louise Bray from the SIGN on 
Broadway, and Don Kunkel of the Yorkton Exhibition. 
 
The wall-of-success winners were Gary Lamb from Parks 
Jewellery, Wade Ruff from Ruff’s Countrywide Furniture and 
Appliance, and Mike Rusnak from Rusnak Insurance Ltd. 
 
The community involvement leader was Mark Butchko from 
the Yorkton Dairy Queen, who just moved to the city less than a 
year ago. The Property Restoration Award were Crystal and 
Jimmy Dean from the Best Western Parkland Inn. And the 
customer services winner were Larry Haas from Haas Nissan. 
 
The business expansion winner was Jocelyn Roy of Shear Bliss 
and the new business ventures winner was Ken Kohlert of 
Fuzztone Music. The Young Entrepreneur Award went to Chad 
Shumay, Aaron Kienle, and Brennan Wiens and the CAB 
Clothing Accessories, a young group of men who’ve set up a 
business in the community. And the Business of the Year 
Award went to Mac Tiller from the Birch Island Cattle 
Company, Mr. Speaker, who have established the large feedlot 
operation in that area of the province. 
 
Sixteen deserving award winners, and I can tell you that I heard 
many, many, many success stories that evening of things that 
are happening on the eastern side of the province and the 
number of opportunities which abound across not only rural but 
across urban Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chamber of Commerce, the city of Yorkton, and the people 
of Saskatchewan have a lot to celebrate, Mr. Speaker. The tiger 
of the East is alive and well and booming in our side of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Financial Accountability of Government 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when this 
Premier took office he promised an open and accountable 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

government. And then SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] came along, Mr. Speaker. And only 
when the government was caught did they actually fess up to 
what was going on with SPUDCO. But in the wake of that 
particular scandal, here’s what the Premier had to say. He said, 
quote: 
 

When mistakes are made our taxpayers and [our] citizens 
deserve honest accounting . . . 

 
That’s what the Premier said. Today we learn that over the past 
three years there have been 42 incidents of fraud costing 
taxpayers close to $2 million. And what did this open and 
accountable NDP [New Democratic Party] government do 
about those incidents of fraud? They covered them up, Mr. 
Speaker. They hid them from the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why the culture of cover-up? Why 
would they hide these instances of fraud from the taxpayers, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The member opposite should know full well that in 1991 
members on this side were elected on a promise to have open, 
honest, and accountable government — chasing out a regime 
that was notorious for covering up and hiding what was actually 
happening in government. The member opposite will know full 
well about that regime. 
 
The members should be aware that since that time, through the 
Gass Commission report, through the work of the Public 
Accounts, through the work of the Provincial Comptroller’s 
office, this government has moved forward in terms of making 
sure that we have among the best, the best financial accounting 
regime in this country. 
 
Today I have announced new measures that will be in place to 
make sure that we have among the most stringent public 
reporting processes. In every case that was documented today, 
government officials, managers, and supervisors have acted, 
acted decisively, to deal with the situations that they were 
confronted with. Today we will make sure that from here on 
forward everything above $500 is publicly disclosed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the only reason the minister 
announced today these 42 incidents of fraud and the loss of up 
to $2 million in taxpayers’ money was because the opposition 
Saskatchewan Party asked the question, Mr. Speaker. Theirs is 
a policy of, if nobody asks, we’re not going to tell, Mr. Speaker. 
Amazingly with a straight face this morning, with a straight 
face, the minister said this: 
 

“Transparency and financial accountability have been the 
hallmarks of the NDP government . . . ” [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And if by transparency and accountability the minister means 
distortion and cover-up, he’s completely right, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s what we’ve seen. We saw it with SPUDCO. 
They didn’t fess up to anything until they got caught. Six 
months of cover-up until they got caught. We saw it in the 
campaign. They didn’t campaign on a tax hike. They increased 
taxes after the campaign. And the minister of Finance at the 
time said, well you wouldn’t want to tell the people about your 
agenda for a tax hike during an election campaign. And now we 
see, over the last three years, 42 incidents of cover-up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why the culture of cover-up in his 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we were aware, as a 
result of two significant incidents, one involving the 
Department of Environment, one involving the Department of 
Community Resources, that there were two significant issues 
that were publicly disclosed earlier. Those amount to about $1.5 
million worth of fraud, of theft, of misappropriation. That’s 
what those represent. 
 
Today what we have provided is additional reporting as a result 
of a government-wide review during that three-year period. We 
went back and we looked at all government departments, 
Crown corporations, and agencies and we have provided a 
complete list to the members of the Public Accounts. 
 
More so, Mr. Speaker, we will go further than a government has 
gone before in making sure that on a quarterly basis the 
government will report directly to the chairman of the Public 
Accounts Committee all incidents over $500. This will provide 
us with one of the most stringent public reporting processes in 
Canada today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, incredibly now the Minister of 
Finance — and I assume the Premier — is saying, trust us. It’s 
notwithstanding SPUDCO, notwithstanding the little tax 
cover-up in the last campaign, notwithstanding what’s 
happened with these 42 incidents of fraud. We are now, the 
NDP are now going to clean up this issue in the government, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what the Minister of Finance is saying. 
 
That’ll happen, Mr. Speaker, right about the time that O.J. finds 
the real killer, I think, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is that 
this information, this announcement today would not have 
happened if we don’t ask written questions. We have to ask 500 
written questions of this Premier, of this government which 
they refuse to answer in a timely basis. They’ve finally come 
forward with the answer now and we find out that they have 
been covering these things up. Again to the Premier: take to his 
feet and explain to the people of this province why the culture 
of cover-up in his government. 
 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as a legislator I think that 
I can say quite clearly that this legislature, this government 
welcomes greater oversight of the public spending. And this 
government has moved forward to make sure that the job of the 
Public Accounts Committee is easier, that they have the 
information available to them in a format which is timely and 
which allows for that dialogue to happen directly with the 
officials that are dealing with it. 
 
The member opposite I think is attempting to besmirch the 
reputation of a lot of civil servants in this province. In each of 
these cases that we have dealt with today, we have seen that the 
civil servants have taken — or the managers and the supervisors 
have taken — decisive action, in some cases involving a 
situation as small as $10. They have acted. And that is, I think, 
a sign of what has been happening within the civil service. They 
have not been covering up as the member opposite would say. 
He is wrong again on that. Rather, they have been dealing with 
it. 
 
What we can improve, however, is the public reporting process. 
Our government has an agenda to do that. I would welcome the 
member’s scrutiny of that. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it isn’t managers, it isn’t 
professional civil servants that have been covering anything up. 
It is this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. It’s this government 
that gets questions in the Legislative Assembly from the 
opposition and refuses to answer them for matters of a month. 
It’s this government that waited six long years to force that 
member for Prince Albert to tell the truth about the SPUDCO 
scandal, Mr. Speaker. He wouldn’t have told the truth of his 
own volition. We had to drag court documents into this 
Legislative Assembly and expose the truth. Now we needed 
questions to be asked of that minister and of that Premier before 
they would fess up on these instances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a pattern the likes of which 
we saw with the previous federal Liberal government in terms 
of their forthrightness with the people of the province. Why in 
the world won’t the Premier answer the basic question? Why 
did he cover these things up? Why the culture of cover-up in 
this government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, citizens of this province 
are aware that the party opposite has a 25-year deficit in terms 
of credibility on this issue. Members are well aware . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well aware that it is this government, 
this government that has acted since 1992 to clean up the 
financial affairs, to make sure we’ve got a tighter financial ship, 
to make sure we’ve got better financial reporting, to make sure 
that we’ve got financial practices which are in place to deal 
with the issues that governments face. For the member opposite 
to allege anything else shows not only is he not being forthright 
but is lacking in credibility on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this morning’s release from the NDP Finance minister 
had the quote and I want to reread that quote. It says: 
 

“Transparency and financial accountability have been the 
hallmarks of the NDP government since the early 1990’s.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government hid the facts. They hid the 
facts. Today we find out that 42 fraud cases dating back to 2003 
are now suddenly available to be looked at. Two million dollars 
in missing money, Mr. Speaker, including inappropriate 
purchases using a government credit card, stolen lottery tickets, 
stolen cigarettes, debit card fraud, forged cheques, stolen money 
— which included money stolen from a Christmas function. If 
the NDP is so accountable, why have they only provided 
information back to 2003-2004? What about the time since the 
current Premier was elected? What happened during that time 
period? 
 
[14:00] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we have undertaken a 
three-year review in terms of what the situation was. And we 
feel that this provides us with a good understanding of the 
situation. Let’s understand fully here that of the $1.9 million 
that’s being dealt with, 1.7 of which has been previously 
disclosed as having been misused. 
 
What we are now dealing with are a number of smaller issues. It 
doesn’t mean they’re any less serious, but they are nevertheless 
smaller. I don’t what the threshold is the member opposite 
would seek for us to have that level of reporting at, because that 
party has never put forward any such plan — never put forward 
that plan. 
 
It is this New Democratic Party government that is putting 
forward a threshold that says, every cash theft over $200 will be 
reported directly to the police. Every incident of 
misappropriation — not simply theft, not simply fraud — every 
issue of misappropriation of over 500 will be reported directly 
to who? The Chair of the Public Accounts Committee, which is 
chaired by the former leader of the opposition. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is an open, honest, and accountable government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the NDP wants to 
sweep any incidents of fraud that occurred during those years 
under the carpet. And they want to continue their systematic 
cover-up. If the NDP is open and accountable as they claim, 
why wouldn’t they voluntarily provide this information to the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter which auditor’s report you read. 
This one is dated 2002 and it says: 
 

This report continues to focus on encouraging the 
Government to improve its accountability to the public. 
Improving public accountability fosters better 
management of public resources. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter which auditor’s report you look 
at over the last number of years. The auditor has been indicating 
to this government they have to put in place a better 
accountability package. Years and years and years have gone by 
— a lot more than three, I might add. Will the Premier commit 
today to providing a full accounting of all incidents since he 
became Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I find it surprising that the former 
Chair of the Public Accounts Committee asks this question 
now. I think it begs the question of where that member was — 
sitting in the Public Accounts Chair — when he had the 
opportunity to question directly officials. Not just over the last 
three years, not just over the last six years — that member has 
had 10 years to ask these questions. During that time period that 
member knows full well that we have continued to work with 
the auditor, with the private-sector accounting firms, with the 
comptroller, with department officials to make sure we’ve got 
one of the best financial management regimes in Canada. The 
member knows that. I think it would do a service to this House 
for him to admit it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the auditor’s reports that go to the Public Accounts 
Committee, recommendations have been passed. These are 
recommendations put forward by the auditor, and they are 
recommendations that members on that side of the House voted 
for, years and years and years ago, to improve the 
accountability of this Legislative Assembly. And they haven’t 
been acted on. Fourteen years has gone by since — this minister 
mentioned the Gass report of 1992 — 14 years of NDP rule to 
finally see today’s announcement that indeed we have to move 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government cannot be trusted. In light of 
today’s events, surely the NDP government would be willing to 

commit today to providing the people of Saskatchewan with a 
full accounting of information on all fraud in government back 
to 1991. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit to a full 
accounting of all fraud cases since the NDP government came 
to power in 1991? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well why stop there? Why stop there, 
Mr. Speaker? I mean under this, why don’t we go back to the 
days of Jimmy Gardiner? I mean the members opposite are 
fascinated by this. 
 
Don’t worry about the accountability issues that the member 
opposite raises in terms of this administration because we are 
taking measures to improve them. Mr. Speaker, here’s what the 
Provincial Comptroller says in his report to the former leader of 
the opposition, the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee. He 
says: 
 

Based on [the] work performed by . . . [his] Office and 
information gathered regarding . . . [the] incidents . . . [he] 
believes that these were not the result of broad or systemic 
problems . . . [of] the Government. Rather, the incidents 
occurred due to a small number of individuals either not 
adhering to proper controls and procedures or not 
exercising adequate supervisory or management oversight. 

 
What is it the Provincial Auditor says? The Provincial Auditor 
says that: 
 

. . . the 130 agencies covered by this report have adequate 
practices . . . [and] manage risks to public resources. That 
is, the agencies have sound practices to safeguard public 
resources and have complied with [their statutory 
requirements] . . . 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what the officials who guard the public 
finances have to say. If there is more to be done, I welcome the 
member’s suggestion on how we can work together to do it. But 
this otherwise is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. And the 
Chair recognizes the member for Cannington. 
 

Thefts at Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the recommendations were 
made by the Provincial Auditor. They were made by the Public 
Accounts Committee. They were not acted upon by that 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is riddled with dishonesty. 
They are neither open nor accountable. Today we learned of 
$100,000 that was misappropriated by a former employee of 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] in 2003. That was 
taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. And the worst part is the NDP 
government never made it public until they got caught hiding it, 
and that was today, Mr. Speaker — three years later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a systematic culture of cover-up which exists 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

within the NDP cabinet and caucus, and that’s those 30 people 
sitting right there. It took six years to admit the faults at 
SPUDCO by that minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Minister of SGI: why did the NDP government cover up 
this case of fraud? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, very clearly there was no 
attempt to cover up anything. Mr. Speaker, what happened was 
that SGI was following the accountabilities that were in place at 
the time that guided them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the incident came to light, then the 
employee was confronted, was terminated, was charged, went 
to court, and in fact pled guilty. And, Mr. Speaker, in addition 
to that, the report was made to the audit committee of the board 
of SGI twice — when the incident was discovered and then 
again in the annual report. 
 
At that meeting, Mr. Speaker, the external auditor to SGI as 
well as the Provincial Auditor’s office are present. Mr. Speaker, 
all that was required was done, Mr. Speaker. And what the 
minister has announced today is that from this point forward, 
including for Crown corporations, that reports of instances over 
$500 be reported on a quarterly basis to the Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That sounds 
like David Dingwall saying, I’m entitled to my entitlements 
because that’s how it’s written. He did everything that he could 
do. Did he issue a press release? Did they inform the Crown 
Corporations Committee? No, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t done, and 
there was two SGI reports in that time period after that. 
 
Of the $100,000 that was misappropriated, only $14,500 was 
recovered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first the NDP hides the fact that the theft even 
happened. Secondly, taxpayers’ money goes missing and they 
don’t get it back. Mr. Speaker, the NDP are failing the people of 
Saskatchewan and accident victims. Mr. Speaker, what has this 
NDP government done to get the people’s money back and 
done to ensure that accident victims benefit from SGI money 
and not criminals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is a little difficult to 
understand how the hon. member would suggest that this was 
somehow hid when in fact it was a court process, a public court 

process, Mr. Speaker. In that court process, the prosecutor used 
evidence to bring the case in the amount of $14,673. Mr. 
Speaker, that amount has been returned. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, SGI is not content to rest there 
but is in fact taking civil action to recover the remaining 
amount. It is the full intention of SGI, Mr. Speaker, that the full 
amount will be recovered. That’s where it belongs and that’s 
what will be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, this was just one incident 
in a flood of fraud cases that were covered up by this NDP 
government. We’ve long known about the government hiding 
from the truth, SPUDCO. We now know there’s a culture of 
cover-up present with the NDP cabinet and caucus. This NDP 
government is riddled with mismanagement. 
 
In the same Crown, SGI in 2003 had another fraud case — 
$19,000 went missing. And I quote from the summary of 
responses to written questions: 
 

A total of $18,955 in cash and cheques went missing from 
a locked cabinet in the Autofund Payables [and] 
Receivables area of . . . SGI office. 

 
It goes on to say the theft is unsolved after a police 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the police investigate a crime in a public Crown 
and the government doesn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan. 
Again a question, Mr. Speaker: why did the minister cover up 
this case of fraud? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member answers his 
own question. There was a theft which occurred in 2003 in the 
amount of $18,955 in cash and cheques that went missing from 
a locked cabinet in the Auto Fund payables recoverable office 
of SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was reported to the police. The police have 
done an investigation and the SGI special investigation unit has 
also conducted its investigation. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, to 
this point there has been no conclusion to that investigation. 
 
And I ask the hon. member, what more can be done when you 
perceive that there is a theft, that you report the theft to police? 
That is what was done. It was most appropriate and, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know what more could be done than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

Loss Prevention Measures 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
cover-up is falling apart and so in the minister’s announcement 
this morning the buzzwords that were about improving 
reporting procedures. In other words he’s committed to actually 
telling the public about these types of incidents through the 
Public Accounts Committee on a go-forward basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while reporting is all well and good after 
pressure from the opposition forces them into it, what about 
preventing the fraud? There was very little in this morning’s 
announcement to assure the people of Saskatchewan that there 
are measures in place to prevent fraud cases like the 42 that the 
Minister of Finance had to confess to this morning. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister, lip service is not good enough. What 
good is improving reporting if there aren’t appropriate fraud 
prevention mechanisms put in place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, surely the Chair of the 
Public Accounts Committee is not accusing the Provincial 
Comptroller of not having sufficient management controls in 
place. 
 
What we are talking about today is how we’re going to enhance 
these. And as such I announced a number of new measures to 
do exactly that. Enhanced internal audit functions in the 
Provincial Comptroller’s office including additional staff; 
improved training for managers and employees to ensure 
effective understanding of financial management practices; 
increased emphasis on financial competencies of staff including 
new potential partnerships with public accounting firms to bring 
them in to share their expertise; and additionally of course the 
new approach that we have to making sure we’ve got a more 
regular and timely reporting of these incidents. 
 
I think that this is a balanced package. It builds on the strength 
of financial management that the NDP has brought to 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I sit as the Chair of the Public Accounts and I have 
seen time after time the Provincial Auditor bring forward 
reports and recommendations saying that there isn’t proper 
preventative measures in place. He’s telling the departments 
that they need to improve their procedures. He’s telling the 
ministers in charge of these departments, the NDP ministers, 
that they need to clean up their act. 
 
Back 10 years, Community Resources — it used to be called 
Social Services — were told that their procedures were not 
sufficient and, Mr. Speaker, the answer back then was the same 
as the answer we’re hearing today from this minister: we’re 
going to fix it in the future. Yes, it’s been a problem in the past 

but we’re going to fix it in the future. Mr. Speaker, that minister 
and that NDP government have no credibility. They have no 
desire to fix anything unless they get caught. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the question: why in today’s announcement 
was this given only after the official opposition asked the 
questions that they didn’t want to answer? Why is it only when 
the minister was pressured, when the NDP was pressured into 
answering these questions do they come up with this scheme 
and commitment to do better in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
unfortunately have a 25-year deficit in terms of credibility on 
this issue. Listen to what the member for Cypress Hills had to 
say. He said, you can’t prevent everybody, you can’t make sure 
or be certain that everybody’s going to follow the rules all the 
time. 
 
Why is it that member says this, but the former leader of the 
opposition seems to think that it’s possible . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just 
find that the question is rather incredible. And perhaps what the 
members opposite should do is have a caucus meeting, get their 
act together, and decide which of these statements they want to 
pursue. I appreciate the interpretation from the former leader of 
the opposition. 
 
But listen to what the Provincial Auditor says in his most recent 
report which is under review by the Public Accounts 
Committee. He says that: 
 

For the most part the . . . [130] agencies covered by this 
report have adequate practices to manage risks to public 
resources. That is, the agencies have sound practices to 
safeguard public resources and have complied with the 
laws governing their operations. 

 
That’s not what I say. That’s not what members on this side 
say. That is what the Provincial Auditor says. And maybe the 
Chair of the Public Accounts Committee should listen to him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — I stand on behalf of the government to table 
written questions no. 567 to 581 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has tabled questions from 567 to 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

581 inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, The Film and Video 
Classification Act currently governs the approval and 
classification of films including videotapes and DVDs [digital 
versatile disc]. The Bill extends the application of the Act to 
video and computer games. 
 
The entertainment environment has changed considerably since 
The Film and Video Classification Act was enacted in 1985. 
Over the last 20 years the content of video and computer games 
has continued to advance in terms of graphic quality and 
complexity. Canadians are avid consumers of video and 
computer games and are among the best equipped players in the 
world. The average age of the person who plays video games is 
30 years old; 63 per cent of game players are over 18 years of 
age. 
 
The video and computer game sector is the fastest growing 
sector in the entertainment industry. In 2005 the video and 
computer games industry in Canada, including video game 
hardware and accessories, generated $890 million total revenue. 
 
As a result of these changes in the industry, children face a 
higher risk of exposure to violent video and computer games. 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill responds to the needs of parents and 
consumers for a safe and informed marketplace. The 
amendments included in this Bill will require video and 
computer games to be classified under the Act and will allow 
video and computer game classifications made by the 
Entertainment Software Rating Board to be adopted and 
enforced in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Entertainment Software Rating Board is a self-regulatory 
body that has developed a rating system for video, computer, 
and online games. It was established in 1994 by the 
Entertainment Software Association which is an industry trade 
association representing companies that publish video and 
computer games. 
 
The ESRB [Entertainment Software Rating Board] ratings are 
designed to provide information about video and computer 
game content so consumers can make informed purchase and 
rental decisions. The ESRB rating system is widely used in 
North America. Most of the major video games and computer 
software manufacturers have adopted the ESRB rating system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Act are intended to 
harmonize Saskatchewan’s legislation with that of other 
Canadian jurisdictions. The amendments complement the 
industry’s voluntary commitment to parents program. This 
program was established jointly by the Retail Council of 

Canada and the Entertainment Software Association of Canada 
in October 2004. It is designed to restrict selling or renting 
games to children that are meant for older teenagers and adults. 
 
The program’s mandate is to help parents make informed 
choices for their families by educating consumers about the 
ESRB rating system and ratings enforcement. Over 90 per cent 
of the video and computer games sold in Canada are from 
retailers participating in the commitment to parents program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will make compliance to the ESRB 
ratings mandatory for all retailers in the province. As a result it 
will be an offence to sell, rent or exhibit video computer games 
classified as mature to a person under the age of 17, and sell, 
rent or exhibit a video or computer game classified as adults 
only to a person under the age of 18. The amendments will 
require adult video and computer games to be approved and 
classified under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also updates the existing penalties for 
non-compliance of the Act. Mr. Speaker, in reviewing this 
legislation we have consulted with consumer associations and 
video computer game industry. I appreciate the time, effort, and 
co-operation that these groups have contributed to the 
development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Film 
and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 30, The Film and Video Classification Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise to speak about Bill No. 30, An Act to amend the Film 
and Video Classification Act. Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in 
this province would applaud the intent of this legislation which 
is to protect our children from inappropriate films and video 
games that are available in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly true that with the availability of 
the Internet and downloading over the Internet, various kinds of 
inappropriate material is bound to be available to children, and 
this isn’t appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do trust that in terms of this legislation that it has 
been contemplated that there are steps taken to protect children 
from downloading inappropriate video games and things of that 
nature over the Internet as well, because certainly there are 
these venues for acquiring this material that’s inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we send a strong 
message as a society that we want to make sure that the people 
that sell this material have to do so under a strict standard of 
guidelines that protect our most vulnerable citizens, our 
children. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is aspects of this legislation 
that we want to ensure that is strong enough and appropriately 
worded so that the intended purpose that the minister has 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

outlined will indeed be achieved in the wording of this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we consult with people 
that truly understand all the ramifications of the video industry 
and that we have an opportunity to make sure that the 
safeguards are appropriate and in place and sufficient to do the 
job. In order for that to happen, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 30 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant 

la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today and move 
second reading of The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will bring about seven changes to The 
Victims of Crime Act, 1995. First, the Act will be amended to 
include the list of guiding principles approved in 2003 by 
ministers responsible for victim services, setting out how 
victims of crime should be treated. This amendment will 
acknowledge the needs of victims and demonstrate that victims 
have a voice in the criminal justice process. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the general application period for 
compensation claims will be changed from one to two years 
from the date of the victim’s injury or death. The minister will 
be authorized to extend this period where it is reasonable to do 
so. This amendment will ensure that compensation will be 
available to all victims in appropriate circumstances. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, the application period for victims of sexual 
abuse will begin to run on the date the crime is reported to the 
police. Presently the application period begins to run for a 
sexual abuse victim when he or she understands the nature of 
the injuries and recognizes the effects of the misconduct. This 
provision is difficult to apply, Mr. Speaker. The amendment 
will make the application period clear. As with other 
applications, the minister will have the ability to extend the 
application period where appropriate. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will allow for the 
provision of compensation to immediate family members of 
homicide victims for the costs of short-term counselling after 
the victim’s death. There’s presently a need for crisis 
counselling in the short term, after which counselling is 
available at no cost through the regional health authorities. 
 
Fifth, the application form will be removed from the 
regulations. Having the minister approve the application form 
will make it easier to amend as necessary. 

Sixth, Mr. Speaker, the minister will be allowed to refuse or 
reduce compensation in limited circumstances. This will be 
possible where the victim’s injury or death occurred while he or 
she was participating in a criminal offence or where the 
applicant has not provided information as requested by the 
minister within a reasonable time after the request was made. 
The purpose of the first provision is to allow for a refusal or a 
reduction of compensation where the victim was involved in a 
crime, such as a drug deal, home invasion, or assault. The 
purpose of the second is to encourage co-operation in relation to 
the application process. 
 
Seventh, Mr. Speaker, an appeal process will be provided in the 
legislation. The amendments allow applicants to request that the 
minister reconsider his or her decision respecting compensation, 
and they require the minister to do so. If the applicant is not 
satisfied through reconsideration, he or she may appeal to an 
appeal committee which will make a final decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will be very well-received by 
the general public, victims, and those working in the area of 
victim services. The amendments exemplify our government’s 
continued commitment to fair, just, and respectful treatment of 
victims of crime, to ensuring that victims have access to the 
victims compensation program where appropriate, and to 
providing victims a voice in the justice process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move the second reading of The 
Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 32, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that this is an important bit of legislation. The initial 
legislation that was introduced in 1995 established an important 
principle of making sure that in this province the victims of 
crime were going to be treated appropriately and that they were 
going to be compensated where that was appropriate. 
 
This legislation to amend that 1995 legislation adds some 
important points that I think are noteworthy. It indicates a 
general set of principles for how victims of crime are going to 
be treated and how the funds should be used to promote those 
principles. The principles being: treating the victims with 
respect, ensuring minimum inconvenience for victims, 
respecting the concerns and views of victims, and ensuring that 
victims should receive prompt and fair redress for the harm that 
they have suffered. Mr. Speaker, I think those are important 
statement of principles in terms of how this province treats 
people that are victims of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also note that in this legislation it expands the 
coverage, if you like, of the victims of crime to secondary 
victims that are defined as a spouse or a child of an adult 
victim, and if the victim is a child, the parents or siblings of the 
child victim. So it expands the coverage and the potential 
definition of victims to beyond the individual that is indeed 
victimized to their immediate family. 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is important. It sends a clear 
signal that in this province we are going to treat victims of 
crime with compassion and dignity and respect. And I think that 
is a very important principle that we all should consider 
supporting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is important changes to the 1995 
legislation, and we want to make sure that nothing was omitted 
by accident. And in order to do that we will like to consult. And 
at this moment, I would like to adjourn the debate to allow that 
to happen. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 32 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to today to move 
second reading of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 
Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, the amendment will allow the transfer 
of 258 hectares of Crown land to the Mistawasis First Nation 
under the treaty land entitlement process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there is an ongoing need to protect 
important wildlife habitat. Recent additions of 51,799 hectares 
of ecologically important Crown land into The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act have exceeded removals, including those in this 
amendment, by approximately 4,856 hectares. 
 
We must also recognize the value of participating in a process 
that allows for our commitment to provide assistance where 
feasible for the transfer of lands to reserve status. Mistawasis 
First Nation has met all the conditions related to the sale of 
these Crown lands and if this amendment is approved, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food will sell these 
Crown lands at fair market value. 
 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is presently responsible for 
the management and administration of the 258 hectares under 
selection by the Mistawasis First Nation. 
 
These lands are currently designated as protected under The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, the Act does not 
allow for removal by regulation of Crown lands from The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act schedule for the purposes of 
specific land claims. These amendments to the Act are required 
to allow for the sale of these lands by Saskatchewan Agriculture 
and Food to the Mistawasis First Nation for the purpose of 
satisfying the specific claim. Mr. Speaker, the amendments 
before us will allow 258 hectares of land subject to the Act to 
be sold by Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 33, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
speak on Bill No. 33, an Act respecting The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, I think this is an important 
commitment in terms of the province of Saskatchewan in 
dealing with a specific land claim between the Mistawasis Band 
and the Crown. And I understand, as the minister has well 
explained, that in order for these particular lands to be 
transferred as part of the specific land claim, they have to first 
have legislation that will remove it from the wildlife protection 
basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am quite certain that this is appropriate. I 
think what we would want to do is make sure that we 
communicate with the Mistawasis First Nation to make sure 
that this is in accordance with the negotiations that they’ve 
conducted with the Crown, and to make sure that this answers 
the specific land claim that they’ve had with the Crown. And so 
for us to do that successfully, I would move to adjourn debate at 
this time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on Bill No. 33 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the member from 
Saskatoon Centre on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leave to 
introduce guests please. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre is asking 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your west gallery today is some family members from Moose 
Jaw. My brother, Reg Forbes, and my sister-in-law, Cheryl 
Robbins, are over here this afternoon, spending some time in 
Regina and seeing what we do in our House here. 
 
So I’d ask all members here to welcome our guests to the 
Saskatchewan legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 
2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I stand before you to move 
second reading of The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006. The 
proposed new subsections 5 and 6 of the Act will provide 
practical, efficient, and effective options for maintenance and 
disposition of seized live wildlife. This enhanced capability is 
particularly significant in cases involving seizures of large 
numbers of live wildlife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these proposed changes are legislative tools 
required by the department to effectively deal with situations 
involving both illegally captured, free-ranging wildlife, and 
illegally imported game farm wildlife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with chronic wasting disease and other 
wildlife-related diseases becoming of greater public and 
resource management concern, this amendment will improve 
government’s ability to effectively deal with animals illegally 
imported into the province or captured from the wild. 
 
Rather than the department being required to house and care for 
seized live wildlife for an extended period of time until all legal 
processes have been completed, Mr. Speaker, the proposed 
amendments will allow for partial seizure or seizure and 
confinement or quarantine at location. The other proposed 
options, Mr. Speaker, include deportation, sale, humane 
destruction, or release to the wild as practical and cost-effective 
alternatives to lengthy care, housing, and disposition of seized 
live wildlife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will provide the statutory base 
for handling live wildlife in seizure situations in an efficient, 
effective, and practical manner without requiring the 
government to maintain large numbers of wildlife in the same 
condition as when seized. If, Mr. Speaker, court proceedings 
result in acquittal, the Crown’s liability for any wildlife seized 
is limited to the fair market value at the time of the seizure. 
 
These amendments are similar to existing legislation in 
Alberta’s Wildlife Act and Canada’s Fisheries Act. Mr. 
Speaker, the amendments also provide enforcement and penalty 
provisions to clarify existing legislation. They also broaden the 
discretionary ability of the courts to extend a license prohibition 
period in recognition of a serious contravention of the Act or 
regulations. 
 
The amendments would automatically cancel all big game, 
game bird, and fur licences issued pursuant to the Act or the 
regulations for most contraventions of the Act or regulations or, 
Mr. Speaker, in the case of a wildlife trafficking offence, any 
wildlife related licence. As it stands currently, a person 
convicted of an offence under the Act or regulations would only 
lose the licence related to the offence. As with the existing 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, the authority to cancel licences upon 
conviction lies with the courts. And these proposed 
amendments do not change that authority with the exception of 

a conviction for a wildlife trafficking offence. Mr. Speaker, in 
this instance the Minister of Environment would determine 
what wildlife-related licence, if any, would be cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other changes allow judges more discretion in 
cancelling licences for a period longer than one year should the 
offence be of a serious nature or involve an individual with 
multiple previous convictions. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will allow for a 
prosecution to be commenced any time within two years of the 
date of the minister becoming aware of the offence. Currently 
prosecution cannot be commenced after two years of the date of 
the contravention. This limitation is a concern where there has 
been ongoing illegal commercial wildlife activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 34, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on this Bill that’s cited as The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the minister has fairly well outlined the 
significance of the wildlife industry, if you like, in our province 
— both the hunting business and the game farming business — 
and some of the threats that are in that industry and chronic 
wasting disease being one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that there are the appropriate 
bits of legislation in order to make sure that the wildlife assets 
that we have in this province are properly protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to have stricter measures for conviction 
of these offences in the province, but I also think that it’s 
important for the government to make sure that there are 
sufficient numbers of conservation officers in the field in order 
to make these penalties stick and to enforce these kinds of 
directives. Mr. Speaker, it takes both aspects in order to have a 
successful initiative in this field. 
 
I certainly think that this is a fairly detailed Bill. The minister 
has taken some time to explain in some detail the ramifications 
and the changes envisaged in this Bill, and certainly we as the 
official opposition are going to want to consult with people in 
this whole broad industry — hunters and farmers, game farmers 
as well, and conservation officers. And in order to facilitate 
that, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 34 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2006. 
It seems appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that I raise the topic of water 
in the very week that we acknowledge World Water Day which 
is tomorrow on March 22. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the addition of section 83.1 will make it clear that 
orders made pursuant to section 69 under earlier legislation 
prior to May 27, 2005, may be enforced with these measures 
made available in The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 
2005. These powers did not exist under the previous legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority legislation 
was proclaimed on October 1, 2002, as a result of our 
government’s safe drinking water strategy. It was formed by 
bringing together the water management responsibilities from 
SaskWater, Saskatchewan Environment, and the Saskatchewan 
Wetland Conservation Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act 
was proclaimed over three and a half years ago, it has 
accomplished many significant initiatives designed to protect 
the quality and quantity of water for Saskatchewan people: the 
development of a watershed and aquifer planning model for 
Saskatchewan, the development of a process to monitor and 
report on the health of our watersheds which we released earlier 
this year, and we are currently leading provincial and federal 
officials in the development of an integrated water management 
framework to coordinate existing and emerging water issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March 2005 our government identified several 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act 
which were enacted to strengthen the authority’s capacity to 
ensure proper management of Saskatchewan’s water resources. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I wish to propose a further amendment by 
adding section 83.1 to the legislation which will clarify 
provisions of The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 
2005. Mr. Speaker, this amendment will enable the authority to 
register notices of complaints against drainage works on the 
titles to the lands on which the works are located. It also will 
enable the authority to register orders with respect to 
remediation work required on the land titles and in the case of 
non-compliance with an order. And it will enable the authority 
to undertake the remedial work ordered and register with the 
Court of Queen’s Bench a certificate of the authority’s costs 
which, once registered, has the same force as if it were a 
judgment of the court for the recovery of a debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will strengthen the intent of the 
previous legislation and strengthen the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority’s ability to provide watershed 
management. Mr. Speaker, thank you, and I will now move 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 
2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority that 
Bill No. 39, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise and speak 
briefly on the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment 
Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, I recognize and recall that the 
watershed authority Act last year that was brought forward was 
fairly comprehensive in nature and I would suspect that this 
single clause amendment comes as a result of an omission that 
the government had in the original legislation. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s reasonable to make sure that the 
Watershed Authority has the appropriate authorities and powers 
it needs in order to comply with the direction of the Act. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I think when I heard the minister talking about the 
whole issue of potentially registering a lien or a claim against 
the title of land, that certainly would be something that we 
would want to scrutinize very carefully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years in our province, there have been 
many issues of the proper removal and drainage of water from 
farm land so that it could be used for agricultural purposes, 
either grain and oilseeds or pasture lands. And I think that that 
is an area where there has always been traditionally some 
contentious issues and the possibility of misunderstanding. And 
if I understood the minister correctly that this amendment 
would allow the Watershed Authority to actually put a claim on 
to the title of the land, I think that we would want to make sure 
that this is indeed appropriate and is not a measure that is too 
repressive to achieve the results that are desired. 
 
So in order for us to communicate and to consult with the 
agricultural community and with the people in charge of the 
Watershed Authority, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that 
we have these discussions. And in order for that to happen, at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that second reading debate on Bill No. 39 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 
my remarks I will be moving second reading of Bill No. 45, 
The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. 
Speaker, The Local Government Election Act governs how 
municipalities and school boards conduct elections. 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

The Bill before us contains amendments concerning election 
procedures, amendments that will provide greater consistency 
between the election provisions for urban municipalities, school 
boards, and rural municipalities, and amendments that are of a 
housekeeping nature and follow up on the incorporation of rural 
municipal election procedures into the Act. This took place 
effective January 1, 2006, when the former Rural Municipality 
Act, 1989 was replaced with The Municipalities Act. 
 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, were developed in 
consultation with the Saskatchewan Association of City Clerks, 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the Urban 
Municipal Administrators Association of Saskatchewan, the 
Rural Municipal Administrators Association of Saskatchewan, 
as well as officials from Saskatchewan Learning and other 
municipal school board election stakeholders. The amendments 
have the full support of all those groups, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have already outlined the general intent of this 
Bill but, for further clarity, I will take a moment or two to 
elaborate on some of the more significant amendments. This 
will ensure all hon. members have a good understanding of 
what we are going to achieve through this Bill. 
 
I will begin with the amendments pertaining to election 
procedures. Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities have identified 
what they felt was some unclear wording in the provisions used 
to outline how a vacancy on a rural municipal council is filled 
and the number of times a voter may cast a vote in an RM [rural 
municipality] election. During our consultations, Mr. Speaker, 
we did discover that the wording was a bit outdated and had 
been the cause of some confusion in the past. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill includes amendments to clarify wording in 
those areas. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, an amendment will update the 
definition of voter in the rural municipal election provisions to 
ensure that the definition is consistent with the provisions in 
The Municipalities Act. This Bill contains amendments that will 
provide for greater consistency between the election provisions 
for urban municipalities and school boards with those for rural 
municipalities. 
 
During the spring 2005 session of the legislature, The 
Municipalities Act was passed. The Municipalities Act replaced 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and The Rural Municipality 
Act, 1989 and came into effect on January 1, 2006. 
 
In concert with passing The Municipalities Act, the rural 
election provisions from the previous rural municipality Act 
were incorporated into The Local Government Election Act as a 
separate division applying only to rural municipalities. This also 
came into force January 1, 2006. 
 
The amendments that will provide for greater consistency are 
quite straightforward, Mr. Speaker. First, the appointment of an 
agent for a candidate running in an RM election will now be 
done on a prescribed form, as is the case for urban and school 
board elections. This change will also require the agent to make 
a declaration similar to the declaration required from a 
candidate’s agent for an urban or school board election. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will add a section to provide the authority 
for a candidate running in a rural municipal election or the 
candidate’s agent to object to the entitlement of any person 
intending to vote. 
 
Section 72 of the Act already provides the authority for a 
candidate or a candidate’s agent in an urban municipality or a 
school division election to object to the entitlement of any 
person intending to vote. However, similar authority for RM 
candidates or the candidate’s agent was never in the old rural 
election procedures. This has been a cause of concern for RM 
candidates, candidate’s agents, and for RMs in general, all of 
whom feel the authority with respect to objecting to a voter 
should be consistent between urban municipal, school division, 
and rural municipal elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that the ability to object to a 
person voting does not deny that person the right to vote. If 
there is a challenge, the voter merely completes a voter’s 
registration form stating that he or she is a voter. If the validity 
of the election is ever challenged in court, the recording of an 
objection does provide evidence to the justice which may help 
in a decision. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the authority for rural municipalities to 
hold joint elections with urban municipalities and school boards 
was provided under the rural election procedures in 2002. But 
similar authority was not previously provided for cities, small 
urban municipalities, or school divisions. The amended 
provision in this Bill will standardize this authority by 
extending it to cities, urban municipalities, and school divisions. 
The authority however, Mr. Speaker, to conduct joint elections 
has not been extended to northern municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 
as no RMs are located in northern Saskatchewan with whom a 
northern municipality could agree to conduct a joint election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 
45, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 45, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise to speak to Bill No. 45, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was listening to the minister outline all the 
shortcomings and problems that he was proposing to correct in 
this legislation, I’m surprised we’ve been able to elect anybody 
in the municipal and school levels at all in the past. It seems as 
if there is so many shortcomings that this legislation is deemed 
to correct that I don’t know how we’ve carried on so far. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, insofar as there are changes in the way school 
board authorities and boundaries and jurisdictions occur, it’s 
certainly, I think, important to as much as possible to streamline 
the process and to provide the tools to facilitate the potential 
holding of joint elections and things of that nature, because it 
simply makes a lot of sense in order to have people go to the 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

polls that’s on one date rather than a number of them for these 
various authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, this particularly affects 
rural and urban municipalities and school boards. I also am 
wondering if there has been any consideration of including 
health boards in this process as well, because that’s another 
body that, you know, needs to have some guidance in terms of 
elected representatives into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that all of these considerations require a 
great deal of consultation with the various bodies affected and 
in order for that to be facilitated at this time I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate for Bill No. 45 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 4 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just spend a 
few moments on Bill No. 4, The Assessment Management 
Agency Amendment Act. 
 
What this Bill is doing is basically changing the commercial 
sector to move to a market-value model which we are totally 
supportive of. It’s interesting to note that the system that we’ve 
been using in the past, there have been an awful lot of 
discrepancies in it where we’ve talked in the last session about 
buildings that would be very, very highly assessed on the 
commercial side, and yet a government building that’s sitting 
right nearby and at the same basic structure was assessed at a 
far different level. And that was brought up in the past, and so 
maybe the new market-value model will be far better serving 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one issue that I’d like to just talk about 
briefly, and that is in SAMA’s [Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency] mandate to bring the market value in by 
the year . . . January 1, 2009. They’re sending out commercial 
information request forms. And we’ve been getting a number of 
calls on these forms because they go quite in-depth about 
finances and whatnot. 
 
And people are phoning us and asking, do they have to fill these 
forms out? And we don’t have an answer to that as yet, if they 

are required to by this government to fill the forms out. There’s 
information in these forms dealing with incomes and a lot of 
stuff that could be actually found in income tax reports. So that 
is something, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll be addressing in 
committee. And so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
forward this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 
No. 4, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
4, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 4 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 5 — The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Bill No. 
5 follows along with Bill No. 4 addressing the amendments in 
The Cities Act to deal with fair value or market value 
assessment. 
 
There’s one item in this Bill that has raised some concern and 
that is the parking fee issue. Now I think we need some 
clarification on the issue of if a city or an institution can seize 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

and sell a vehicle to pay off a parking fine. And we understand 
from the city’s perspective that a lot of fines are left outstanding 
and they are on the hook for a bunch of money. But there’s 
some debate as to whether the city should have authority to 
seize and sell a vehicle at the expense of a financial institution. 
So that’s one of the things, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we 
will be discussing in committee. So at this time I would forward 
this Bill to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Wood River has 
moved that the Bill go forward to the committee. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that Bill 
No. 5, The Cities Amendment Act be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 5, The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs that Bill No. 5, The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 6 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
This Bill also is An Act to amend The Municipalities Act. It’s 
mostly a clean-up nature amendment to make way for the 
market value assessment model that we’ve just been talking 
about in the other two Bills. 
 
The questions that we have related to this Bill we can do in 
committee, but I’d just like to make one point. I know when this 

Bill was introduced there was a question asked of the 
government if proper consultation had been done. And there 
was assurance that the groups had in fact been consulted with. I 
had phoned the president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities] that same day and he had not even 
heard of the amendment. So that’s something that we have a 
little bit of concern about, is the consultation process when it 
comes to these Bills. 
 
But as this is basically a housecleaning type of Bill, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I would recommend it to go forward to 
committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It’s been recommended to go forward 
to committee. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, Bill No. 
6, The Municipalities Amendment Act be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 6, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs that Bill No. 6, The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Prebble that Bill No. 21 — The Boiler 
and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. Just a few 
comments, Madam Speaker, before we move this Bill to 
committee. A number of questions have been raised regarding 
the piece of legislation. However, as we observe, the legislation 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

is fairly straightforward. In fact it’s just bringing some clarity to 
the wording in the piece of legislation. 
 
But I go back to comments made by the former minister when 
he introduced second reading of this Bill in the fall. And he 
indicated at that time that proclamation of the Act, which was 
passed in 1999, has been delayed in order to develop and 
finalize supporting regulations. And he indicates these 
regulations have been shared and discussed with key 
stakeholders to ensure that they are practical and effective. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Chair, from some of the information 
we’ve received recently, there are some questions arising as to 
how extensive the discussion has been with key stakeholders. 
There’s some questions arising whether or not stakeholders 
have been informed or been involved whatsoever in discussing 
the regulations that are being proposed and that are to come 
forward in order to move this Bill forward and address a 
number of the issues or the reason given for the reasons for this 
piece of legislation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s imperative that as pieces of 
legislation move forward in the Assembly, that when the 
government indicates that they’ve talked to stakeholders, that 
they indeed take the time to talk to stakeholders. And while I 
realize we’ve had a change in ministers since the piece of 
legislation was moved forward, I would trust that in the last 
little while there has been some actual discussion. And, Madam 
Deputy Chair, I have no idea where the regulations are as we 
haven’t had . . . the minister hasn’t had a chance to respond to 
that comment made by the former minister. But we anticipate 
that when we get into committee, we will be raising some of 
these questions in regards to this piece of legislation. 
 
While the legislation itself is fairly simple and straightforward, 
it’s quite obvious that there were a number of issues that needed 
to be addressed going back to the 1999 piece of legislation. And 
the fact that it’s been delayed this long in receiving 
proclamation indicates to us that while the legislation came 
forward in 1999 and has been updated in 2005, there are some 
issues around the legislation that need to be addressed. And we 
certainly want to ensure that when we get into committee, 
Madam Deputy Chair, that we have that opportunity. And I 
know we’ll take the time. 
 
We trust that the minister and his officials will come prepared 
as well to indicate to us who they’ve talked to, the stakeholders 
they’ve actually sat down with, whether progress has been 
made in regards to the regulations that will actually be used to 
enact this piece of legislation and how it moves forward. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Chair, I believe in view of the fact that 
this legislation, as far as correcting wording in regards to the 
older piece of legislation, is fairly simply and straightforward, I 
believe more progress can be made in addressing some of the 
questions by moving this piece of legislation into committee. 
Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that the Bill would 
go to the committee. So is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety that 
Bill No. 21, The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 21, The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 
2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 21, The Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 22 — The 
Forestry Professions Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
welcome the opportunity to speak on this Bill No. 22 for 
forestry professionals. I see that seven other provinces have 
currently forestry professional legislation, and I see this Bill is 
bringing Saskatchewan up to that standard. I have questions on 
some of the fine tuning of this Bill and I have questions as to 
some of the structure of the administration of this Bill. I also 
have some questions on the powers of the Bill. I am sure that 
these questions can be answered in committee. Therefore I 
would like to see this Bill move to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that the Bill would 
move forward to committee. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The question before the Assembly is the motion by 
the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 22, The Forestry 
Professions Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 22, The Forestry Professions Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that Bill No. 22, The Forestry 
Professions Act be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 24 — The Cost 
of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The intent 
of this Bill is to disclose the cost of credit and make it easier for 
consumers to determine the actual cost of credit that they are 
facing. And in this day and age where citizens are bombarded 
by telemarketing, and some of those telemarketing calls come 
from credit card companies offering what looks on first blush, 
you know, a sweetheart deal of very low interest rates, but in 
some cases some hidden provisions or provisions that aren’t 
perhaps fully explained which could incur very high credit 
costs. 
 
I think we need to do as much as we can in order to make the 
cost of borrowing money as apparent as possible, and this Bill 
attempts to move down that road. And I think we certainly on 
this side of the House would support those measures. 
 
We do have a number of questions surrounding this particular 
piece of legislation that we will be prepared to ask in 
committee, Madam Deputy Speaker, so I would indicate on 
behalf of the opposition that we would be asking those 
additional questions in committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Moved that the Assembly would be 
ready for the question. The question before the Assembly is a 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 24, The Cost of 
Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 24, The Cost of 
Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 24, The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
[15:15] 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 19 — The Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, 
in the interests of time we’ve seen lots of fairly short speeches 
in quantity but certainly very high-quality speeches on this side 
of the House today and I’ll do my very best to uphold that 
strong tradition on this Tuesday afternoon. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Bill that we’re talking about here, An Act 
to amend The Trustee Act, really certainly a very important 
Bill. Myself, I can speak from personal experience. I am a 
trustee for my father. My father is 87 years old and has always 
been a real strong . . . strong with his bookkeeping abilities and 
his financial accounting and so on and so forth. And it really 
puts a lot of pressure on people who become trustees because 
they want to make sure that they continue that high quality and 
high level of accounting. 
 
This Bill talks about a lot of things that I think are really truly 
important under The Trustee Act and I know that my colleague, 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast who is the critic in this 
area, has spoken to me at great length about this Bill. And we 
are prepared to ask whatever questions we have remaining 
about this Bill in committee. And so therefore I would like to 
move that we move this Bill on to committee. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 19, The Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 19, The Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 19, The Trustee Amendment Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 18 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you again, Madam Speaker. Just like 
the Bill that I spoke about prior to this, Bill 19, and this one, 
Bill 18, talks about The Securities Amendment Act and 
amendments to the security Act. 
 
I have spoken at great length to our critic, the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. I know the Minister of Justice has done a 
lot of work in this area. 
 
And along with one of my colleagues, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast, we realize that this is a good, strong move 
in the fact that we are trying to harmonize some of the 
provincial legislation with federal legislation, and that can be 
nothing but good to make these kind of Acts more efficient. 
 
Again, Madam Speaker, whatever questions that we have 
remaining, we are certainly prepared to ask in committee. And 
therefore I again move that this Bill go on to committee. Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 18, The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 18, The Securities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 18, The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 15 — The 
Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to speak to Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The 
Highways and Transportation Act. 
 
As I see it, the amendment does two basic things. It rolls the 
former Highways Revolving Fund into the General Revenue 
Fund as accounting practices no longer require it to operate the 
fund. And it also increases the fines for act of civil disobedience 
like highway blockades from a frustrated public. 
 
It certainly, Madam Deputy Speaker, is interesting to note that 
the government has gone to increasing fines for so-called civil 
disobedience. We know that, especially in the North, there’s 
been a number of years in a row that residents in the North has 
been blockading roads, trying to bring their issues forward to 
the government. And the government seems to just ignore their 
concerns. 
 
And now with the demise of Weyerhaeuser in the North, I 
suppose that problem in the North will have gone away. It is too 
bad that the government didn’t in the past take some initiative 
to address their concerns because hopefully there will be a 
forestry industry in the future. Certainly under a Saskatchewan 
Party government, there will be. And these issues need to be 
addressed. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill also speaks to this fund that 
has been rolled into the General Revenue Fund. And I 
understand it was to provide custom work to a multitude of 
groups such as municipalities, school boards, and First Nations. 
And the fund was discontinued back in March 31, 2004, and 
then the government transferred all the capital assets into the 
General Revenue Fund. So this has allowed the government to 
allocate the cost of equipment over multiple years when the 
GRF [General Revenue Fund] expensed all costs in the current 



March 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the changes to The Financial 
Administration Act in 2004 meant that the fund was no longer 
needed by the government to manage the equipment’s fleet or 
work activities. And this raises a number of questions, which I 
will certainly be asking in Committee of the Whole, about 
changes to the obstruction clause in section 22. The 
government, as I mentioned before, is increasing fines for 
people who unlawfully block a highway or place an obstruction 
on the highway. And as we read it, the new section allows the 
department official or peace officer to remove any object or 
person from the highway. 
 
Now we’ve got a number of questions around that. It’s 
interesting that the . . . what more, I guess, power or control the 
government needs in order to do this. I understand the minister 
and the government can get a court order to refrain from 
obstructing the highway now. So it’s questions around that and 
also what the costs incurred by the department respecting a 
blockade or considering debts owed to the Crown. 
 
Now the Bill also speaks to fines being increasing from a 
maximum of $200 for a first offence and $500 for a second 
offence to fines of a maximum of $1,000 or 60 days 
imprisonment or both. 
 
As I said it’s very interesting because when there’s problems 
that residents have in a particular area, as in the North, or 
there’s been other cases in other parts of the province where 
highways have been blocked. Really, people aren’t normally 
willing to take such a drastic step to make their point clear. And 
so it’s interesting to see what the government’s concern is that 
they are having to bring in the added fines and punishment for 
people to display their anger over government policy and how 
it’s being dealt with by the government. And these are very 
serious situations that must take place before people take really 
the last resort and blockade highways and roads in the province. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s many, many questions that 
we have about this Bill, and we certainly will be asking those 
questions in Committee of the Whole. So, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to just thank you, and we would like to refer 
this to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Highways that Bill No. 15, The 
Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move 
that Bill No. 15, The Highways and Transportation Amendment 
Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 15, The Highways 
and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
standing committee on intergovernmental relations and 
infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the standing committee on intergovernmental relations and 
infrastructure. 

 
Bill No. 28 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 28 — The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, thank you again. 
Madam Speaker, I wish that perhaps on this Bill, The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, that I could stand and say . . . on 
Bill No. 28, that I could stand and say similar words that I had 
used on Bill 18 and 19 where we were ready to send those two 
Bills to committee because we felt that they were ready to go to 
committee and that being the final stages of a Bill in this House 
it’s appropriate that we would send them there. 
 
That’s not the case for Bill No. 28, the veterinaries Act. I’m not 
the critic for this area, Madam Speaker, but what I’ve heard 
from my colleagues over the course of time is that there seems 
to be a lot of conflict between groups — veterinarians groups, 
some other veterinarians, farmers, ranchers — some conflict 
about whether the Bill does everything it should to alleviate 
problems arising out of the veterinarian industry. 
 
Madam Speaker, I know that the association, the veterinarian 
association, has had problems with individuals who are not 
qualified, that are performing veterinary techniques out of the 
basement, so to speak, Madam Speaker, although that’s sort of a 
cliché because it’s pretty hard to do veterinary techniques out of 
your basement because it’s sort of hard to get a horse into your 
basement — although, Madam Speaker, my brother-in-law did 
have a horse at one time that he rode into the kitchen. So even 
though I use it as a cliché, it’s simply not truly impossible 
because as I said on the case of my brother-in-law, that one day 
when he rode his horse into the kitchen of his house . . . and we 
thought that was pretty unique. However we didn’t perform any 
veterinary techniques upon that horse while it was in the 
kitchen. 
 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2006 

So, Madam Speaker, the question here is that I know there are 
going to be amendments brought forward by the government. 
I’ve seen some smiles from the government side of the House, 
which is good, today. 
 
I know that there was talk about . . . there’s concerns about 
perhaps people performing acts of dentistry on horses, for 
instance, Madam Speaker. I’m also aware that there are a very 
few actual licensed veterinarians that do perform dentistry in 
Saskatchewan. So it becomes difficult for owners of horses that 
need to have teeth floated or so on and so forth. I know also, 
Madam Speaker, that’s a practice that I’ve done at my farm is 
floated the teeth on an old horse, older horse, where it needed to 
be done. And I didn’t have the opportunity to call a 
veterinarian, nor did I feel it was necessary to call a 
veterinarian. 
 
The other part of the Bill that I know raises some concerns with 
lots of people that I talked to is the castration of horses. And it 
would be required that veterinarians be present and actually do 
that practice. 
 
Again, Madam Speaker, on our farm, we’ve done them 
ourselves over the course of years. My father-in-law was sort of 
the master at that, and we performed those kinds of operations 
upon horses, our own horses, at the time. And I know it’d be 
frustrating for ranchers and farmers and owners of horses that 
felt that they were very capable of doing that to have to call a 
veterinarian to perform those kinds of procedures. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, in summing up all these, I know that there 
are many questions that remain to be answered and need to be 
answered on this Bill. And therefore, I would move that we 
adjourn debate upon this Bill today. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Carrot River Valley that we adjourn debate on the Bill before 
the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this House do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:30.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................701 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant ..........................................................................................................................................................................701 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................712 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................702 
 Regina Christian School Senior Boys’ Basketball Team Wins Gold 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................703 
 Bladworth Elks Club Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................703 
 Dreaming in Colour 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................703 
 Theatre Performance in Radisson 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 Yorkton Chamber of Commerce Hosts Business Awards 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................704 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Financial Accountability of Government 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................705 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................706 
 Thefts at Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................707 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................708 
 Loss Prevention Measures 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................709 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................709 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................709 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................709 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................710 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................710 
 Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................711 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................711 
 Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................712 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................712 
 Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................713 
 Bill No. 39 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................714 



 

 Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................715 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................716 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................716 
 Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................716 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................717 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................717 
 Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Yates (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................................718 
 Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................718 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................719 
 Bill No. 24 —The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................719 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................719 
 Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................719 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................720 
 Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................720 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................720 
 Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................720 
  Lautermilch (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................721 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................721 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


