






















































Hansard: April 26, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 47A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 26, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1381 
 April 26, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege again today to present a petition to this Assembly in 
regards to a provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in next year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s care hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by a number 
of individuals from the community of Saskatoon and Warman. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of individuals from the communities of 
Warman and Saskatoon respecting their concerns about the 
availability of a provincial children’s hospital. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in next year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Saskatoon 
area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today in support of a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition I present today is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition today are from the 
city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to rise with my colleagues to discuss the lack of a 
children’s hospital in our province: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Hepburn and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition requesting allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. This is signed by residents of 
Saskatchewan who believe the children in this province deserve 
the finest health care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2006 

reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures on this petition come from the 
fine city of Saskatoon, and I am pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition supporting a provincial children’s hospital. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And all the signatures on this petition come from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition on behalf of the signators from the city of 
Saskatoon. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
this province who are very concerned that we do not have a 
children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe most of if not all signatures to this 
petition come from the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to join 
my colleagues in reading a petition of citizens who would like 
to see a children’s hospital in our province. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Warman, 
and Borden. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues on behalf of citizens concerned about the lack of a 
children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition today come from the 
community of Cudworth and Saskatoon, and I am pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again 
to rise today to present a petition from citizens that would like a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today on behalf of concerned citizens across Saskatchewan 
who are disappointed that Saskatchewan and PEI [Prince 
Edward Island] are the only provincial jurisdictions that do not 



April 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

have a dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

The petitioners today live in Silverspring, Forest Grove, and 
Erindale in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens that would like to see some action from 
this NDP government on a lot of their hospital announcements 
but there’s been no action — and this specifically on the 
children’s hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forward the petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to read a 
petition on the request for a children’s hospital. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also join my 
colleagues in presenting a petition on a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding allocation of 
funding for a provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. And I 
will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by troubled and concerned 
voters in Saskatoon Meewasin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today on behalf of 
citizens of the province who believe that children deserve the 
finest health care at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2006 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order an addition to a 
previously tabled petition has been reviewed and pursuant to 
rule 14(7) is hereby read and received as addendum to sessional 
paper no. 644. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice of a 
motion for a return. I give notice that I shall on day no. 52 
move: 
 

That an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 
showing the consultant’s phase 1 report on the review of 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 52 move: 
 

That an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 
showing copies of all stakeholders’ submissions for the 
review of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many stakeholders 
submitted reports for the review of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency? 
 

As well as, I give notice on day no. 52 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: will the phase 1 report of the 
review of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency be tabled in 
this legislature? And if so, when can the Assembly expect 
this report to be tabled? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great privilege 
to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 
Assembly, 51 students present here today from Henry Janzen 
School in the awesome constituency of Regina Walsh Acres. 
They are here today with two teachers, and perhaps the teachers 
can wave or stand as I call their name. There’s Shelley 
Desrosiers — hi Shelley — and Jean Juno. Thank you, Jean. 
 
[13:45] 
 
There are some other adults in the group that I assume that are 
not in the grade 4 and 5 class of Henry Janzen School, so I will 
assume that these are the chaperones accompanying the 
students today. And I wish to thank the teachers and the 
chaperones for taking the time out of their busy schedules to do 
so and hope the students will enjoy their day here at the 
legislature and being in the Assembly. 

So I would ask all my colleagues to welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Snowbirds Acceptance Show 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the distinct pleasure of attending the formal 
acceptance show for the 2006 Snowbirds along with the 
member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. This show was performed 
for the approval of Lieutenant-General Lucas who is the chief 
of the air staff in Ottawa and air traffic regulators from Canada 
and the United States. 
 
431 air demonstration squadron, which is better known as the 
Snowbirds, represent a tradition of excellence as ambassadors 
demonstrating the skill, professionalism, and teamwork of the 
men and women of the Canadian Forces. While not a combat 
unit, the Snowbirds exhibit the skills and courage Canada’s 
combat forces count on to contribute to world peace and 
security. 
 
The Snowbirds are a Canadian national institution. Flying Tutor 
jet aircraft adorned with the colours of the Canadian flag, the 
team represents the vibrant spirit of this nation, thrilling 
audiences across the continent with precision formation flying 
and crisp solo aerobatics. Now in their 36th season, the 
Snowbirds have flown in over 2,000 shows for over 117 million 
spectators. The 2006 team will perform 64 shows at 41 
locations across North America. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Major Ian McLean, the team leader and 
commanding officer of the Snowbirds, and his 2006 teammates 
for an excellent acceptance show demonstration yesterday. I 
would ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Snowbirds and wish them a very successful 2006 season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Administrative Professionals’ Day 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
very important day to the hard-working office professionals 
around the world. Today is Administrative Professionals’ Day. 
Today we recognize the administrative workers whose 
invaluable services assist businesses and governments across 
the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are more than 475 administrative 
professionals employed in Canada. In the United States there 
are more than 4.1 million secretaries and administrative 
assistants and some 8.9 million people working in various 
administrative support roles. Millions more administrative 
professionals work in offices all over the world. 



April 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

Mr. Speaker, today is also part of Administrative Professionals’ 
Week which has become one of the world’s largest workplace 
observances. The event is celebrated globally, bringing together 
millions of people for community events, educational seminars, 
and individual workplace activities. 
 
In appreciation of office professionals, Mr. Speaker, it is 
common to provide training, lunches, or gifts of appreciation, as 
I’m sure that all members have done for their support staffs. 
 
At this time I would like to offer my appreciation to my 
constituency assistant, Sharon Lindgren, as well as the staff of 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus offices. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to invite the Assembly to join me in recognizing 
administrative professionals on the Administrative 
Professionals’ Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
members opposite to recognize Administrative Professionals’ 
Day. It is a day to recognize the terrific work of all of our 
administrative professionals. 
 
Behind every well-functioning office there is a dedicated staff 
of administrative professionals that file papers, conduct 
research, produce reports, and get us to our appointments. But 
they do much more than that. They are often the glue that holds 
our offices together. Without them our offices cannot function. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes they are underappreciated, but their 
work is invaluable. They are the first person that you see when 
you walk in an office, and they are always there with a smile, 
professional attitude, and great work ethic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, I want to thank and 
commend our two very capable professionals in our caucus 
office for their tireless work and dedication: Sylvie Toffan and 
Amanda Duncan. Amanda Duncan also serves the dual role of 
being a candidate’s spouse in the extremely successful 
campaign that is going on in the Weyburn constituency. 
 
I would also like to thank my own constituency assistant, Rita 
Flaman Jarrett, and my other staff member, Janice Metcalf, for 
their extremely hard work and the challenges that they face on a 
daily basis, putting up with me which is no easy task, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would like to ask all members to join in 
recognizing administrative professionals and those specific 
individuals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Educating Students and Parents About Anti-Bullying 
 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, for La Ronge schools, this is 
Anti-Bullying Week. The schools in the community are 
working together to educate students and parents about 

anti-bullying. 
 
Kevin Crosby, principal of Gordon Denny Community School, 
spearheaded the plan and collaboration of the Northern Lights 
School Division and Lac La Ronge Indian Band schools in the 
week of high-profile, anti-bullying workshops and help centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, five schools — including Pre-Cam Community 
School, Churchill Composite High School, Senator Myles 
Venne School, and Bell’s Point Elementary School, from 
kindergarten to 12 — are participating. Students prepared 
posters and banners for a march that took place on Monday as a 
part of the campaign. The march saw students walk through the 
communities of La Ronge, Air Ronge, and Nemeiben River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bullying is a concern for both students and 
parents. Anti-Bullying Week is an effort to show the scope of 
the problem and to educate communities about causes and 
possible solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will like to invite all members to join with me in 
congratulating the community of La Ronge and the five schools 
involved in their efforts with anti-bullying. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Wishing Baby Paige and Family Well 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, after a month-long, painful 
ordeal, baby Paige is now back in Saskatchewan, and her 
treatment will start today. Baby Paige’s doctors in Edmonton 
are very optimistic that her type of leukemia is treatable. 
Everyone in this Assembly and I’m sure all of the people of 
Saskatchewan that have gotten to know baby Paige wish her 
well. 
 
I know from my past medical background that for serious 
progressive diseases, every day is critical and even more so for 
small children. I believe the fact that baby Paige’s treatment 
was delayed for three weeks emphasizes the dire need for a 
children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. A children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon would be a resource for all of our children. It would 
be the magnet for research, and it would help our province to 
retain the specialists that we so desperately need. 
 
It is my understanding that in addition to having to pay for 
travel and accommodation and expenses, it has been 
recommended that baby Paige’s parents, Mike and Michelle, 
both take up to a two-month leave of absence from their work 
to be with Paige throughout the course of her treatment. If 
anyone wishes to help the family out in this regard, the 
Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation has graciously offered 
to collect and pass on donations to the family. Anyone who’s 
interested should visit the foundation’s website at 
www.chhf.sk.ca or call 931-4887. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

A Vision for First Nations Youth 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Tony Cote is the remarkable past 
chief of the Cote First Nation and a former vice-chief of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
More than 30 years ago, Tony Cote had a vision for the youth 
of his community — to establish a sporting event available to 
every First Nations youth in the province. In an effort to 
provide positive, healthy alternatives to the First Nations young 
people, Tony founded the Saskatchewan First Nations Summer 
Games in 1974. 
 
Mr. Cote wished to see First Nations people represented 
strongly in national sporting events and at the Olympic Games. 
To do so, Mr. Speaker, he encouraged training and competition 
in the summer games which were eventually expanded to 
include winter events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first summer competition saw 500 athletes 
compete without the aid of experienced coaches or adequate 
facilities. As a measure of how much progress has been made, 
the recent First Nations Winter Games saw the participation of 
over 3,200 athletes — remarkable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tony Cote has instilled pride in First Nations youth across this 
province, and he has provided them with a platform on which to 
celebrate their athletic achievements and on which to shine. Mr. 
Cote has attended almost every event of the summer and winter 
games since they first began, and as a measure of the man’s 
character he prefers to avoid being praised for his work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join 
with me in congratulating Tony Cote on his successful 
involvement with Saskatchewan First Nations winter and 
summer games. May his vision continue in its success for long 
into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Budget Advertising Expenses 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of many hard-working taxpayers who are upset with the way 
this government is spending their money. These same taxpayers 
are now seeing the TV ads and numerous commercial spots and 
posters promoting the Finance minister and his new budget. 
These ads are now costing taxpayers over half a million dollars. 
This amount is almost 10 times what this government spent 
promoting last year’s budget. 
 
Taxpayers are outraged that this money could have been better 
spent to more urgent issues, issues such as the deteriorating 
health care system where in my constituency alone, 
communities like Watrous are still waiting on an urgently 
needed new hospital building and communities like Davidson 
who have a long-term care waiting list who urgently need 

repairs to re-open an entire wing for long-term care. 
 
And what about our farmers? This new budget has nothing in it 
for farmers. Worse, the Finance minister cut 166 million from 
the Agriculture budget. At the very least couldn’t half a million 
dollars that’s being spent promoting this government’s Finance 
minister’s commercials could have been better spent topping up 
the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program 
or giving farmers a break in crop insurance costs? 
 
So I’m asking all the taxpayers of this province to keep calling 
about their anger over this outrageous advertising expense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Health Care Review Commissioned by Minister 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Minister of 
Health announced that his deputy minister and the province’s 
chief medical officer will be conducting an investigation into 
the dreadful circumstances surrounding baby Paige’s inability 
to get timely care in Saskatchewan. As we all know, the family 
fled to the Stollery Children’s Hospital in Edmonton after being 
told their screaming child would have to wait another three 
weeks for tests to determine exactly what was wrong with her. 
Within 24 hours of being admitted into the hospital in 
Edmonton the family had a preliminary diagnosis of leukemia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister outline for this Assembly what 
the goals of his review are? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite has outlined the description of the request that 
I made quite accurately in that I did ask my deputy minister to 
do a review of the circumstances. Also as the member knows 
the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority is also conducting 
their own review in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the terms are very wide-ranging and general so to 
not exclude any of the circumstances that may have surrounded 
this case. Mr. Speaker, the ultimate goal of the review, both in 
Saskatoon and by the deputy minister for myself, is to ensure 
that proper care is delivered to the people of Saskatchewan who 
expect it and who deserve it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, since Monday I’ve expressed 
concern about the fact that this will be an internal review. We 
believe the situation is serious enough and broad ranged enough 
to warrant an outside set of eyes but the minister disagrees. If 
the minister won’t agree to an external review can he at least 
table for this Assembly the terms of reference for the 



April 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

investigation that he has ordered? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member will know, as all members of the House likely 
will remember, yesterday in this Chamber I indicated that the 
individual who is a considerable part of the review that I’ve 
asked from my deputy minister is the chief medical officer for 
the Five Hills Regional Health Authority. He brings to the table 
considerable expertise and is greatly respected. I had indicated 
to the Chamber that I expect a report from him and my deputy 
minister before the end of the week. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to allow them to do the work that they need to do and 
report to me as soon as they possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Public Awareness of Health Care Options 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition believes that in 
addition to finding out what went wrong in the case of baby 
Paige, there also needs a commitment to improve the system so 
that a tragic incident like this never happens again. 
 
And what has become crystal clear in this particular case is that 
the people of Saskatchewan are not being made aware of all the 
options that they have when it comes to accessing health care. 
Many people were surprised yesterday to learn that in only a 
few select circumstances does a patient require pre-approval for 
out-of-province treatment. No matter the result of the review, 
will the minister commit today to improving the information 
available to Saskatchewan people as they try to make the most 
informed decision about their health care? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite made some comments in this regard yesterday 
as did the opposition Health critic, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. Mr. Speaker, they indicated that this could be 
one of Saskatchewan’s best kept secrets. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it should be known that on average in 
any given year approximately 71,000 people —Saskatchewan 
residents — receive medical or hospital service in another 
Canadian province. Mr. Speaker, 71,000 Saskatchewan 
residents that are provided service by Saskatchewan medical 
services branch. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, this year alone in this budget 
which the members opposite opposed, we increased the dollar 
value available to support those who require services outside 
our province by $16 million for a total of $85 million in 
out-of-province services. I ask the members opposite to 
reconsider their vote on the budget and support that which they 
are now asking for. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
advocated a seamless referral system to improve Saskatchewan 
people’s access to timely health care. 
 
We believe there must be a standardized protocol for all 
professionals in the health care system who help people make 
decisions about their treatment. Mr. Speaker, if timely treatment 
isn’t available in one health region then the availability of that 
treatment other . . . then the availability of that treatment in 
other health regions in the province needs to be explained. If 
timely treatment isn’t available in this province then the health 
system must look at what’s available in other provinces. Finally 
if a person can’t get the care they need in this country, we need 
to look at that option such as the Mayo Clinic. Will the minister 
commit today to examining and implementing a seamless 
referral system such as this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite will already know that the province of 
Saskatchewan and this government has made considerable 
commitments to electronic health records and maintaining a 
relationship between individuals and the care that they get 
inside this province, outside this province, and outside the 
country. 
 
The member from Cannington is spouting off at the moment, 
Mr. Speaker. The member from Cannington will probably 
remember that earlier in the month, sitting next to the member 
who is the Health critic for the Saskatchewan Party, the member 
from Cannington said very clearly when we were applying 
additional money, $2 million, Mr. Speaker, to the software 
circumstances that would assist in reducing waiting lists, the 
member opposite said, it’s a waste of money, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite should get their story straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, if a patient has an abnormally 
long wait time they should be able to discuss this with their 
physicians. In order to make a well-informed decision about 
their own health care and to take responsibility for their 
well-being. patients need to know all of their options, and that 
includes knowing what options are available in another health 
district or in another province if they’re facing abnormally long 
wait lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to launching a 
public awareness campaign so that people can make informed 
decisions about their treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
interesting that on one hand they asked us not to spend money 
on advertising and on the other hand they asked us to spend 
more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very strong commitment to reducing 
waiting lists both for diagnostics and for surgical care in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, we have a waiting list and surgical 
registry that other provinces envy and are looking to emulate in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when we sit down with the 
federal government and the other provincial ministers of Health, 
we’ll be talking about waiting lists and additional federal 
support to ensure that Saskatchewan continue to do the good 
work that we’re already providing to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan and leading the nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not a surprise that 
communication within the Health department is so confused 
when we have a minister that doesn’t know the difference 
between advertising and providing information. When asked by 
reporters about this policy yesterday the minister said, and I 
quote: 
 

I simply assumed the Quality of Care Coordinators 
understand the policy and when it is appropriate to do so, 
they will advise patients of what their options are. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a number of cases where this has 
not happened. We believe that assuming people know about 
out-of-province treatment policy is not good enough. 
 
Yesterday I asked the Minister of Health to review the work of 
the quality care coordinators to find out what can be done to 
improve the services they provide. The minister refused, but 
he’s now had a whole day to think about it. Will he commit to 
such a review today as it is in the best interests of all 
Saskatchewan people who may find themselves in need of 
health care, and they need all of the information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite might do well to do a little bit of 
reading, even the Regina media. I quoted from a Regina 
Leader-Post editorial yesterday. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
another Leader-Post editorial today, Mr. Speaker, that talks 
about not blaming anyone, not finger pointing but to ensure that 
the system works for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I take that commitment very, very seriously. 
Mr. Speaker, the work that I do, that my office does, and the 
department does is ultimately designed to ensure that the health 
care, the quality of the system, is the best for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as was indicated the other day, I think it 
should be stated for the record as far as waiting lists are 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, we can proudly say 93 per cent of all 
surgeries done in Saskatchewan are done within 12 months, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Resources for Rural Schools 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
tell you about a column that was written in one of my weekly 
newspapers, the Moosomin World-Spectator. It’s a column, Mr. 
Speaker, written by one Kevin Weedmark, and it’s an open 
letter to the Premier. And I’d like to quote: 
 

Dear Premier Calvert: 
 
I just wanted to drop you a note to let you know how 
things are going in rural Saskatchewan. I sometimes 
wonder if you know much about what’s going on out here. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Weedmark goes on to talk about the South 
East Cornerstone School Division and how every school in the 
area is losing teachers. He goes on to ask the Premier to come 
and visit our neck of the woods to see first-hand what is 
happening to rural Saskatchewan and the education system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: will the 
Premier take Mr. Weedmark up on his invitation and go and tell 
him about his plan for cutting teachers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there is a reason that school 
boards are elected locally so they understand their division, they 
understand the communities that they represent. And that’s why 
they have the responsibility and the autonomy to make 
decisions that affect that division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really a little bit early to see what the staffing 
levels and how that will adjust with the new budgeting. But, 
Mr. Speaker, these are difficult decisions made by the school 
boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, another 
question to the Premier, and I’d like to again quote from Mr. 
Weedmark’s column. And he says: 
 

I would love to take you to McNaughton High School. 
You can help the teachers understand why when they have 
a high student-to-teacher ratio already, they have to lose 



April 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

some teaching positions. Then we could go to Maryfield 
School and help figure out how to cut almost two full 
positions from a skeleton staff. 
 

Mr. Speaker, again my question to the Premier is this: when 
does he plan to go to Moosomin and meet with Mr. Weedmark? 
When will he go out to rural Saskatchewan and explain how he 
is going to cut teachers from an already understaffed school? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, again I will say to those 
opposite that there is a very strong reason that local boards have 
the autonomy and the responsibility for what happens within 
their division. Mr. Speaker, they represent the communities that 
elect them and put them on those boards. They know the 
communities, they know what’s needed within their 
communities, they know what their student needs are in their 
areas. And, Mr. Speaker, they will make difficult decisions to 
address that. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite always 
like to refer that it’s our decisions, it’s the decisions that we’re 
making. Would they prefer to see all decisions made in Regina? 
Mr. Speaker, we would not. We believe that these decisions 
have to be made locally within the divisions and by the boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s quite obvious, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Premier’s more interested in sitting in his 
place than offering anything to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. We have here, Mr. Speaker, an open invitation 
for the Premier to leave the marble palace and see first-hand 
what the NDP policies are doing to rural Saskatchewan. And 
again I quote from Mr. Weedmark’s letter. 
 

I would love to take you to the Wapella oilfield (where 
you’ve probably never been) and the Rocanville potash 
mine (where I know you have been before) so you can see 
where the royalties come from to pay your salary. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could read more. But I’d like to hear from 
the Premier. Again, Mr. Speaker, when does the Premier plan 
on going with Mr. Weedmark to see these important sites and to 
learn about how the royalties they pay, pay for his salary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
kind of leaves open a lot of options when he asks his kind of 
global question. You know when he’s referring to areas in the 
province that are rich in resources, does he think that those 
resources belong solely to that area? They don’t, Mr. Speaker. 

They belong to the province and they belong to all people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s one of the reasons why there 
was the restructuring to address the zero-grant boards for better 
regional pooling, for better distribution of resources, so that the 
education system was equitable and provided equal opportunity 
for students right across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
question is actually quite simple. The people in southeast 
Saskatchewan and Mr. Weedmark would like to see some of 
those resources used to actually cover the expenses of . . . and 
schools and pay for teaching positions that they’re losing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an open invitation to the Premier from 
someone in rural Saskatchewan asking the Premier to come and 
explain himself. And I’d like to read one more quote from this 
invitation. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Weedmark says, and I quote: 
 

This is a serious . . . [situation]. I would love to see you 
out here. If I do, I’ll assume your government has some 
interest in rural Saskatchewan. If I don’t I’ll come to the 
same conclusion as everyone else in rural Saskatchewan, 
that you have written us off. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Mr. Premier, have you written off 
rural Saskatchewan? If you have, are you ready to go and 
explain this to Mr. Weedmark? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member is an experienced member and I 
would just like to remind him that he should stick with the 
protocol to direct all of his remarks through the Chair. 
 
The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I appreciate the member relaying Mr. Weedmark’s 
remarks. But I must say to the member opposite, we don’t need 
an invitation from the member opposite to visit rural 
Saskatchewan. We do so on a regular basis individually. We 
also do throughout the summer on the school bus. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that my schedule is dedicated from 
. . . in June and in September to be out in the schools in the 
province of Saskatchewan and visiting students where they do 
their learning and where they have so much provided to them 
by the school divisions across Saskatchewan — to see how it 
works, where they are in their communities. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
something that I look forward to and my schedule is already 
committed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2006 

Deputy Premier’s Comments About Radio Show 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s sure good to see 
that the NDP has their priorities straight. Instead of fixing up 
their messed-up health care system, they run around attacking 
talk show hosts. 
 
Yesterday the NDP Deputy Premier accused John Gormley of 
inciting civil disobedience. And how exactly did he do that? By 
playing a clip of the Premier from question period. By playing 
the Premier’s own words, according to the NDP, that’s civil 
disobedience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP is totally incapable of fixing the health 
care system so instead they decided to just censor the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: when is he going to stop shooting 
the messenger and start fixing the health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I wanted to say to the members 
opposite that when in fact we have an occasion as we had 
yesterday or the last couple of days where we believe that there 
has been some information that’s been provided by the media, 
Mr. Speaker, that we think that it should be examined, Mr. 
Speaker. And so we’ve simply asked that the individual who 
practises under a code of ethics, under a standard — and, Mr. 
Speaker, that the radio station, Mr. Speaker, is also a member of 
that particular code of ethics — we’re just simply asking, Mr. 
Speaker, that that be examined. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not an unusual practice for 
those of us who serve as professionals in various different 
disciplines. We expect that we would honour the code of ethics, 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to those practices. And so that’s 
exactly the question that we’re . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, by any fair assessment the NDP 
health care system failed baby Paige. And what was this NDP’s 
reaction? Attack the media for having the gall to criticize the 
Premier. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a typical NDP bully tactic straight 
from the Deputy Premier. He went after Chief Bird for 
attending the Saskatchewan Party convention. And he told 
people from Weyburn-Big Muddy they had better vote for the 
NDP if they expect to get anything from this government. And 
now he’s attacking John Gormley for criticizing the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier support the NDP bully tactics, or 
is he going to rein in his Deputy Premier, or does he support 
this NDP bully tactic? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to 
the member opposite and I listened very carefully to the radio 
talk show on my way home a couple of nights ago. And I want 
to just ask the members opposite because . . . and provide this 
information. When the Department of Health said, we’d like to 
be on the radio talk show so we can provide information, Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates to the reciprocal agreements, Mr. Speaker, 
the radio host show said, I don’t think that it’s my prerogative 
to do this because I just don’t believe this should happen. But 
then he said, I guess I’ll be forced to do this. 
 
For two days, Mr. Speaker, and to the member opposite, the 
radio host show provided information to the people of 
Saskatchewan that was inaccurate about reciprocal agreements 
— inaccurate. Inaccurate. And you’re standing up in your place 
today and supporting the fact that information was inaccurate, 
Mr. Speaker. And I say to the member opposite, I say to the 
member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And I wish to . . . Order. Order please. I wish 
to remind the Deputy Premier as well that he should direct all of 
his remarks to the Chair. The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Deputy Premier said, and I quote: 
 

I have never seen . . . a piece of work that has created so 
much anxiety for people as what I’ve seen the last two 
days being reported by Mr. Gormley . . . 

 
He’s never seen so much anxiety, Mr. Speaker. Well how about 
the anxiety of baby Paige’s parents as they listened to their 
child scream day after day in agony?. And how about the 
anxiety of a health care system that was telling them they had to 
wait for three weeks, and was not telling them they could go to 
Edmonton and get the help they needed immediately? Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s a whole lot more anxiety than the talk 
show host criticizing the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP’s failing health care system creates 
anxiety right across this province, instead of trying to censor the 
media will this Premier call off his enforcers and focus on the 
real problem of health care in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I view it as our 
responsibility to provide information to Saskatchewan people in 
an active fashion, Mr. Speaker, on a regular basis. And I want 
to say that I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite are standing up today and supporting the information 
that was coming from a radio host show which I expect, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re supporting. And when you have a radio 
host show, Mr. Speaker, who says this: 
 



April 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

I will restructure [the] unions, I will kick ass, I will pay 
some nurses a whole bunch more than they are making 
[today and] I will bring in certain treatment protocols . . . 
done in Europe [right down to here, Mr. Speaker and I will 
make doctors happier and the health care system will work 
better, Mr. Speaker]. 
 

And then he goes on to say this. He said: 
 
. . . but I have been around hospitals where we see nurses 
kinda waddlin’ around, and they don’t look like they . . . 
[don’t] really doin’ anything for anybody. You kinda 
wanna say, hey, sharpen up. 

 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as long as I’m the 
representative on the government side in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to be standing up for people of 
Saskatchewan and making sure that they get the appropriate 
right . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if our Deputy Premier wants to 
stand in the House and stand up for people, well why didn’t he 
stand up for the baby? And why didn’t he stand up for the 
health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier is accusing 
John Gormley . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier is accusing 
John Gormley of creating anxiety and fear. Well look where 
that’s coming from. The NDP wrote the book on fear tactics. 
The only difference is most of the NDP fear tactics are totally 
made up. The fear that baby Paige’s parents felt was real, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is so mixed up it can’t fix 
the health care system. It can’t fix the population loss. It can’t 
fix agriculture. And all they do is lash out at anybody who 
criticizes their Premier. They criticize . . . They lashed out at 
Chief . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. Order 
please. Order please. Order please. I invite the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena to complete her question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister first of all 
bullied Chief Bird and John Gormley. And I’m asking the 
Premier if he actually agrees with these bully tactics. Does he 
support bullying anybody who who dares to criticize his 
government? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to say this, 
Mr. Speaker. My sense, Mr. Speaker, is that we are very 
concerned exactly about what happened to the story around 
baby Paige, very concerned about that piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you have, Mr. Speaker, a radio host show today, Mr. 
Speaker, that goes on for two days that says to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that says to the people of 
Saskatchewan that there is no reciprocal agreement to look after 
the child, Mr. Speaker, that there is no reciprocal agreement, 
where that kind of language entices people to say, had they 
come to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, that they today would be 
in jail, Mr. Speaker — that kind of behaviour, Mr. Speaker, is 
intolerable from any professional. Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] 
. . . behaviour, in my view, ethical behaviour is not acceptable 
in any profession, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so we’re asking the owners of the radio station, Mr. 
Speaker, to tell us whether or not they in fact support this kind 
of ethical conduct, Mr. Speaker. Because at the end of the day, 
Mr. Speaker, this is about ensuring that this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Order. Order. Order. On a point of order . . . 
Order. I would request order of members of the Assembly. 
 
On a point of order, I wish to advise the Deputy Premier that 
during his remarks he did use a phrase indirectly that he ought 
not to have used if it was . . . I consider it to be 
unparliamentary. And I advise the Deputy Premier to refrain 
from doing indirectly what you cannot do incorrectly. And I 
believe he understands the remark I’m referring to. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Healthy Living Services. 
 
Enhancements to Child and Youth Mental Health Services 

 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this morning I had the privilege of visiting child and youth 
services here in Regina to announce the details of enhancements 
to child and youth mental health services in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — I appreciate the opportunity to visit 
organizations where vital front-line work happens and to meet 
people who dedicate their energy to our province’s most 
vulnerable children. Every child in our province, Mr. Speaker, 
deserves the opportunity to grow, to develop, to unlock their 
potential, to explore their dreams, and to have hope for the 
future. 
 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2006 

When the former children’s advocate raised several concerns in 
her 2004 report entitled, It’s Time for a Plan for Children’s 
Mental Health, we knew we needed to make some changes to 
our services, Mr. Speaker. We consulted with a vast number of 
stakeholders to better understand what worked and what 
changes needed to be made. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, we committed an additional $1 
million in this year’s budget to better support children and 
youth with mental health issues, and we’ll double that support 
to $2 million annually. These new initiatives will expand early 
identification and intervention, treatment, outreach, residential, 
and respite services. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, five mental health specialists will be 
hired in Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert to provide expert 
consultations to service providers in rural, remote, and urban 
areas. Also 11, new, parent therapist residential spaces will be 
added to the major urban centres for children and youth with 
primary mental health disorders who cannot live at home. We 
also add, three mental health professionals will join the new 
early psychosis intervention program in Regina to serve youth 
at the first onset of psychosis. 
 
The number of clients waiting for intervention services at the 
Autism Resource Centre in Regina will be reduced, and mental 
health outreach and respite services will be provided to an 
additional 440 children and youth across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this announcement will help address the needs, 
gaps, and barriers in mental health services for children, youth, 
and families in Saskatchewan. It also is a part of a much larger 
children’s health agenda that will better support all of our 
children in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the statement or the note sent forward by the minister prior to 
coming into the Assembly today regarding the child and youth 
mental health services and the announcement that he made 
today. 
 
I do want to respond and in particularly talk about how overdue, 
how long overdue this is and some of these positions are. We 
have been hearing on a regular basis for a past number of years 
some of the deficiencies in the . . . especially youth mental 
health services in this province. 
 
There are huge gaps in the mental health services, and we 
certainly hope that this will start to bridge those gaps or cover 
in those gaps because we know there are issues out there. 
 
I was interested to see the minister talk about the positions that 
they are going to be filling: five mental health specialists; 11, 
new, patient therapists residential spaces, and three mental 
health professionals. Mr. Speaker, we know, again on a daily 
basis, that we are lacking health care professionals in this 
province, whether it’s oncologists, whether it’s nurses, and in 
this field. 

[14:30] 
 
I remember a number of months ago just prior to the fall session 
the government announcing a new ward opening up. They’re 
opening up a number of beds in one of the hospitals. But they 
made the announcement not knowing whether they could fill 
the nursing positions that were needed to cover off those beds. 
And what has happened since that time is that people have 
moved from other wards to fill the new beds that the 
government has announced. Now they’re leaving other wards, 
where these nurses have come from, short. 
 
So I would applaud the fact that they’re going to open up some 
new positions. But once again, I am questioning the government 
if they have done the homework to know whether they can fill 
those positions and not rob from Peter to pay Paul because 
that’s what we’ve seen far too often in the health care system. 
We certainly know that there is a need, a huge need. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would applaud the government for going in this 
direction, but only applaud the government if they are able to 
fill the positions like they’ve announced here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 1,015 to 1,035. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,015 through to 1,035 inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let’s cut some taxes. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to move second reading 
of Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act of 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the provincial budget I announced this 
government’s plans to carry forward on major reforms to 
Saskatchewan’s business tax system. These business tax cuts 
will allow Saskatchewan to achieve a competitive tax system 
for business that will stimulate growth and strengthen the 
Saskatchewan economy. We believe that these changes will 
assist in creating more jobs for Saskatchewan young people. 
Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are set to deliver meaningful tax 
relief to Saskatchewan businesses that will rival neighbouring 
jurisdictions and attract investment from beyond our borders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has announced that it will reduce 
the general corporate income tax rate from 17 per cent to 12 per 
cent over the next three years. The general tax rate will decrease 
as of July 1 of this year to 14 per cent, drop to 13 per cent on 



April 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

July 1 of next year, and finally drop to 12 per cent on July 1 of 
2008. 
 
We are also making changes to increase the amount of income 
eligible for small businesses to qualify for the small-business 
tax rate. And the ceiling will rise from 300,000 to 500,000 over 
the next three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also improves the tax incentives for 
manufacturing and processing. The existing non-refundable 
investment tax credit for manufacturing and processing will be 
refundable as of budget date as a result of this Act. The 
carry-forward period for unused unexpired credits earned in 
respect to previous acquisitions will be extended from 7 years 
to 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act and the budget also introduce a number of 
personal income tax credits beginning in 2006 taxation year. 
Perhaps one of the most important of those is the employee tool 
tax credit that will take into account the cost of tools required to 
be purchased by employee tradespersons as a condition of their 
employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of our 
revamped corporate tax structure, we will now have one of the 
most competitive and business friendly environments in 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, these initiatives will boost capital 
investment, enhance business opportunities, and will ultimately 
create jobs for Saskatchewan youth. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
will help make sure Saskatchewan remains the best place in 
Canada to live, to work, and to raise a family. And as such I 
move second reading of an Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
of 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 64, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on the Bill to amend The Income Tax, 
2000 in second reading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder how much it takes in order for 
the NDP government to finally catch on. We come over the last 
decade and more of NDP governance, where we moved from a 
relatively competitive province to one that’s almost dead last in 
every competitive indicator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even in the midst of an oil boom, we see an 
out-migration of jobs and people making sure that our province 
is almost a laughing stock of Canada under this NDP 
mismanagement. Mr. Speaker, the official opposition asked the 
government a long time ago to have Professor Vicq do a 
program and an evaluation of our competitiveness, and finally 
at long last they did. And after that report, finally at long last, 
the government has introduced some measures that indeed are 

going to make our province more competitive. And to that end 
we are certainly grateful that finally they caught on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that the member from Prince Albert 
who is responsible for the atrocious loss in SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] actually 
get the message and understand what’s going on, but hopefully 
the left wing of the party instead of the extreme left wing had 
the common sense to listen to some good advice in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that we have a lot of work to do to make 
sure that this government takes further steps to improve the 
competitive environment in this province. We doubt if they’re 
ever going to fully catch on, and that’s why nothing less than an 
election and a change of government is really going to get this 
province on track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is consultation that needs to occur in order 
for us to discuss the details of these measures to see if indeed 
they go far enough to achieve the kind of results we want. And 
in order to facilitate that, at this time I’d move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 64 be adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of the policy field committees on Crown and Central 
Agencies as well as the Economy Committee, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1384 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1384 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1384 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Snowbirds Acceptance Show 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1384 
 Administrative Professionals’ Day 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1384 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
 Educating Students and Parents About Anti-Bullying 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
 Wishing Baby Paige and Family Well 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
 A Vision for First Nations Youth 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
 Budget Advertising Expenses 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Review Commissioned by Minister 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
 Public Awareness of Health Care Options 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
 Resources for Rural Schools 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1388 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1388 
 Deputy Premier’s Comments About Radio Show 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1390 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1390 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Enhancements to Child and Youth Mental Health Services 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1392 



 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


