






















































Hansard: April 10, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 38A  MONDAY, APRIL 10, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1047 
 April 10, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today on behalf of constituents from the community of Prelate 
who are concerned about the disintegration of Highway 32. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and to make necessary repairs to 
Highway 32 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this situation is urgent. And this is proudly 
presented to you on behalf of constituents from the community 
of Prelate. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Prince Albert, Kuroki, Invermay, Margo, Leask, Kylemore, and 
Yellow Quill. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand again today 
to present several pages of a petition of citizens concerned 
about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from all around the 
province. From Yellow Quill, Kamsack, Martensville, 
Saskatoon, Wadena, Humboldt, Bruno, Peterson, and 
Meacham. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the failure of this government to fund 
the cancer fighting drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
city of Saskatoon. And I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens of Wilkie who are opposed to 
possible health care service reductions in their community. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Wilkie Health Centre and 
special care home maintain at the very least their current 
level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
concerned citizens of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are all from my 
hometown of Spiritwood, and Mayfair. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling on the government to maintain its Department of 
Highways section shop at Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop at Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan Highways 
employees who would be affected by such possible 
closure. 
 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise today to present a petition regarding autism spectrum 
disorders. And the prayer reads, lengthily, as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Saskatchewan minister of Health, the Hon. John 
Nilson. 
 
“The presentation from Saskatchewan Families for 
Effective Autism Treatment concerned issues surrounding 
the support of autistic children and adults that need review, 
one in particular being the availability of behavioural 
therapists. The committee was impressed with the 
commitment of the parents and families of people with 
autism and . . . ” 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members just to 
restrict their petitions to the reading of the prayer, briefly. 
Would the member bring it to a close, please. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, this was the prayer. 
 

And as is duty bound your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

This is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
happy to present it on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present similar 
petitions regarding autism spectrum disorder. I will read only 
briefly a portion of it: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made by the Government of 
Saskatchewan caucus to the Minister of Health. 
 

And I’ll read a portion of that: 
 

To continue to provide intensive behavioural intervention 
and other therapies for as long as an individual’s lead 
medical professional team deems it to be required, and to 
increase the early diagnosis of children with ASD. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. This petition is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon and Warman. 
 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 7, 8, 64, 67, 638, 639, 645. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: did officials in the office of the 
Minister of Justice undertake any written correspondence 
with the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission regarding 
the reinstatement of John D. Hillson at the Saskatchewan 
Legal Aid Commission, and if so, will the minister table 
this correspondence in the legislature? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how much money was the 
Legal Aid Commission billed from private law firms for 
services related to the claim of John D. Hillson? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: did the Minister of Justice, his 
office, or Executive Council at any time make a 
recommendation to the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 
Commission with regard to the employment of John D. 
Hillson at the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, and 
if so, what was the recommendation? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: how much of the federal 
funding received under the early learning and child care 
agreement in principle between the federal and provincial 
government was allocated to the Department of Learning 
in the 2005-06 provincial budget? What programs was it 
allocated to and how much was allocated to each program? 
 

I have a similar question, Mr. Speaker, for the budget year 
2006-2007. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following 
question: 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

To the Minister of Finance: how much money will the 
government spend in total promoting the provincial budget 
by advertising in newspapers, radio, television, and any 
other sources? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the total cost 
commitment by the government and the community 
respectively for the Melville hospital? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development: in the fiscal year 2005-2006 what was the 
total amount of money in the forms of grants, loans, or 
other funding arrangements given to businesses or 
co-operatives in Saskatchewan? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how much of 
the federal funding received under the early learning and 
child care agreement in principle between the federal and 
provincial governments was allocated to the Department 
of Community Resources and Employment in the 
2005-2006 provincial budget? What programs was it 
allocated to and how much was allocated to each program? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a similar question covering the years 
2006-2007. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — For introduction of guests, members of the 
Assembly, it is my honour today to introduce to you a group of 
teachers seated in the Speaker’s gallery who are here in the 
legislature to attend the eighth annual Saskatchewan Social 
Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. This 
institute started on Saturday, will continue through to 
Wednesday. 
 
Already this group has met with the Chief Electoral Officer, 
members of the judiciary, and several government caucus and 
legislative staff. During the next three days they are scheduled 
to meet with Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan as well as House leaders, caucus Chairs, caucus 

whips, private members from both sides of the House, and 
cabinet ministers. 
 
The teachers will be developing new educational materials 
based on their learning experiences here in the legislature. The 
Department of Learning is working with them and will connect 
these lesson plans to the online curriculum making the 
resources available to all teachers in province. 
 
I would ask, as I introduce these teachers, that they might just 
give a little wave. We have here today: Kathy Chomey from 
Battleford Central School; Megan Clake of University of 
Regina; Al Cooney, St. Joseph High School, Saskatoon; Ryan 
Hughes, École Vickers School, Prince Albert; Jason L’Heureux, 
Connaught School, North Battleford; Mark McKeen, University 
of Regina; Todd Miller, Campbell Collegiate, Regina; Ian 
Mitchell, Campbell Collegiate, Regina; Tana Mitchell, Winston 
Knoll Collegiate, Regina; Jeff Morari, St. Joseph High School 
in Saskatoon; Kevin Parisien, Imperial Community School, 
Regina; Steve Variyan, Yorkton Regional High School; Regan 
Williams, Milestone School; Karielle Willner, Davidson High 
School; Ron Zurevinski, St. Joseph High School, Saskatoon. 
 
I would also like to introduce two special guests who are here to 
observe our institute: from the Manitoba Education, 
Citizenship, and Youth, Hugh Sigurdson; and from 
Saskatchewan Learning, Gerry Craswell. 
 
I want to make special mention of our steering committee, 
composed of three teachers who attended past institutes. And 
these people are: Randy Glettler, from Winston Knoll 
Collegiate in Regina; Tim McFadden, Thom Collegiate, 
Regina; Erin McLeod, Campbell Collegiate, Regina. And also 
from the Department of Learning, Gail Saunders, Anna 
Schmidt, and Brent Toles. And the coordinators for the 
conference from the Speaker’s office, Linda Spence and Ray 
Robertson. 
 
I ask all members to welcome this group to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to welcome to this legislation and introduce to 
members of the legislature, three of those who will be travelling 
with me to Ottawa to ask the federal government for an 
immediate payment of at least $575 million for farmers. 
 
Accompanying us on this trip are three members who are in the 
gallery: Dave Marit, who is the president of SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], from the 
Assiniboia area; Jim Hallick, vice-president of SARM, and Jim 
is from Sturgis; and also with them is the deputy reeve of 
Porcupine, Wes Black, and Wes is representing the Porcupine 
disaster committee. 
 
Along with us will be members also from the National Farmers 
Union, farm support review committee, who are not with us in 
the gallery today. But I would like members to welcome them 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

to the gallery today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join with the Minister of Agriculture in welcoming the 
SARM representatives here today, and I want to wish them the 
very best on their trip down east to meet with the federal 
Agriculture minister. Every farmer in this province is waiting to 
see how they’re going to make out down there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also am very happy to hear the Minister of 
Agriculture talk about 575 today instead of the 200 million he’s 
been talking about for the last month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly a 
guest seated in the west gallery. Jack Purves, believe it or not, 
even though he doesn’t look like it, actually taught me school 
for one year. He looks too young for that, I know, but taught me 
school I think when I was in grade 12. And at one time, Mr. 
Speaker, he actually looked like those younger teachers in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, but I guess we all were a bit younger at 
one time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that Jack has served our 
community where I was born and raised — Goodsoil — very 
well over the many years that he has been there. He is currently 
the mayor of the village of Goodsoil and met with me earlier 
today actually in his capacity as a delegate with the credit 
union. And many of us in the Assembly here will know that the 
credit unions are in Regina at their convention right now. 
 
So I’d ask all colleagues to join with me in welcoming a friend 
and neighbour from Goodsoil — Jack Purves. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d also like to welcome a friend of mine and a constituent, 
Wes Black from Porcupine. He has been working very hard 
with a group of people who are concerned about the agricultural 
industry. I know that everybody here is concerned about 
agriculture, but I really commend Mr. Black for his dedication 
and the work he’s putting in to making sure that Porcupine’s 
area is recognized. Thank you, Wes. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the east 
gallery, the opposition gallery, I’d like to introduce a young 
gentleman who called me with an interest to come to the 
Assembly and just to see how this place functions — Riley 
Potter, who is currently a university student at the U of R 
[University of Regina], taking human justice. 
 
Riley tells me he hasn’t been here since his grade 5 school tour, 
and he’s certainly looking forward this afternoon to spending 
some time and just observing how this Legislative Assembly 
works and the process. And I’d like to welcome Riley and ask 
all the members, yourself, sir, to welcome Riley to his 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Anniversary of Vimy Ridge 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, at the dawn of April 9, 
1917, Canadian forces engaged German forces at the battle of 
Vimy Ridge. On Easter Monday, all four divisions of the 
Canadian Corps led by Lieutenant-General Julian Byng 
attacked Vimy Ridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ridge was a tactical asset and key to German 
defences. Previous British and French attacks had failed, 
leaving Canadians to drive occupation forces from France. 
Months of meticulous and gruelling preparation prefaced the 
battle, including the construction of tunnels, trenches, 
tramways, and roads. No other single Allied advance was 
greater before that day of the First World War. 
 
By the afternoon of April 9, Canadian forces had taken the crest 
of Vimy Ridge and by April 12 they had reached the summit, 
leaving enemy forces to flee under the cover of night. Mr. 
Speaker, during the battle of Vimy Ridge, which spanned only a 
few days, 3,598 Canadian soldiers were killed and another 
10,602 were wounded. The soldiers fought bravely and left us 
with an obligation to never forget the great cost of war. 
 
On a personal note, Vimy Ridge was my grandfather’s first 
battle. On April 9, 17 years later his son, my father, was born. 
So when we celebrate my father’s birthday, we remember Vimy 
Ridge. 
 
In remembrance of the 89th anniversary of the battle at Vimy 
Ridge, I’d like to take a moment to honour the men and women 
who’ve sacrificed themselves in foreign lands for our freedom. 
It’s our responsibility to maintain the peace that they have given 
their lives for. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

Saskatoon Haberdasher Honoured 
for 50 Years in Business 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last night there was a celebration in Saskatoon that was 50 years 
in the making. 
 
In 1956, a young, dashing entrepreneur named Elwood Flynn 
set out to change the way men dressed in Saskatoon, bringing 
the finest men’s clothing to our province. Fabrics from New 
York, Toronto, Montreal, and Italy were soon meticulously 
tailored by Elwood Flynn and seen at every special occasion in 
the city. 
 
Last night it was the city and menswear industry’s turn to 
honour the man who literally changed the look of Saskatoon for 
50 years. Guests came from across North America. People such 
as Jack Fraser flew in for the event, as did senior executives 
from Hugo Boss, Warren K. Cook, Arnold Brant, and 
Hathaway. 
 
Former Saskatoon Eastview MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] Ray Martineau served as a most capable MC [master 
of ceremonies], introducing many dear friends who roasted and 
toasted one of Saskatoon’s most respected members of the 
business community. In the audience were dapper looking 
individuals like the member from Saskatoon Southeast, former 
Premier Romanow, Jack Vicq, Dr. Lionel Lavoie from Melfort, 
and Mayor Don Atchison. 
 
Mayor Atchison spoke of the fact that Saskatoon is 100 years 
old and for 50 of those years, half the life of the city, Elwood 
Flynn has been there, employing people, paying taxes, and 
contributing to every charitable cause imaginable, from the jazz 
festival to Rotary to Ronald McDonald House and everything in 
between. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through you, I wish all members of the Assembly 
to help me congratulate Elwood, Joan, Barry, and Jeff Flynn on 
50 successful years in business and for making Saskatoon and 
Saskatchewan a better place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan First Nations Person Elected to Federal 
Parliament 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to be part 
of the recent ceremony celebrating the 100th anniversary of the 
first sitting of this legislature, especially because of the 
emphasis placed upon shared history, the treaty relationship, 
and the important role that First Nations people have played in 
the history of this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it also brought to mind an event that took 
place back in January, one that seems to have passed almost 
unnoticed although I believe it to be a significant milestone in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am referring to the election of Gary Merasty to 

represent the people of the Desnethé-Missinippi-Churchill 
River riding in Ottawa. It’s been a long time coming, Mr. 
Speaker, but this marks the first time that a First Nations person 
has been elected in Saskatchewan to sit in the federal 
parliament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gary Merasty is a member of the Peter Ballantyne 
Cree Nation. He is a graduate of the University of 
Saskatchewan’s Indian teacher education program and holds a 
master’s degree in Education. Mr. Merasty has served two 
terms as Grand Chief of the Prince Albert Grand Council, and 
throughout his career has worked tirelessly as a community 
advocate for improved education, health care, and infrastructure 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Mr. Merasty and hold every hope 
that his election to parliament will prove to be not just an 
historic event but a turning point for Saskatchewan and First 
Nations people in this province’s ongoing story. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Martensville Nomination Meeting 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday evening last I, along with a few colleagues, attended the 
Martensville nomination meeting held at Dalmeny. The 
members were from Lloydminster, from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, from Saskatoon Northwest. And, Mr. Speaker, a 
former member from Humboldt was there. Her name was 
Arlene Julé. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Silver Springs who is our Finance 
critic was guest speaker, and gave an emotional but a strong and 
forceful speech on the future of Saskatchewan under a new and 
creative party, the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The member from Martensville also gave a very emotional 
speech thanking the people in his life and the people of his 
constituency for the opportunity to serve his constituency. The 
member from Martensville, who we all know and love, talked 
about the many battles one experiences in life, but none like the 
one he and his loving wife, Arlene, and family are going 
through right now. 
 
I remember back in 1999 when I was first elected, it was the 
member from then Rosthern who took me under his wing to 
help me with the learning of the role of a politician. He was my 
buddy MLA then, and now I have to prove to him that I am 
worthy of his vote as he is now my constituent. 
 
We all congratulate the member from Martensville on his 
nomination, and we wish he and his wife and family health and 
happiness in the battles that lay ahead, and a speedy return to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Representatives to National Aboriginal Hockey 
Championships 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everybody in 
the Assembly knows how much I love the game of hockey. It’s 
good clean fun, Mr. Speaker, a game of speed, skill, and finesse 
with a little bit of rough-and-tumble thrown in just for good 
measure, Mr. Speaker. And because I love the game so much, 
I’m particularly pleased to rise in this Assembly today to say a 
few words about two constituents of mine from Buffalo 
Narrows who have been chosen to represent Saskatchewan at 
the upcoming National Aboriginal Hockey Championships in 
Kahnawake, Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marlee Dahn Durocher and Jena Ariel Autumn 
Nicholls have been named as members of the Bantam Female 
Aboriginal Team Saskatchewan and I know that they’ll both go 
there and give their all in representing both Saskatchewan and 
the fine community of Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Nicholls is 13 years old, and a proud Métis 
who has lived pretty much her entire life in Buffalo Narrows. 
She has wanted to play hockey for almost that long. Jena started 
playing hockey in kindergarten, and since then has played on 
both boys’ and girls’ teams. The only thing Jena may like more 
than hockey is living in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Durocher is 15, and like Jena is very proud of 
her Métis heritage. She is currently attending Churchill High 
School in La Ronge where she excels both academically and in 
sports. One of her future goals is to play for the University of 
Saskatchewan women’s hockey team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be prouder of these two fine young 
women. I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
wishing them every success at the National Aboriginal Hockey 
Championships and in all their future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Government’s Attitude to Business 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I’m concerned about the member from 
Nutana’s memory loss. Last week she chirped about the 
opposition leader’s dinner — a dinner that had twice the 
number that the Premier’s own event had. She recalled the 
Progressive Conservatives’ 1982 slogan, the province being 
open for business. Now I’d like to point out to the Minister of 
Advanced Education that the 1982 PC [Progressive 
Conservative] slogan was never mentioned in the Leader of the 
Opposition’s speech but ironically it was in a news release put 
out by none other than her NDP government. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, in a news release dated March 30 of this year the 
headline reads, “Open for Business workshops taking place.” 
And the Deputy Premier is promoting them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we find very interesting on this side of the 
House is how members opposite can remember or even invent 
things purportedly happening 20 years ago, but they can’t 
remember NDP statements or promises from even a couple of 

weeks ago. 
 
And though the member for Nutana mocks the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan for innovation and growth, this year’s NDP budget 
is being deemed by many people as nothing more than Sask 
Party lite. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t need a Sask Party lite. 
We need the Sask Party because this NDP government has been 
calling business people corporate hucksters and the like for far 
too long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Regina-Elphinstone. 
 

Support for 2006 Budget 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan was the first Canadian province to balance its 
books in the 1990s, and on Thursday Saskatchewan delivered 
its 13th consecutive balanced budget. It’s no small thing, Mr. 
Speaker. Devine debt is still costing the people of 
Saskatchewan over a half a billion dollars a year. But the 
provincial economy is strong and, Mr. Speaker, with this budget 
we begin building a better future right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan’s largest budget ever, $7.7 
billion being invested to secure the prosperity we enjoy today 
for a generation to come, reinvesting in our social programs to 
ensure that no one is left behind on the path to opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re cutting business taxes to stimulate the 
economy and create jobs. We’re giving young people more 
reasons to stay in Saskatchewan by freezing university tuition 
and increasing training seats and enrolment opportunities. 
We’re supporting our communities and farm families by 
increased revenue sharing and property tax relief, more funding 
for health care and education, and highway improvements 
across the province. We are supporting our citizens through 
enhanced social programming and assistance, increased funding 
for police and crime prevention strategies, and agricultural 
support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget reflects Saskatchewan values. It’s all 
about working together to ensure that Saskatchewan remains 
the best place in Canada to live, work, and raise a family. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Plans for Job Creation and Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
contrast in Saturday’s papers couldn’t have been more startling. 
The headline in the National Post read, relative to the national 
job numbers the headline read quote, “Job boom rolls along.” 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

What was the headline in the Leader Post for that same day? In 
a province, frankly that should be leading the country, the 
headline in the Leader Post said, quote, “Job numbers take a 
tumble.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian economy is enjoying unprecedented 
job growth. We here in Saskatchewan have the foundations, 
frankly, to lead the country in almost every economic figure 
imaginable. Yet under the NDP, we’ve lost 5,200 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask the Premier again today: when will he 
adopt, when will he adopt a complete growth agenda, a plan for 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough to get 
up day after day in the House and complain about things. What 
is needed, Mr. Speaker, is to have a plan. And on Thursday of 
last week, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance presented a 
plan. 
 
And what did it say in Saturday’s paper? It said this, Mr. 
Speaker. Arlene Kish, a Toronto-based economist, said that she 
was really impressed with the budget and quote: 
 

. . . [it] will attract investment to the province . . . “People 
are going to say Saskatchewan is a viable option. Before, it 
was too expensive . . . Here, they’re entering the playing 
field.” 

 
Eric Howe, an economics professor at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] said, “I’m simply fascinated.” He said, he said, 
we’ll see . . . Well they laugh at Eric Howe, Mr. Speaker; I 
don’t know why they laugh. But this is what he said . . . he 
would say, we would see further investment in the province. 
Mr. Speaker. We have a plan and they don’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve adopted one element 
of a plan, one element of a growth agenda. And it’s a positive 
development, Mr. Speaker. It’s Sask Party lite when what we 
truly need is the Saskatchewan Party. And the evidence for that 
need, for the complete growth agenda and a change in the 
government, comes as you look more specifically, more deeply 
at the government’s own figures released on Friday. 
 
Here are some facts, Mr. Speaker. There were a thousand fewer 
jobs for 15- to 19-year-olds. There were 600 fewer jobs for 20- 
to 24-year-olds; 4,700 fewer jobs for 25- to 44-year-olds in the 
province of Saskatchewan under the NDP; 6,300 fewer jobs for 
people who are under the age of 44. That’s the record of this 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will he not stand up and explain why he’s not 
adopting a complete growth agenda for the province of 

Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, another thing that Eric Howe 
said in the paper was that business was in a position to start 
investing in a big way in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says we have no 
plan. Mr. Speaker, we have done personal income tax reform, 
oil and gas tax reform, mining tax reform, now business tax 
reform. 
 
What ideas do we hear from the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker? None. He says this, Mr. Speaker. He says two things. 
That if he was elected Premier, he would appoint a committee 
to tell him what to do. That’s his first plank. His second plank, 
Mr. Speaker, is that he says, I’m a different brand, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, there may be a little bit of sizzle to that, but 
there’s no steak, no substance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a little ironic, the 
minister’s answer, considering the fact that in this budget, what 
did they do with respect to the corporate tax structure? We had 
given them our plan, but what did they decide to do? They went 
out and got a what? A committee to try to tell them what to do 
with respect to corporate taxes, and they implemented it. 
 
As far as a brand change for the province, we most assuredly 
need a new brand of government on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because the brand we’ve got, it’s like a can of 
new Coke, Mr. Speaker — bright red and nobody wants it, Mr. 
Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s the question for the Premier. The day after his good 
news budget, the day after his good news budget, we couldn’t 
get him up. He wouldn’t get up on his feet and answer 
questions. He would not stand up and answer any questions. 
Then he told the media, apparently outside, that he wouldn’t 
talk to them on Friday morning at all either. 
 
The day after this good news budget, the road map to 
prosperity, Mr. Speaker, for once in maybe two or three weeks, 
will the Premier stand up and specifically articulate his growth 
agenda for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already outlined what 
this government has done in terms of an economic development 
plan, but I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. I find it disturbing that 
the Leader of the Opposition and his Finance critic would be so 
arrogant that they would say that the former accounting 
professor, Jack Vicq, had to get ideas from them in order to 
write his report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The arrogance of that statement and the idea that that report was 
written by the Saskatchewan Party is an insult to Jack Vicq, and 
it’s an insult to the intelligence of the people of this province. 
What is even more insulting, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that on the 
one hand they want to say the budget was all our idea, and on 
the other hand they say they’re not going to vote for it. Well 
which is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing disappearing more 
quickly than jobs unfortunately from the province of 
Saskatchewan is the Premier. Will the Premier please stand up 
and answer a question with respect to the job numbers released, 
the 5,200 jobs lost, the worst job creation performance in the 
country? Will he not stand up simply and explain to the 
province what his entire growth agenda is? What is the plan to 
turn these numbers around? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I will tell the 
Leader of the Opposition again — personal income tax reform, 
reform of oil and gas royalties, reform of mining taxation, the 
royalties and exploration incentive . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order, order. Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
doesn’t listen. I mentioned what we’re doing — education, 
training, immigration. Mr. Speaker, there is a plan. The plan is 
in the budget. The budget is supported by the people and the 
groups in Saskatchewan. The only people that don’t support the 
budget — which is a budget of jobs and growth and opportunity 
on the path to prosperity in this province, Mr. Speaker — are 
the sorry Tories sitting right over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Thursday of this week marks the planned closure date for the 
Weyerhaeuser pulp and paper mill in Prince Albert. Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the minister responsible for the forestry 

task force: could the minister tell this Assembly and the people 
of Saskatchewan today whether or not Weyerhaeuser will shut 
its doors this week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to that 
member that, in spite of calls from our community and calls 
from this government to extend that date, Weyerhaeuser has 
chosen to proceed with the April 13 closure. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday CTV 
[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] reported the story of a 
young family leaving Prince Albert. They are leaving, Mr. 
Speaker, because the father has been laid off from 
Weyerhaeuser and cannot find quality work in Saskatchewan. 
Alvin and Trina Wiegers and their two daughters are packing 
up and heading to Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Here is a real life 
example of people leaving the province, Mr. Speaker, taking 
with them all they have contributed to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote Trina Wiegers: 
 

It breaks my heart . . . we built this house when we first 
got married and, you know, Alvin and his father built it 
together. I pounded nails too. That makes me feel sad. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same minister: why has this 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government . . . forcing people to 
leave the province to find work? Why is the NDP government 
the only province to lose jobs? Why is that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member opposite that his new-found concern for working 
people, as the former leader of the opposition and the current 
Leader of the Opposition, sure as heck wasn’t evidenced when 
we were putting in place the forest centre in Prince Albert to 
support the industry and support families and to bring new 
businesses into that community. There was little support there, 
Mr. Speaker. So I find it interesting today that he feigns concern 
for families, Mr. Speaker. And to say that there are no quality 
jobs in this province I think speaks ill of the business 
community. It speaks ill of his own province. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that member is totally inaccurate. 
 
If he wants a list, Mr. Speaker, I can trot in a list of people who 
found employment in this province as well. But I’m not going 
to do that, Mr. Speaker. Our job as government members, our 
job as opposition members, is to work to ensure that we have a 
healthy forest industry in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s exactly what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

Navigata’s Financial Performance 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in 2001 this NDP government 
decided to sink millions of taxpayer dollars into a BC [British 
Columbia] telecommunications company called Navigata. 
 
In its first 40 months of operation, the NDP lost over $42 
million in Navigata. However the minister kept telling us that 
Navigata would be profitable by 2004. Mr. Speaker, in 2004 
Navigata suffered its worst losses to date. In the year that the 
NDP told us that it would start turning a profit, it lost over $16 
million. But then the NDP assured us that Navigata would be 
profitable by the third quarter of 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the minister please tell this House: did 
Navigata meet that target? Did Navigata make money in 2005? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we tabled the annual report of SaskTel today, and it 
was a very successful year for SaskTel. There was some very 
strong customer growth, improved efficiency within the 
organization. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, without a doubt the results for Navigata were 
not as successful as we had hoped. The rapid turnaround 
strategy that was used reduced Navigata’s losses by 60 per cent 
but, Mr. Speaker, we have done a review of Navigata and have 
put forward a plan that’s been accepted to integrate Navigata 
into SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, according to the NDP, 
Navigata was supposed to actually turn a profit in 2005. And 
what happened? Well it had its worst year ever. It lost $21.6 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has lost $64 million on this 
BC company. That’s almost twice as much as SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], and the 
losses just continue to mount year after year. The NDP have 
now sunk about $70 million into Navigata, and what is that 
investment worth today? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s worth a mere 
$3.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did the NDP get it so wrong? How did they 
lose money year after year on Navigata? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, well this is a debate that 
happens every year in this legislature where . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, but what it boils down to is that 
the Saskatchewan Party dislikes the Crowns. They do not 
believe in the Crowns. They do not believe in the service that 
the Crowns provide to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel provides great services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s its priority. That’s its focus. And it will 
remain so, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is coming into 99 
years old, and it has provided services in this province for all 
those years. And with the changes that we’re making, it will 
continue to do that into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that SaskTel 
has to cover up for NDP blunders. Last year the NDP lost $21.6 
million on Navigata. $21.6 million is nearly $60,000 a day. Mr. 
Speaker, $60,000 a day would buy a lot of Avastin for cancer 
patients right here in Saskatchewan. Sixty thousand dollars a 
day would hire a lot of nurses right here in Saskatchewan. Sixty 
thousand dollars a day would fund a lot of nursing home beds 
right here in Saskatchewan. Instead the NDP are blowing 
$60,000 a day on a money-losing company in BC. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, on page 40 of SaskTel’s annual report it says, and 
I quote: 
 

[If] . . . a particular venture within the portfolio . . . will 
not be profitable within three to five years from the 
beginning of operations . . . [SaskTel] will explore exit 
strategies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Navigata clearly fits this description. Is the NDP 
following its own policy and developing an exit strategy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this carries on the same old 
same old Saskatchewan Party theme where they have attacked 
SaskTel, they have attacked the Crown corporations. But, Mr. 
Speaker, on the other hand they will stand and say, build a cell 
tower for me; I would like better cellphone coverage. Mr. 
Speaker, on one hand, they want the services. On the other 
hand, they have a fundamental dislike for the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has provided good services in this 
province. Integrating Navigata into the main body of SaskTel, 
we’ll be able to provide better services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We will be able to expand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same old attack on the Crown 
corporations, and the Saskatchewan Party is not credible when 
it comes to the Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Former Member’s Employment with the Legal Aid 
Commission 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last year the official opposition 
raised the case of former MLA Jack Hillson who was denied 
re-employment by the government after losing his seat in the 
2003 provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to The Labour Standards Act, Mr. 
Hillson was entitled to get his job back. The Justice minister 
condoned the Legal Aid Commission’s refusal to reinstate Mr. 
Hillson. At that point in time, I warned the minister that he was 
breaking the law. Now the Court of Queen’s Bench has 
determined that the government did indeed break the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do with a Justice 
minister who refuses to ensure that one of his agencies is 
upholding the law of the land, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member is aware, and I think most members are aware, the 
Legal Aid Commission is not a part of the Justice department. 
It’s not part of the line department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as most members are aware, and the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast should be aware, the commission is 
governed by a board of lawyers and lay people. They all have, 
they all have full-time jobs aside from this public service they 
provide. I am sure that they will be gathered together fairly 
soon to consider the decision that’s been made by the court. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that is not an acceptable answer, 
to hide behind independence. 
 
Was Jack Hillson being punished because he left the NDP 
cabinet to go back and sit as an independent Liberal? This was 
nothing more, Mr. Speaker, than a political vendetta. Does 
anyone think for a minute that this would have happened to 
Jack Hillson had he ran as an NDP candidate in the 2003 
election? I think not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please, 
members, on both sides. Order please. Member for Saskatoon 
. . . Order. Order please. Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us why we 
have a two tiered justice system — one set of laws for the NDP 
and one set for anyone who chooses to oppose them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time 
the opposition has alleged political interference in this case. 
And I’d like to quote from a letter to the editor written in 
response to a Star Phoenix editorial by the Chair of the Legal 
Aid Commission, Robert J. Gibbings, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel]. 
Quote: 
 

The editorial raised the spectre of political involvement, 
however, and although this is entirely unjustified, it has 
unfortunately been raised by others, perhaps for political 
gain. The SLAC’s board made its decision not only 
without political interference or consideration, but totally 
unknown to any politician, governing or otherwise, until 
well after the fact. 
 
Indeed, if any politician had attempted to direct or 
influence the decision, either to terminate Hillson or [to] 
retain him, I would have immediately resigned as chair 
because I would no longer consider the board independent. 
 
I suspect other board members would have done the same. 
 

I take it the member from Saskatoon Southeast disagrees with 
the independence of the board. He should state that clearly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that member knows full well the 
difference between the impartiality that Legal Aid has in 
carrying out its mandate and the ability to fulfill and follow the 
laws of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ultimately the Minister of Justice was responsible 
for this decision. He knew what was going on. As a result of 
this NDP government’s mismanagement and incompetence, Mr. 
Hillson is now entitled to his job back. The NDP government 
will also end up paying approximately a quarter of a million 
dollars in costs and damages. 
 
Where is this money going to come from, Mr. Speaker? Is he 
going to take it out of the impoverished clients of Legal Aid and 
talk about independence there, or will the department make it 
up? At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this 
province will have to pay for the utter incompetence of this 
minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit today by replacing this 
minister with someone who is capable of ensuring that that 
department and that agency comply with and follow the law, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast can backpedal as quickly as he wants to. In 
the previous question, he said this government was punishing 
Jack Hillson, that the decision was political, that the 
commission had taken political direction. He should withdraw 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

those remarks. We have Mr. Gibbings’s statement on that. He 
should withdraw those remarks, and he should apologize to the 
commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there will be no apologies for 
accusations against a government that insists on breaking the 
law and condones illegal activity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — The judge in this case determined that the 
Legal Aid Commission breached section 80(2) of The Labour 
Standards Act. That section says that if an employee chooses to 
seek public office, the employer must grant the employee a 
leave of absence and, upon expiration of the leave, the 
employee must be allowed to continue their employment 
without any loss of privilege connected with seniority. 
 
The government clearly thought that none of those rights should 
apply to Jack Hillson. Mr. Speaker, again the government 
knowingly broke the laws of the land and this Justice minister 
turned a blind eye to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: who is going to be held 
accountable for this government breaking its own law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I will ask the member, when he’s phrasing his 
questions, to not impute bad motives on the part of any member 
of the cabinet or on any member of the House, and the 
member’s use of the word “knowingly” offends the House. I 
would ask him not to use that type of remark in the future. And 
the Chair goes to the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s quite clear the 
Chair, the Chair of the Legal Aid Commission said that there 
was no political interference, there was no political direction, 
and that no politician knew, knew about the decision because 
the decision was made by an independent commission. 
 
Now I would, I would remind the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast that he has the same immunity in this Assembly that 
every other MLA does. But he is an officer of the court. He is 
governed by a code of professional conduct. And if he wants to 
allege that Mr. Gibbings is lying in this letter that he wrote to 
The StarPhoenix . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Again I ask members not to do indirectly 
what you can’t do directly in terms of referring to other 
members. Now order please. Order please. The Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The member from Saskatoon Southeast 
should be very careful about what he wants to allege in the case 
of commission board members and what they have expressed 
publicly as what has happened here. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as the judge in this case points 
out, the object of this section of The Labour Standards Act is to 
encourage employees to participate in the democratic electoral 
process. It guarantees them the right to return to their same 
employment positions with the same employer when they are 
finished serving office. Mr. Speaker, what kind of message does 
this government’s flouting of the law send to people who want 
to run for office? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier today apologize to Jack Hillson 
on behalf of his government? And will he get rid of the current 
Justice minister who is unwilling to deal with this issue? Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question. Will 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast repeat his allegations 
that the commission, the Legal Aid Commission and the Chair 
of the Legal Aid Commission was politically punishing, 
politically punishing Jack Hillson when they made their 
decision, that they were doing it at my direction? Will he repeat 
those allegations outside the House so that Mr. Gibbings and 
the commission members will have recourse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll table answers to written questions nos. 770 to 799 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to question 770 to 779 have been 
submitted. Order please. Order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to support 
the budget. I rise today to support the best budget of today. It’s 
a budget for today. And I hope that in my brief remarks I will 
outline why I feel so strongly that this is a budget for 
Saskatchewan’s women and men and children. This is a budget 
for today, and it’s all about the future and it’s about that bright 
future that we’re building right here in Saskatchewan where no 
one is going to be left behind on the path to opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, having just come through question 
period, I find it interesting . . . Now we get some heckling, but I 
heard, I heard very little about the budget. Here we are Monday, 
Monday, just having sat after, you know, took a weekend off 
for members to go and talk to their constituents, talk to their 
family, talk to their mothers, and find out what it is that they 
could complain about in this budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
proof is in the pudding. There sure wasn’t much to complain 
about in this budget. Not hardly a . . . nothing on the budget 
from the opposition today in question period. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this budget is amazing. This is the first time in 
my time in this legislature, this is the first time that we have had 
diverse groups praise the budget. And when I talk diverse 
groups, I’m thinking of the . . . well we’ve got tradespeople 
welcoming tool tax relief. The member for Regina Northeast 
pushed that very diligently and I congratulate him on that. 
That’s worth a couple of million dollars, but $1 million a year 
ongoing for tradespeople in tool allowance and just a 
recognition of how valuable tradespeople are in today’s 
economy and in the economy as we go forward. But we also 
have, the provincial budget received praise from a citizens’ 
commission that prepared the alternative budget. They prepared 
the alternative budget proposals prior to the introduction of the 
actual budget on Thursday. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that group does terrific work and they’re . . . 
In many ways I want to associate myself with them in that they 
believe that we have to look after, generally speaking we have 
to look after the people least able to look after themselves in our 
society. That’s the position which I want to attach myself to. 
And I want to publicly thank the people that put together the 
alternative budget for being there year after year, fighting, 
proposing the betterment of people that are less fortunate, if I 
can put that mildly, in our society. These people do great work. 
 
These people are praising this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. 
Why? Well I can think of about 480 reasons. For every person 
that is receiving social services, $480 increase in social 
services, which I want to put that into perspective in terms of 
some of the things that that can buy. And an additional . . . Yes, 
here’s what you can buy at your grocery store, Mr. Speaker. 
You could buy 4 pounds of bananas, a big jar of Cheez Whiz, 2 
dozen eggs — that’s the large kind of eggs. You could buy 6 
pounds of extra lean hamburger and a box of corn flakes — and 
that’s with the extra $40 a month, Mr. Speaker. This is money 
that will make a real, real difference to real people, every day in 
every way in our society. 

In addition to that, there’s another $120 a year in transitional 
funding for those who are transitioning from social services to 
the workforce, and that’s in addition to the things that the 
government is doing for them, for our society today. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very proud of this budget for that reason, for those 
reasons. 
 
I’m very proud that this budget remembered our post-secondary 
students, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got a two-year tuition fee freeze 
effective with the budget that was announced Thursday by the 
Minister of Finance. I’m very, very pleased about that because 
students deserve the opportunity to study and learn and prepare 
for their careers to the best of their ability without the burden of 
unnecessary expenses. 
 
Now within that I recognize that a tuition fee freeze for two 
years does not make a permanent tuition fee freeze. But it is a 
recognition that at this point in time there are some things that 
we can do as a government that will help our post-secondary 
students. And we are very happy to help those young people 
and we’re optimistic that many of those young people are going 
to choose to make their careers right here in Saskatchewan as 
they build their lives right here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased that this is our 13th 
successive balanced budget — 13 in a row. And I can’t stress 
how important it is to, as I’ve heard the Premier say at different 
occasions, cut the frills and pay the bills. Well we’ve got some 
frills now and we’re still paying the bills. And that’s because 
Saskatchewan’s economy has shown consistent growth year in 
and year out under this Premier’s stewardship, under former 
Premier Romanow’s stewardship. 
 
We have balanced the books and we have enjoyed very good 
economic growth right here in Saskatchewan. And because of 
that we’re able, in this budget alone, to increase our 
expenditures some 700 and I think it’s $29 million in one year 
alone. And we’re forecasting an ability to continue to do that. 
 
And I want to point out for all members, Mr. Speaker, that this 
is the third year in a row where we’ve been able to balance the 
budget without any drawdown on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
which is our own internal rate balancing, or balancing fund. So 
for three years in a row we’ve not taken a nickel out of the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. In fact we have tended to top it up in 
that time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the debt, the total debt of the province 
continues to go down. It’s an amazing record that we have on 
this side of the House. It’s something that my colleagues should 
all be very proud that we’ve sort of set the table for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And the people of Saskatchewan should feel 
great pride in what they have been able to do, Mr. Speaker. The 
people of Saskatchewan are the ones that balance the budget, 
that do pay the bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well before I leave debt, Mr. Speaker, I do want 
to point out that Saskatchewan’s debt-to-equity ratio is now at 
about 17 per cent which is the lowest it’s been since 1986-87. 
Lowest it’s been since 1986-87 which was four or five years 
before Premier Romanow took office, before the New 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

Democratic Party took over from the right wing Conservative 
Party led in those days by Grant Devine. Mr. Speaker, we are 
proud of Saskatchewan people, and we’re proud of what they’re 
doing every day and in every way. 
 
We have in this budget, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question about 
it, this budget is one that introduced the largest business tax cuts 
in Saskatchewan’s history. And I argue it’s the right time for us 
to do that. We had asked Jack Vicq to do a report some years 
back, and he made recommendations that led to the set-up of 
the Saskatchewan income tax system where we were able to set 
our tax system for working people. 
 
We introduced the largest personal income tax cuts in 
Saskatchewan’s history at that time some few years back, and 
now it’s time to . . . Oh pardon me. I should finish that thought. 
The projections were that income tax was going to drop, that 
Saskatchewan was going to be collecting . . . that income tax 
was going to drop. Well those projections weren’t met in their 
entirety, in that the economy continued to grow and the amount 
of income tax didn’t drop nearly to the extent that Mr. Vicq had 
forecast. So our provincial treasury was better off as a result of 
it, despite the fact that working women and men had enjoyed 
very good tax cuts. 
 
Now the express hope is, Mr. Speaker, that the business 
corporate tax cuts will enhance Saskatchewan’s position as a 
low-cost place to do business. We have a very good workforce. 
We’ve got very low costs. We’ve got relatively low taxes. 
Indeed you look at provinces around us, and there are payroll 
taxes. Saskatchewan has no payroll taxes. You look at 
Saskatchewan’s utility rate bundle. We have the lowest-cost 
utility rates in North America and we’re very proud of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the tax cuts that others will outline — I don’t 
want to take my speech time on that — but with the tax cuts, the 
corporate capital and corporate income tax cuts that are 
introduced in this budget that we’re so very proud of, I think 
we’ve set the table for businesses now. And we’re going to be 
. . . I’m looking forward to welcoming businesses as they 
expand, as they grow their workforce, as they grow their 
corporations and their companies right here in Saskatchewan. 
And I’m looking forward to these businesses stepping right up 
to the plate and really, really making Saskatchewan a very 
happening province. So that’s where we’re heading. 
 
Madam Speaker, I watched the budget being presented, and I’m 
fortunate — I’m blessed — I sit right behind the Minister of 
Finance. So I’m watching and I have to tell you that in the time 
I’ve spent in this wonderful Assembly, I have never seen 
opposition with such long faces. I have never seen an 
opposition look so sad as the budget was presented. Because, 
Madam Speaker, the budget . . . The opposition’s job is to 
oppose. The opposition’s job is to oppose. 
 
Well we saw the opposition in question period today. We saw 
opposition, but it was centred on everything but the budget — 
everything but the budget. It was astounding to me to see the 
long faces. And I had a friend of mine summed it up to me on 
the weekend this way. This friend said, well it was interesting 
because the Minister of Finance got to his feet, spent three 
minutes welcoming his family and introducing a very few key 
advisers. Of course, he welcomed the gallery, the legislative 

visitors. But three minutes it took him to do that. 
 
And then for 27 minutes the Minister of Finance talked about 
Saskatchewan. He talked about Saskatchewan working women 
and men and children. And he talked about corporations in 
Saskatchewan, and he talked about Saskatchewan’s wonderful 
and great future. 
 
Then, then when the Minister of Finance was done, the 
opposition critic rose, and he spent three minutes talking about 
himself and his leader. And then he spent, then he spent the 
next 10 minutes talking about the Saskatchewan Party. I’m not 
sure he ever got around to the budget, Madam Speaker. I didn’t 
hear it, but it was really interesting to me in that our Minister of 
Finance spent — get this — three minutes introducing and 
thanking a few key people, 27 minutes talking about 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan corporations and our 
future. That’s a total of 30 minutes. 
 
The opposition Finance critic spent three minutes talking about 
himself and the Leader of the Opposition and 10 minutes 
talking about the Saskatchewan Party. Three and ten . . . oh, oh, 
I’m not superstitious; I wouldn’t pretend to be. But that is 13 
minutes. And then we follow it up today, Madam Speaker, with 
question period that is just absent of questions around the 
budget. 
 
Well I actually did spend my first term in this Assembly in 
opposition of the Grant Devine government. I can tell you, 
Madam Speaker, we were on our feet, and we were doing the 
very best we could to beat up very, very bad budgets that did 
not do what they should have done. We were busy fighting a 
corrupt and a bad administration. The Monday after the budget 
was introduced, Madam Speaker, we were on question period 
about the budget, and we stayed on the budget for the entire 
week of the budget debate — always. 
 
What do we get here? Talk about other things. I wouldn’t talk 
about the budget either if I was in opposition. I wouldn’t either. 
 
Madam Speaker, before I close I want to leave people with this 
recollection. I’m realizing as I get to be a half century old that 
I’m no longer a kid, and I realize that many people don’t have 
the corporate memory to remember the right wing government 
of Ross Thatcher. Who’s that, they’d say? Right wing Liberal. 
Ross Thatcher campaigned, Madam Speaker, saying there 
wasn’t enough funding for agriculture. The population of 
Saskatchewan was in decline. He said we have slow economic 
growth, and he said we have high taxation. 
 
Well I remember those days. Those were the days of my 
political awakening, if I can describe it that way, because by 
1971 when Ross Thatcher was driven from office, when Allan 
Blakeney led the New Democrats to the new deal for people, 
large majority . . . Well let’s look at the things that Ross 
Thatcher campaigned on. 
 
He said there wasn’t enough money for agriculture. Well I can 
tell you I was on the farm, and the desperation in 1971 was 
immense. Madam Speaker, farmers were not able — by and 
large many farmers were not able — to pay their bills. It was a 
desperate, desperate situation in 1971. And that’s after eight 
years, that’s after eight years, member for Thunder Creek, that’s 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

after eight years of Thatcher Liberals in power. After eight 
years, if they had a solution, they should have been delivering 
it, and they sure weren’t. 
 
[14:45] 
 
After eight years of right wing Liberal government, we had a 
population that was in decline, just in a huge decline, Madam 
Speaker. He campaigned saying the population’s in decline, and 
then he watched it and encouraged it as it continued and 
increased the decline. He said that the economy was slow. Well 
he may have had that right in 1964 when he was elected. But by 
1971, the economy wasn’t just slow; it was in reverse, Madam 
Speaker. And the taxes had been increased. That was the right 
wing Ross Thatcher Liberal government. 
 
Then along came a fellow by the name of Grant Devine who 
said there’s so much more we can be. There’s so much more we 
can be. He said Saskatchewan has so much going for it, you can 
afford to mismanage it and still break even, he said. Well now, 
he campaigned saying that, you know, compared to Alberta, 
we’re just backwoods here. 
 
He said that the NDP hasn’t cut taxes fast enough, and he 
promised to cut the fuel tax and to cut sales tax. And he said 
there wasn’t enough funding for agriculture, and he said the 
population’s in decline. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, by 1991 Grant Devine was . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’m sure some of the members 
would like to get into the budget debate, and there will be an 
opportunity. But till then, their voices carry, and we want to 
hear the member on his feet. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. And by the end of 
Grant Devine’s term in 1991, he was so incredibly disgraced. 
The population was hemorrhaging at 18,000 . . . We were losing 
18,000 people a year at the end of his term — 18,000 people a 
year at the end of the Devine term. 
 
This is a term that after the Leader of the Opposition spent 
seven years working for that government. The Finance critic 
worked for them for two years. Anyway, Madam Speaker, this 
is what right wing governments bring us to. 
 
I want to say, Madam Speaker, as I close, this is a budget for 
today. This is a budget for tomorrow, and this is a budget all 
about making Saskatchewan the province that I want to 
continue to live in, that I want my children to continue to live 
in, and I want my grandchildren to have a future in. This budget 
will do much to make sure that everyone is included on the path 
to opportunity. Madam Speaker, I proudly support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I 
would like first of all to start by thanking my constituents for 
allowing me to be here again for the 11th time listening to the 
budget that’s been brought down by the NDP government 

across. I’d also like to thank my family for their support as I do 
my work here in the legislature on behalf of the people from the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency. 
 
Madam Speaker, the member opposite talked about a budget for 
the future, but I just want to remind some of the members 
opposite that the people in the Kelvington-Wadena constituency 
do not see this as a budget for them for the majority of them 
have got issues that were not addressed at all by this budget or, 
if they were, there’s nothing there that has helped them. 
 
Madam Speaker, for the people who don’t know the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency, some of the places in there 
that I’m very proud of are places like Foam Lake where we’re 
doing a lot of work of biodiesel — work by themselves, work in 
promotion, and trying to get this issue across Canada. These are 
very hard-working individuals, are committed and dedicated to 
the work they are doing, and I am proud of them. 
 
In the northern part of the constituency is the area where a lot of 
constituents came in last week talking about the flooding. 
They’ve experienced 17 inches of rain last fall and weren’t able 
to get a lot of their crop off and what they did get off only 
happened because they put dual wheels on their combines and 
went through the fields, basically causing a wave of water in 
front of them trying to get the crop off so they could collect 
crop insurance. 
 
People in Greenwater and Fishing Lake area are very concerned 
about the highways, the roads up to the lakes. I had the 
opportunity to go to both of those places on the weekend, and 
it’s absolutely impossible to dodge all the potholes on the road 
to the lakes. Most of them are concerned that tourism this year 
is going to be a real concern trying to get people out to the 
lakes. 
 
The Minister of Highways stood in the House a couple of weeks 
ago and talked about the satellite depots or highway depots that 
were open in different constituencies, and we’d heard rumours 
that some of them are going to be closed. And he assured this 
House that they would not close. But there are a number of 
people in these affected areas around Saskatchewan that are not 
certain that the minister is sure what’s going on in every area. In 
fact I’m going to be so happy to hear directly from the people 
who are employed in those buildings saying that yes, they still 
do have a job because they aren’t sleeping well at nights even 
with the minister’s assurance there would still be work. 
 
In the Kelvington-Wadena constituency, the SARCAN issues 
are large. Not only is there some problem about the number of 
containers that are accepted, but they are also wondering why 
so much of the money from recycling actually goes back 
directly into the General Revenue Fund and why it’s not used 
for the environmental issues that the money was targeted for. 
 
I have a school in my constituency, Theodore school. I know 
the Minister of Learning and the past ministers of Learning 
know about this school. The community fought very hard to 
keep it open, and even at this time they are being squeezed out. 
They know that they need the school in order to keep the 
community viable, but the issue that they are dealing with on a 
day-to-day basis was not addressed in this budget. 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

I visited the towns of Rama and Wishart which are very small 
communities, but again they have people that are working hard 
doing a lot of volunteer work to ensure that their communities 
do stay alive. And the issues of policing, which is something 
beyond their control, it’s just a bill that’s given to them, and the 
bill given to them for water and sewer treatment is more than 
their taxes will allow or can allow. Even the lights that 
SaskPower has in these small towns is costing more they can 
afford, and nothing like this was addressed in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers in my constituency waited with bated 
breath last week when they heard the budget, to see what was 
going to happen to them. Well I guess that is exactly the word 
— it was to them; it wasn’t for them — because in this budget 
there was nothing, nothing new to help the farmers, not just the 
ones that are victims of the flooding in the northern part of the 
constituency, but all the farmers. 
 
The CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program 
that is basically bankrupting most of our farmers because of the 
inconsistency and the fact that they can’t even know for sure 
when they go to their accountants whether they’re going to get 
any money or not, and if they do get it, a large of percentage of 
them actually are asked to give the money back again. It’s not 
helping them get the crop in the ground this year. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has stood in the 
House and said that they were putting some money into CAIS. 
They’re not even fully funding this year’s CAIS program. He 
said that if the finances allow later on, they’ll put more money 
in. 
 
Anybody that’s going to their banker this spring and trying to 
get a line of credit so that they can put their crop in the ground 
and know that they have to pay more money for crop insurance, 
get less coverage out it, and the CAIS program isn’t even fully 
funded, knows that governments are not there to help them out. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in Foam Lake the citizens of that 
community have been waiting to hear what this government . . . 
do more than promise something about their primary health care 
centre for a number of years. Their hospital was taken from 
them, but basically the minister assured them that they would be 
given a primary health care unit. And there is still nothing that 
leads them to believe that this government cares whether they 
exist or not. 
 
The seniors in my constituency waited to hear the word senior 
brought up in the budget. And that’s something that again was 
not addressed by any facet of the budget that we heard last 
week. And it brings great concern to many of my constituents. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there was twice in this budget that I 
actually did agree with certain initiatives of the government. 
The fact that they funded some of the seats at Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies and they decided to fund 
midwifery is something that I support. But I’ve learned after 11 
years that the devil is always in the detail. So I’m waiting to see 
what actually happens, if it comes without strings attached and 
if there basically is going to be something for these groups of 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader stood in the House today and talked 
about the issue that this government does have a brand for and 

that is their ability to keep young people in this province. He’s 
talked about the loss of 5,200 jobs in Saskatchewan in the last 
year — 1,000 fewer jobs for people under the age of 20; 600 
fewer jobs for people the age 20 to 24; 4,700 fewer jobs aged 
people 25 to 44. Madam Deputy Speaker, this isn’t something 
that I’m proud of and I’m sure hoping the government is not 
proud of it. 
 
We also learned today about one of the latest ventures that the 
government has decided to risk our money in, Navigata, and 
decided that losing $70 million is okay in a province where the 
main job should be to attract people. In fact last year, they lost 
$21.6 million. That’s nearly $60,000 a day this government 
decided it could lose. This is the same government that decided 
that they couldn’t, they couldn’t fund the drug Avastin. They 
don’t have enough seats for nursing students, that they don’t 
have enough money to help farmers. But they can gamble 
money, taxpayers’ money in ventures outside of our province. 
 
I have the opportunity and the honour of being the person 
responsible for looking after the First Nations and Métis 
Relations from the critic perspective. And I did hear both of 
these words come up frequently in the budget, but I am waiting 
to see whether this $8.6 million increase in this department will 
actually show any real benefit for the people that are either First 
Nations or Métis. I know that $360,000 in the minister’s office 
has been added to his budget, and what it will actually do for 
the First Nations people that are waiting for real help, for them, 
is a matter of opinion. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in 1991-92, when the then Premier 
Romanow came into power, he authorized a report to be done 
by two individuals called Stabler and Olfert, and they talked 
about the economic feasibility of Saskatchewan. That report 
talked about 52 communities that were considered viable. At 
that time, I looked at the list and thought there wouldn’t be one 
town left in my constituency, not one town that this government 
considered would be viable. But we thought well this can’t be 
something that a government that supposedly is looking after 
everybody in the province would even look at. 
 
But in the last 15 years, Madam Deputy Speaker, I looked at the 
number of things this government has done, and though they 
didn’t say that there should be a certain number of towns 
basically having to roll up the rug, it’s happened anyway. It 
happens in a way that most people are not conscious of. But 
when you do things like closing hospitals — and I believe 
there’s about 57 hospitals closed now in small communities — 
there will not be a senior build a house in a community if there 
isn’t a hospital. 
 
We have schools closing right across this province, until they 
put the moratorium on two years ago, and we’ll be waiting to 
see what happens when it’s lifted. But this province is 
managing a decline of what they consider to be at least 35,000 
students leaving this province over the next 10 years. They’re 
managing the decline of 3,500 students a year. And this is 
something that this government isn’t bragging about when they 
stand up and talk about the budget. Again a decrease maybe is 
supposed to be good for them. Maybe there’s supposed to be 
more left for the rest of us. But if we don’t have our young 
people, Madam Speaker, we don’t have a future. 
 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

In 1991-92 I believe the budget for the Department of 
Agriculture was just over $1 billion. And this year it’s right 
around the $300 million mark. That’s for the industry that’s 
supposed to be — and we all agree is — the backbone of this 
province, and this government is seeing fit to continually cut the 
funding to it for the last 14 years. They’ve cut funding to RMs 
[rural municipality]. They have not provided cell service that’s 
required in the world today to carry on business in most rural 
communities. The rural service centres were closed. 
 
And the member opposite a few minutes ago tried to talk about 
the amount of debt that this government is servicing and 
blaming it on the Conservative government. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Well there was definitely a debt increase during that time, but I 
have yet to hear a member opposite stand up and say that $5.95 
million of the debt was left by former Premier Allan Blakeney 
and that he’s also responsible for unfunded pension liabilities in 
this province. So if that’s something that this government is 
proud of, then I think they should stand up and talk about that 
as well. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am going to be supporting the 
amendment that our member from Silver Springs brought 
forward, and I will not be supporting the budget that the 
government brought forward. I believe it is unsustainable when 
you talk about the population decreases that this government 
has recognized in their own budget documents. They admitted 
in the budget documents that the debt is going up by $288 
million. This is in a year when we have just about $1 billion 
more than was looked at in last year at this time, and still they 
cannot find a way to balance the budget. 
 
We have an education tuition freeze which most students 
definitely were in favour of. But if they look at the big picture 
. . . And many of the university students talked to me about it 
and said, what are we going to do when the freeze is actually 
lifted? Who’s going to pay for all the services that either have 
been cut — the number of teachers has been cut, the programs 
that have been cut — who’s going to pick up the loss? And will 
we have enough young people left here, taxpayers to pay for it? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the member opposite talked about the 
rainy day fund and the amount of money that he said they have 
actually put into it. Everyone knows that there is no money in 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. It’s a line of credit. When you 
spend the money, you’re debt goes up. There’s no money sitting 
in it, but this government would like to believe or would like 
people to believe that they’ve put aside money for a rainy day. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s areas in this province that are 
having rainy days, and most of them are in the farming 
community. And this government isn’t looking at it. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment put forward by the opposition, and I will not be 
supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for The 
Battlefords. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me today to be able to rise and 
debate the motions that are on the floor before us. The motions 
being the support of the budget brought down by the Minister of 
Finance and an amendment from the opposition that I’ll be 
unable to support. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget brought down on Thursday 
of last week — it being Monday today as I stand before the 
House to make my remarks — the budget that was brought 
down on Thursday by the Minister of Finance is a result of a 
tremendous amount of work by not only the Minister of 
Finance, members of Treasury Board and cabinet but also, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, by the people of Saskatchewan 
themselves. 
 
As you yourself will know, last January — a year and a half ago 
or thereabouts — the Premier hosted in the city of Saskatoon, a 
summit, an economic summit of business leaders and others 
from across this great province. A summit called the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Summit, a discussion by those who 
have an interest in the economic and social future of this 
province, those who have an interest in the opportunities that 
this province presents to all of us. 
 
Those who have an interest in the future of Saskatchewan, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, sat down for a couple of days in 
Saskatoon, discussed the relevant and important issues, said 
things that were of a positive nature to the province and things 
that were of concern to the people of this province. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan listened, 
spoke, communicated with each other. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, at the end of that session, a number of things took 
place. Not the least of which, Madam Deputy Speaker, was the 
fact that the members of this government, caucus, and cabinet 
were listening very closely to the ideas that were presented at 
that meeting. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the budget brought down by the 
Minister of Finance on Thursday clearly indicates how well this 
government listened to the people who were in attendance at 
that economic summit. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as was 
pointed out in question period on several occasions, the only 
group of people not represented at that conference in Saskatoon 
were the members opposite, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
members of the opposition, the Saskatchewan Party members, 
who boycotted all the proceedings of that very important 
summit. 
 
Now coming from that summit, Madam Deputy Speaker, were 
two important conclusions. Number one, the Department of 
Industry and Resources, the Minister of Industry and Resources 
subsequent to that meeting put together an action plan on the 
Saskatchewan economy. Madam Deputy Speaker, that action 
plan on the Saskatchewan economy recognized that we need to 
do things about stimulating the economy and bringing workers 
into this province dealing with immigration, dealing with First 
Nations and Métis people training programs. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, 81, 82 recommendations in the action plan on the 
Saskatchewan economy. Madam Deputy Speaker, a tremendous 
plan of growth for the people of this province. 
 
Then, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Premier announced the Vicq 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

commission. The Premier announced that we needed to have a 
look, to sharpen the edge — the competitive edge — of 
Saskatchewan businesses in the world marketplace, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, set up a commission to take a look at corporate 
taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that commission headed up by Mr. Vicq consulted the 
people of Saskatchewan again, dealt with the members of the 
business community, talked to others who have interests in the 
competitive nature of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And just prior to the end of the year, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the Vicq commission report was tabled. The recommendations 
were reviewed by this government. And as a result of that, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget reflects the 
recommendations of the Vicq commission, making this 
economy more competitive in the international business 
community. Madam Deputy Speaker, what that means to the 
average person in the province of Saskatchewan — more 
investments, more jobs, more opportunities in all parts of this 
province. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud to be a part of this 
government that has over the last year and a half listened to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and on Thursday last week, brought 
forward a budget that clearly listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Madam Deputy Speaker, there are numerous 
other examples that I can refer to, Madam Deputy Speaker, not 
the least of which were some of those items that were in my 
former portfolio as the former minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I can’t tell you how many times 
members of the opposition told us during question period in this 
Chamber that this government had to do something about 
education property tax on farmland. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan had been saying to this 
government, we need to be doing something about the 
education portion of property tax on farmland. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Department of Government 
Relations, the Department of Finance, the Department of 
Learning have been meeting with representative organizations 
of the municipal governments and the school boards, meeting 
with various other members of other sectors of the 
Saskatchewan economy. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
concluded first and foremost we have a universal 8 per cent 
reduction in education property tax across the board for all 
properties in the province. That came into effect last year and, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is reflected in this budget as a 
continuation of that program. In this budget, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, $55 million, 8 per cent education property tax relief on 
all properties in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Second to that, Madam Deputy Speaker, with additional 
resources available to the people of Saskatchewan and 
recognizing the discrepancy between some of the assessments 
on rural land and urban land, some of the differences in the way 
in which the education property tax is applied on agricultural 
land and on urban land, Madam Deputy Speaker, in the 
preparation of this budget, this government was able to take a 
look at the agricultural land side of education property tax. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in this budget, another $52 million of 
relief for education property tax on rural land in this province. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, that adds up to $63 million worth of 
money for the reduction of the education portion of the property 
tax on agricultural land. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that issue is not concluded by any 
means. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, in this budget, a true 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, an indication that 
this government listened, understood, and responded to a need 
from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget also recognizes some of 
the other needs expressed by the people of Saskatchewan, not 
the least of which is now that which applies to my very own 
budget, the Department of Health. Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
Department of Health in this budget is going to receive a total 
of $3.2 billion in financing. Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s a 
10.2 per cent increase over the funding that was committed to 
health care last year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, over the course of the last well, many 
years, Saskatchewan people have indicated their number one 
priority. The number one concern that they have is the health 
care system. Madam Deputy Speaker, this is consistent with the 
population Canada-wide, the population North America-wide. 
The number one issue, top of mind issue for the people of this 
province and across this nation is health care. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, unprecedented record spending in health in this 
particular budget. The government of this province, the 
Minister of Finance, supported by Treasury Board, cabinet, and 
caucus, listened to the people of Saskatchewan. Record 
spending, Madam Deputy Speaker, in health care. 
 
Where is this money going, Madam Deputy Speaker? Front line 
services. Over 50 per cent of the new money in health care, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, front line services — doctors, nurses, 
pharmacists, technicians — those people in the system that deal 
directly with people who need care within our health care 
system. The commitment, Madam Deputy Speaker, of this 
budget to the people of Saskatchewan very visible, very clear in 
these new dollars assigned. 
 
The other dollars, Madam Deputy Speaker, the three pressure 
points in health care, deal with human resources; the second, 
prescription drugs; and technology, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Health care is becoming people, drugs, and technology, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget also addresses the needs of the prescription drug 
program, an extra 14 per cent in increased spending on 
prescription drugs, Madam Deputy Speaker. And new dollars, a 
full 8 per cent allocated to enhanced capital spending for 
facilities and equipment, Madam Deputy Speaker, again a clear 
indication of the strength of this government’s support for the 
health of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget takes a look at, in its 
increased spending, the three pillars that have been outlined by 
others who have gone before us that we have made a 
commitment to: reduced taxes, reduction in the provincial debt, 
and new program spending, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m also very, very supportive of the efforts that have been 
made in this budget to deal with the debt of the province. 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Madam Deputy Speaker, we are all aware, too much aware 
actually, that although the people of Saskatchewan have said, 
don’t tell me about the debt; just deal with it, that we are forced, 
Madam Speaker, to deal with the debt of this province. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am very proud of the work that this 
government has done with regards to the debt of this province 
which, by the way, Madam Deputy Speaker, is now . . . The 
total accumulated government debt, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 
now at $7.25 billion which is the lowest level it’s been at since 
1990-1991 and, Madam Deputy Speaker, this will fall further to 
7.2 billion at the end of this fiscal year covered by this budget. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as the Minister of Finance has 
indicated in answers to questions in this Chamber — and we on 
the west side of the province are always concerned about the 
provincial sales tax, Madam Deputy Speaker — the total dollars 
that are spent on financing the interest on the accumulated debt 
in this province . . . Four per cent of the provincial sales tax, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, has to be used to pay just the interest 
on the accumulated debt left over from the previous 
government. Four points on the sales tax, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, something we’re all very much aware of. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s just take into account this 
budget provides $101.9 million of a surplus that will contribute 
to the third consecutive year of permanent debt reduction, 
bringing the three-year total of permanent debt reduction by this 
government to $446.6 million. Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
cumulative surplus under The Balanced Budget Act, that’s 
2004-05 through ’07-08, is expected to be $883 million. 
 
The government to debt GDP [gross domestic product], Madam 
Deputy Speaker — and this is very important — the 
government debt-to-GDP will be 16.7 per cent at the end of 
’05-06. And it will decline further to 15.9 per cent in ’06-07, the 
first time it’s been below 17 per cent since 1986-87. And total 
debt-to-GDP will fall to 25.2 per cent at the end of ’05-06 and 
24.2 per cent in ’06-07, the lowest rate since 1981-82. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we should all be 
very proud of the work that this government has done under 
very difficult circumstances. Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
budget provides new money for hope and opportunity, more 
opportunities for investment, for jobs, for immigration growth, 
for training, and opportunities for First Nations people. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, every corner, every inch of this province will 
see some benefit from the opportunities presented in this 
budget. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget provides additional 
money for education and health care and the most vulnerable in 
our communities. Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget opened 
doors like doors have never been opened before for every 
resident of this province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud to support the work of 
the Minister of Finance, the Treasury Board, and the cabinet. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud to support the budget 
brought down on Thursday. I will be voting against the 

amendment, in favour of the budget and, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I urge all members opposite to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be able to speak to the budget and in the budget 
debate. I’ve been a member since 1999, have spoken to a 
number of budgets and it’s always very important to me and to 
my constituents to outline really the setting of the Biggar 
constituency, their challenges, the problems in the constituency. 
 
In the past few years, Madam Deputy Speaker, in the 
constituency of Biggar we have had a school closure. The 
Radisson school closed. There’s been many problems within the 
Radisson community because of that. It’s really divided 
communities. It’s really created a lot of stress on students, on 
parents and costs on parents for them to try to get the best 
education that they can for their children. 
 
Also the constituency of Biggar also includes the Vanscoy area. 
The Vanscoy people, the Grandora community, have been 
struggling with the creation of the natural gas caverns. It’s 
affected their water quality, their water levels, and they have 
been fighting this NDP government for now years over that 
very issue. And certainly it’s been a big, not only a frustration, 
again a cause, an alarm to the community concerning how they 
attract economic development. The worries over their health, 
drinking low-quality water, very dirty water. And the 
community there has struggled very hard. They have really 
forced this government to do things that you would normally 
expect a government to do ahead of time and look after the 
water quality of people in an area when these types of 
developments are taking place. 
 
At the other end of my constituency we have the community of 
Wilkie. Wilkie has lost its hospital. Now it’s basically a clinic. 
They still have a doctor but how long that doctor will remain 
when they don’t have a working hospital is a big frustration to 
that community and there’s certainly concerns over that. And 
again it all comes back to economic development and how a 
loss of services like a hospital affects that community. And the 
people are working hard at attracting new businesses but it’s a 
great challenge. And because of the loss of the health care 
facility, it’s a greater challenge. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you come to the town and 
community of Biggar itself, there’s a litany of closures that 
have taken place, that this NDP government has closed in the 
town of Biggar. This NDP government closed the rural service 
centre and the Environment office which it equated to the loss 
of three jobs, one family, and access to qualified and prompt 
service for a large farming community and left a prime and vast 
wildlife zone with no supervision. We had the closure of the 
hospital kitchen leading to a loss of one position and the use of 
a well-equipped, spacious facility. Also, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, recently also lost, had the closure of the SaskEnergy 
office and the loss of a SaskEnergy representative in Biggar. 
Also in the town of Biggar, the SaskTel representation has been 
downgraded by one person, leaving the town with just one 
individual trying to service the whole area. 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

Madam Deputy Speaker, not only those cutbacks have occurred 
in the community of Biggar and the constituency of Biggar, but 
also we notice that the recent amalgamation of school divisions 
has created the loss of the school office in Biggar. Once again 
more jobs going out of town into other . . . out of the 
constituency. This is an exodus of more individuals, more 
families, loss of representation and access to management for 
problem solving and as well as the abandonment of newly 
renovated facilities. Once again long-time residents who were 
involved in the community uprooted, leaving a void in the town 
and disrupted the lives of these individuals. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, also during this period and also in the 
last couple of years we had an announcement in the town of 
Biggar that the CN [Canadian National] Rail terminal was 
going to be closed. And the town of Biggar and the community 
of Biggar went to work to save that terminal. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, everywhere from the mayor to the councillors 
in town to the citizens of Biggar and community signing 
petitions, writing letters to the federal and provincial officials 
and to the president and officials of CN Rail. And it seemed like 
a lost cause. CN Rail made the announcement, said they 
weren’t going to back down. It was going to close. But as we 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. May I ask why the member’s 
on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I ask leave to 
introduce a visitor. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
asked leave to introduce a visitor. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The member from 
Cumberland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I am very 
pleased and honoured to introduce one the youngest and best 
looking chiefs in the province of Saskatchewan. Chief Tammy 
Cook-Searson from La Ronge is here in your gallery. And the 
chief is very active in very many ways. She’s queen trapper of 
northern Saskatchewan, and she’s got children, and she’s very 
sports minded and very progressive in promoting economic 
development and promoting young people in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. So with that I would like everybody to welcome 
the chief to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thanking the member for his 
indulgence, I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d also 
like to welcome the guests in the gallery to today’s speeches. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I was speaking about the potential 
closure of the Canadian National Rail terminal in Biggar. And it 
was amazing how the community got behind the drive to save 
it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask why the member from 
Athabasca is on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again to ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member also asks leave to 
introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The member from 
Athabasca. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I apologize for the member for the 
interruption. It was supposed to be a one-two punch and I just 
missed my cue to make sure I didn’t interrupt. So I apologize 
for the interruption. 
 
I want to join my colleague from Cumberland in of course 
welcoming Chief Tammy Cook-Searson, one of the most 
progressive chiefs in Saskatchewan. And I also wanted to 
recognize the colleague that she’s with. He’s the CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Kitsaki development management group, I 
think. And Russell and I go back many, many years. It’s of 
course . . . the CEO is Russell Roberts and he’s done some 
valuable work in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Many people point out that he’s got valuable experience in 
banking, many, many experiences in developing businesses, 
and certainly worked under people like Ray McKay. And he’s 
probably better looking, and younger than Ray at this stage of 
the game anyway. But a lot of people don’t know that Russell 
worked many, many years in the athletic field as well, and he 
played a lot of volleyball. And it was there that I met Russell, 
and today now how life certainly continues on. 
 
He’s in the arena of business development with First Nations, 
and of course we’re in the arena of politics. But the healthy 
respect that Russell and I had for each other, to his days in 
volleyball, his involvement in Northern Development Board, 
and now CEO for Kitsaki Management which is one of the 
biggest, most successful groups of First Nations enterprises in 
the country. 
 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

I want to join with my colleague in recognizing a very 
impressive chief and a very dynamic CEO, both members of the 
First Nations of La Ronge Band. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying, the Canadian National Rail announced that they were 
going to close the terminal in Biggar some months back. And it 
was amazing to see the community get behind the drive to save 
the terminal. People came out in droves to meetings. The town 
council and mayor sought to have meetings with company 
officials. A number of letters were written to company officials 
and to the provincial and federal governments concerning the 
issue. There was a petition drive that was undertaken. And the 
community really threw its whole heart and soul behind saving 
the terminal. If the community had lost that terminal, it was 
going to be a serious economic loss to the town of Biggar. 
 
And it’s interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, all the lists of 
things, of cutbacks that this NDP government has created in the 
constituency of Biggar. And then we come to a multinational 
corporation like Canadian National Rail. And at the end of the 
day, the community of Biggar convinced . . . The community of 
Biggar which involves the elected representatives, the local MP 
[Member of Parliament] and myself, and individual people, 
citizens of the community, and I have to say the workers of CN 
Rail — there was two unions involved — and they all worked 
together and convinced CN Rail not to close the terminal. 
 
And I think it’s just amazing what you can do when you can 
talk to a multinational corporation and convince them to change 
their policy, change their mind. But when it comes to this NDP 
government, the people of Biggar constituency couldn’t get 
them to change their mind on any of the closures in the 
constituency. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s quite amazing to 
watch that happen. And it’s really the people in the Biggar 
constituency are very disappointed how the NDP have treated 
the constituency of Biggar and the town of Biggar in particular 
concerning these many issues. 
 
Going on to the budget, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s pretty 
obvious that there’s some huge failings within the budget. The 
budget was an admission of the NDP cutting its forecast for job 
creation in 2006 by one-third, from 4,800 to 3,200 jobs. 
 
[15:30] 
 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you compare that to other 
provinces, what’s going on around us . . . BC expected to create 
41,000 new jobs. Alberta expected to create 39,600 new jobs, 
and Manitoba expects to create 5,800 new jobs. It’s incredible 
that during the middle of an oil boom that this NDP government 
cannot create jobs. We continue to lose jobs in this province. 
And we really see no turnaround in that coming because of the 
continuing policies of the NDP government, and really just the 
attitude of the NDP government and the attitude it has had for 
really decades to the private sector. 
 
They have taken one piece of the puzzle and implemented it. 
But this NDP government haven’t brought all of the areas that 
needs to be brought into play in order to get this province going, 
get the economic growth agenda that this province needs. 
 
It seems that creating a competitive labour legislative 
environment, limiting government intervention in the economy, 
these things are very critical . . . to have the government 
constantly competing with the private sector and quite frankly, 
in an unfair basis . . . Having a long-term strategic plan for 
improving infrastructure which includes own-source revenue 
sharing for municipalities, an innovation agenda which includes 
a plan for long-term predictable funding increases to advance 
educational institutions, and more progressive research and 
development tax credits to enhance the commercialization and 
new technologies and research, and greater economic 
co-operation with other Western provinces to reduce 
interprovincial trade barriers. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government isn’t even going to 
meetings. They won’t even meet with the other provinces and 
the other partners in the new West in order to be included in 
projects that’s taking place in Alberta and BC as far as road and 
rail links, and Fort McMurray project and just . . . the list goes 
on and on and on. 
 
Then, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you get down and look at 
the numbers in the budget, what do we have? This government, 
this NDP government has actually increased the debt to the 
province, to the taxpayers, by $288 million. They go on and 
say, if you look . . . part of the budget they pretend that actually 
the debt went down. Well when you look at the summary 
financial statements, not just the General Revenue Fund, you 
see the debt of this province has gone up by $288 million. 
 
And that is a debt that . . . The previous speaker was talking 
about the interest charges on debt. Well they have increased the 
debt. There’s going to be more interest charges to be paid by the 
taxpayer in the future, in the future years. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you look at the $1 billion in revenue 
that this government has to spend. That’s $1,000 per person or 
$4,000 per family. Well what does the individual, the individual 
person in this province going to get out of this budget? Well 
unfortunately next to nothing. 
 
Look what is happening in agriculture. This government is 
actually cutting back the Department of Agriculture by $166 
million over last year — $166 million to an industry that is on 
the verge of collapse, quite frankly, especially the grains and 
oilseeds. It’s amazing that this government today with $1 
billion in extra funding will not put up the $154 million to make 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

sure CAIS is fully funded. 
 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, this NDP government has cut 
back Crop Insurance by $12 million in this budget. Again a 
vitally important farm program that farmers desperately need 
and this government is cutting it back. It’s an incredible thing to 
see this government make those types of cuts, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And so what do we have? What can we say to the folks back 
home, the farmers that are preparing to seed in a few weeks, 
farmers and ranchers who are calving their cattle out? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, first of all the Minister of Agriculture was only asking 
the federal government for $200 million. He thought that was 
enough. Well that doesn’t even scratch the surface. 
 
Finally — finally — now the Minister of Agriculture, after 
being lobbied by not only the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, but by farm groups and finally now when 
he’s going, I understand he’s going to Ottawa, they’ve raised 
their commitment. Or not their commitment so much as what 
they’re asking the federal government, up to $500 million — 
much more realistic figure that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
need. 
 
Well we also hear the Minister of Agriculture announce that 
APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 
was going with him on this trip. Well APAS just came out just 
today and said no; they’re not going with the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Well what does it say to the credibility of this NDP government 
and to the Minister of Agriculture when they can’t have 
support, they can’t have the presence of the most important 
farm organization in Saskatchewan and they refuse to go with 
the Minister of Agriculture to speak to the federal officials? It’s 
quite amazing. 
 
But I believe part of the answer is why groups are distancing 
themselves from the provincial Agriculture minister is because 
of how this government and this provincial Agriculture minister 
has treated the federal Minister of Agriculture. They constantly 
insult the federal Minister of Agriculture. They insult the 
federal government, and then they go with their hand out, 
expecting the federal government to give them something. Well 
I think it would be much more constructive if this government 
was supportive and on a business-like manner go and discuss 
these issues, these very important issues with the federal 
government for the good of the producers of this province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, another item that is very disconcerting 
— and recently we brought it up in question period — and it’s 
concerning the budgeting and the target for funding for nurses 
in this budget. And this Minister of Health will not commit to a 
target, funding for nurses. And the reason that this minister will 
not commit to a target because he said, well what happens if 
you can’t meet the target? Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, you 
know, what is his plan? Well is he going to open more training 
seats for nurses or is he not? 
 
Now I’d like to enter into the record a letter from a mother. Her 
name is Bobbie Haynes from Biggar, Saskatchewan. And the 
letter reads: 

Dear Mr. Weekes: 
 
My name is Bobbie Haynes . . . I am writing to tell you 
something that I know you already know but the situation 
is nearing crisis proportions and I feel I need to add my 
warnings to the people who have the power to change it. 
 
Please read the enclosed newspaper article and know that 
the situation is no different here in Saskatchewan. My 
daughter finished her RN last October and immediately 
started a job at a Regina hospital. She worked so hard to 
get through the very difficult program and was so looking 
forward to working and now . . . [only after] a few short 
months, she is already facing burnout and looking for 
something else to do. This is bad enough but she tells me 
that several of her classmates are feeling the same way and 
will be getting out of the profession before it is too late for 
them. She works on a neuro ward and is responsible for 8 
very ill patients every day and one of her best friends 
works on a cardiac ward and one day was responsible for 
14 cardiac patients. These numbers are unacceptable for 
any nurse let alone a new nurse with very little experience. 
 

She goes on to say: 
 

My daughter is a hard worker, does not complain and 
always gives everything her very best — she is a real 
trooper. And believe me, I do know the difference because 
I have 3 grown children and they don’t all the work ethic 
that she has. She is heart sick over this and truly does not 
know what to do. As I said, she worked very hard and 
graduated with distinction only to face this after a few 
short months. 
 
I would not be writing this letter to you if I wasn’t very 
aware of this being a very common situation . . . I see this 
burn-out in almost every discipline of health care but it 
really frightens me with the nurses because we cannot 
have health care without nurses. 
 

The letter ends: 
 

. . . This is not good health care and, as highly taxed 
taxpayers, we all deserve better. 
 
Thank you for attention. 
 
Sincerely, Bobbie Haynes 

 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that pretty well says it 
all. We have long waiting lists for people waiting for health 
care. We have nurses who have just graduated, after only a few 
months, already being burned out from overwork. And it’s not 
only being overworked but that critical situation where there 
could be mistakes made, and they’re putting not only the 
patients’ and the nurses’ health at risk when they continue to 
understaff hospitals, hospital beds in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I can only say that when the people of 
Biggar constituency and the people of Saskatchewan look at 
this budget, they’re going to say, what is in there to improve 
their life? And, Madam Deputy Speaker, they’re going to say 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

there’s nothing in this budget to improve the lives of the people, 
their children, and their grandchildren. The government talks 
about creating jobs. All this is going to do is continue to see our 
young people leave the province, leave the farms, leave our 
cities to go elsewhere for a better living and to put down roots 
and grow other parts of the world. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment brought forward by the official opposition, and I 
will not be supporting the budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
definitely a pleasure to participate in this debate. The budget of 
course is where the rubber hits the road. It’s where the 
government puts its money where its mouth is, and it backs up 
the priorities of the Throne Speech or of platforms with actual 
money that is of course sent here by the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
And you know, in terms of that level of trust that people have to 
have with their public officials, there’s nothing more important 
than the budget in terms of delivering on that trust and listening 
closely to the people as they enumerate their priorities, as they 
talk about what they want to see in Saskatchewan, and in terms 
of delivering on those priorities, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I guess I’d first of all like to say a few words of thanks to the 
people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre that have sent me to this 
Chamber, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to represent 
them. I was born and raised there, grew up there, lived there. A 
lot of folks know me in Regina Elphinstone-Centre and it’s a 
privilege that they’ve sent me here, Madam Speaker. As 
sometimes I want to joke, Madam Deputy Speaker, they know 
me and they still voted for me. But anyway it’s a privilege to be 
here. 
 
At the risk of, at the risk of using my tie as a prop, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I want to point out that today I’m wearing a 
fine tartan tie of the Wilson clan. And the Wilsons of course 
were my grandmother’s family. My grandmother is Scottish and 
she passed away in the recent past, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
And I think she for me embodied a lot of the things that are 
really great about this province. 
 
The people that got through the Great Depression, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that went through World War II, they built a 
new life for this province. After that war . . . She was one of the 
best, Madam Deputy Speaker. She had deep rural roots and she 
has, you know, adapted to the life in the city, coming off the 
farm in the ’50s, and she raised a tremendous son in my father. 
And she was a great grandmother to all us McCall kids, and we 
miss her very deeply. 
 
But she also taught us a thing or two, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
about how to manage your books. She was Scottish of course 
and she was pretty prudent with the money. And she did a heck 
of a job in terms of being a single person putting together the 
wherewithal to not just make a good life for her son but then to 

partially defray the cost of us McCall kids going on to 
post-secondary education. 
 
So I want to say at the start of my remarks, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that I’m thinking about the people of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre and I’m thinking about my grandma. And I 
think that I want to do them some honour in the remarks that 
I’m going to make here today. And I’m also thinking that we 
want to do them some honour in terms of the budget that we’ve 
put forward, the budget that the Minister of Finance has put 
forward, and the priorities therein. 
 
I also want to say off the top of the remarks here, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance. 
He follows in a fine tradition. We’ve had some very able fiscal 
stewardship on this side of the House. The member for Douglas 
Park is in the Chamber today, the member from Saskatoon 
Pleasant Hill . . . Northwest, the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. We’ve had some very able Finance ministers in 
this House. And certainly the Minister for Finance, the member 
from Regina South, carries on in that tradition. And I also might 
point out, Madam Deputy Speaker, he’s the youngest Finance 
minister in Canada. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I guess I think about the able budget that the Minister of 
Finance delivered on Thursday, particularly when members on 
the opposite side of this Chamber like to talk about a 
government that is supposedly old and tired and all this. You 
know, we’ve got experience and we’ve got youth. We’ve got a 
good balance, just like the priorities in our budget, just like the 
bottom line in our budget, and we’re going to keep moving 
ahead, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I think in this budget, 
in the 2006-2007 budget, we’re building a better future right 
here. We are capitalizing on our economic success while 
reflecting the values of Saskatchewan people. We are working 
together to make Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and 
raise a family. 
 
With this budget we have cut business taxes to stimulate the 
economy and create jobs. We are giving young people more 
reasons to stay in Saskatchewan with more training 
opportunities and a university tuition freeze for yet another two 
years. This government is building a better future for our 
communities and rural residents through revenue sharing and 
property tax relief initiatives This government is also 
supporting our citizens with enhanced social programming and 
assistance to ensure no one is left behind on the path to 
opportunity through enhanced social initiatives. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I just also want to point out that on the 
day of the budget there was a funeral for Gerri Carroll, who is 
the founder of Soul’s Harbour Mission, and did a heck of a lot 
of work in the city of Regina for the poorest of the poor. And 
certainly it was a pleasure to be at that funeral and at that 
celebration of a tremendous life. And I was there with the 
member from Moosomin. 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

And I think that in terms of the certain priorities in this budget, 
I think that the people like Gerri Carroll that are out there 
working with the poorest of the poor, Madam Deputy Speaker 
— there are measures in this budget that I’ll be speaking about 
shortly — but I think that she would have been very interested 
to find out about the increases around the social assistance 
program and increases around TEA [transitional employment 
allowance]. And I guess that I want to say that if we in this 
Chamber can live up to the kind of work that’s done by people 
like Gerri Carroll, I think this is going to be a better province. 
And certainly those are the kinds of aspirations we have in this 
budget. 
 
Highlights in this 2006-2007 budget include it being the 13th 
consecutive balanced budget. There was $7.1 billion in 
operating spending. There was an allocation of $101.9 million 
towards permanent debt reduction, bringing our debt reduction 
total to nearly $450 million since 2004-2005. Government debt 
at March 31, 2006 will be 7.2 billion — its lowest point in 15 
years, since 1991, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
In other words, the debt is at its lowest point — government 
debt — since 1999 . . . 1991 when the NDP took over from the 
Grant Devine Conservative administration. Government debt to 
GDP will be 16.7 per cent at the end of 2005-06 and declined to 
15.9 per cent in 2006-07 — the first time it’s been below 17 per 
cent since 1986-87. 
 
Now the Finance critic opposite likes to talk about how this is 
somehow an ’80s-style budget. And I guess it is an ’80s-style 
budget in one regard, Madam Deputy Speaker, because we’re 
getting back to historic lows in terms of our debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Furthermore, our total debt to GDP will fall to 25.2 per cent at 
the end of the 2005-2006 and to 24.2 per cent in 2006-07 — its 
lowest rate since 1981-1982. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is at once a happy thing, a joyous thing. 
And it’s also kind of depressing because in this House. the 
members opposite like to beat up on Allan Blakeney. They take 
great delight in talking about what supposedly bad things Allan 
Blakeney did for the province of Saskatchewan. But I’ll point 
out for all here of course that, in terms of our total debt-to-GDP 
ratio as a government, it’s the first time since Allan Blakeney 
left office — left the Premier’s office — that we’re in such a 
good place in terms of our debt-to-GDP ratio. So the members 
opposite like to cast aspersions on the good name of Allan 
Blakeney but, Mr. Speaker, I think the record shows they’re not 
fit to carry his shoes when it comes to the fiscal management of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also a priority in this budget, health spending of 
$3.2 billion — nearly a 10 per cent increase in our largest health 
budget ever. There is also education spending of $1.5 billion — 
over a 5 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, there’s an economy that is 
growing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I thank the member from Regina Northeast for 
his enthusiasm. Saskatchewan is currently experiencing 
unprecedented economic success. Several of our key industries 

are performing well. Mining, oil, and gas industries remain 
strong and Saskatchewan is the second largest producer of oil in 
Canada. We’re also the third largest natural gas producer in 
Canada. And Saskatchewan is the largest potash and uranium 
producer and exporter in the world, supplying approximately 30 
per cent of the world’s demand. 
 
Our province also has a wealth of other mineral deposits: coal, 
salt, base metals, clay, sodium sulphate, and gold, and the 
potential for diamonds and rare earth minerals. We have seen a 
23 per cent rise in employment with the oil, gas industry over 
the last five years. And the mineral industry is rapidly 
expanding, nearly doubling exploration in the past year, 
primarily in the North. 
 
We are one of three have provinces in Canada and with the 
steps taken in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we are making the 
necessary investments in order to stay a have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Now one of the main planks in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, was cutting business taxes and other measures to 
stimulate the economy, to sharpen our competitive edge. 
Business tax cuts will grow the economy by attracting and 
stimulating capital investment and creating jobs and job 
opportunities for young people. 
 
This will be done through a multi-year plan to eliminate the 
general corporate capital tax on existing capital investments by 
July 1, 2008; by eliminating the general corporate capital tax on 
new capital investments in Saskatchewan on July 1, 2006; by 
reducing the corporate capital tax research resource surcharge 
rates beginning July 1, 2006; reducing the corporate income tax 
rate from 17 to 12 per cent by July 1, 2008; increase the small 
business threshold from 300,000 to 500,000 by July 1, 2008; 
immediately convert the non-refundable income investment tax 
credit, the ITC, for manufacturing and processing into a 
refundable tax credit and extend the carry forward for unused 
ITCs previously earned to 10 years. In 2006-07 these cuts will 
result in a $95.3 million business tax cut to improve 
Saskatchewan’s competitiveness. 
 
Other initiatives, Mr. Speaker. There’s the creation of a new tax 
credit for employed tradespeople wherein a one-time trade entry 
tax credit that recognizes the high initial cost of work-related 
tools purchased as a condition of employment by eligible 
tradespeople, which will result in $1 million in savings 
annually. And an annual maintenance tax credit that recognizes 
the ongoing cost of maintaining these tools — an estimated $1.9 
million in tax savings for tradespeople annually. 
 
And at this moment, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that this does 
two things. This, at once it fills a campaign commitment that 
we’d made in the 2003 election. And it’s also very much 
impacted by the hard work of the member from Regina 
Northeast who did an awful lot of work on this file. And I want 
to salute him at this point for the good work that he has done in 
terms of putting some money back in the pocket of our 
tradespeople and making their cost of doing business all the 
more competitive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we are supporting 
groundbreaking technology that will boost the economy and 
clean up the environment in Saskatchewan, Canada, and the 
world. 
 
The province is assisting with an initiative to develop and 
demonstrate an enhanced oil recovery process for heavy oil 
reservoirs in Western Canada. This budget also supports the 
Weyburn CO2 monitoring and storage project and the 
International Test Centre for CO2 Capture which will 
significantly reduce greenhouse gas levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very important part of this budget is helping 
young people to build their futures right here, and as I pointed 
out earlier the total budget for education is $1.5 billion, a record 
investment. Funding for education increased 5.2 per cent or 
$75.1 million over the 2005-2006 approved budget. 
 
We are investing in the education and futures of our youth. This 
is particularly true with the new Department of Advanced 
Education and Employment. And I want to send out 
congratulations to the Minister for AEE, the member for 
Nutana, who will do an able job there in this very critical 
portfolio. The funding there increased by 8.3 per cent or $46 
million for a total investment of $604 million. That’s putting 
our money where our mouth is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This critical investment supports an estimated 66,000 learners. 
It’s also a strategic investment in immigration recruitment and 
support. We are making the largest investment in the training 
sector this decade. We are investing an additional $15.5 million 
in the training system and its learners. This represents an 8.6 
increase. Over the past two years we have increased our 
investment by 17 per cent. 
 
We are expanding the training system capacity by 2,759 
training and employment preparation opportunities under the 
CareerStart initiative. We are on track to meet our commitment 
to expand existing training opportunities by 5,400 over four 
years — 3,904 new opportunities being created in the last two 
years. Mr. Speaker, we made a promise in the 2003 election and 
we’re keeping that promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are expanding the number of adult basic 
education seats by 336. This is on top of last year’s expansion 
of 1,000 new adult basic education seats. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
sure as an educator you’ve worked with people learning to 
better themselves, better their opportunities for their families. 
And in terms of one of those critical pieces of the learning 
system, adult basic education is so vitally important to give 
people the tools to improve themselves and improve their lives. 
And I’m very glad to see that in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the spirit of the Kelowna accord we are taking immediate 
action to invest for the first time ever in the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Indian Technologies. We are funding 83 new adult 
basic education seats at SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies] and we are providing provincial training 
allowance for students who attend the SIIT at a cost of 
$900,000. If we are going to build a province where no one is 
left behind on the path to opportunity, training for all 
Saskatchewan citizens is vitally important. And we’re taking a 
move to step beyond jurisdiction and get to results, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
We are spending $3.8 million more on the provincial training 
allowance, with an average $60 per client per month increase — 
again a great step, Mr. Speaker. We are supporting the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Training Certification 
Commission to expand its youth apprenticeship program 
province-wide, getting our young people into the trades right 
out of high school. We are supporting the ATCC 
[Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Training Certification 
Commission] to increase apprenticeship training opportunities 
by at least 105 seats. 
 
We are supporting universities to continue to hold tuition at 
2004-2005 levels for the next two years. This applies to all 
undergraduate programs and many graduate programs. In 
2006-2007 we are spending $17.8 million to hold tuition to the 
2004 levels. This is a 7 per cent increase over last year’s 
funding level. And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a fully funded 
freeze, so in terms of what the university needed that they were 
going to make up through tuition, this bridges that gap. And it 
makes that university education that’s so important if we’re 
going to be working for a society that is more equal, that allows 
people to realize their potential, affordable university education 
and post-secondary education generally is critical to that cause, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are investing $6.3 million, up from $1.7 million in 2005-06, 
for a comprehensive immigration strategy that will attract more 
immigrants to Saskatchewan and help them settle in our 
communities and our labour force. I note that one of the women 
nominated for the YWCA’s [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] women of distinction is an individual named 
Marianne Skoropad who’s worked for the past 25 years plus, 
bringing people from around the world and getting them settled 
here in Saskatchewan. And as we set about the work of this 
immigration strategy — trying to live up to our province’s 
motto of “from many peoples, strength,” I know that we’re 
going to learn from the example of people like Marianne. We’re 
going to be inspired by the work that they’ve done over the 
years, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to carry that forward. 
 
We’re moving on with our commitment to quadruple the 
centennial merit scholarship for post-secondary students by 
providing an additional $500,000 for a total of 287 new 
scholarships, and we’re increasing the graduate tax credit from 
$675 to $850 for students graduating in 2006. The tax credit 
will increase to $1,000 in 2007, again, Mr. Speaker, providing a 
good reason for young people to look at Saskatchewan to start 
their future right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to talk about the things 
that this budget does to support our citizens to ensure that no 
one is left behind on the path to opportunity. In this budget, 
there are $18.2 million for Project Hope, for treatment, for 
detox beds, outreach services, and drug programs, including 
$3.7 million for the secure care initiatives. And I know that 
certainly the member from Saskatoon Sutherland has done an 
awful lot of work on this front and on this file. And it’s very 
important for the Premier himself and I applaud this allocation 
of government resources — of the people’s resources. 
 
[16:00] 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

There is $6.2 million in funding to the Saskatchewan rental 
housing supplement to make higher quality rental housing more 
affordable for families and people with disabilities and 
supporting the province’s five-year, $200 million HomeFirst 
strategy. And again, Mr. Speaker, you think about the 
fundamentals in life in terms of food, shelter, and clothing. It’s 
so important that people have access to that good quality of 
shelter if they’re going to make a good life for themself and for 
their families and if we’re going to have stable neighbourhoods. 
And I couldn’t think of a better expenditure of money. 
 
We’re supporting 670 new families through KidsFirst, again a 
groundbreaking program that this government has a lot to be 
proud of but the people who deliver this program have even 
more to be proud of, Mr. Speaker. We have $14.2 million for 
the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan and transitional employment 
allowance enhancements. This includes $13.2 million to 
provide a $480 per year increase to SAP [Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan] and TEA for an increase to adult allowance 
rates. And people living in residential care facilities will receive 
a $20 per month increase to the personal living allowance. 
There’s $1 million to provide an additional $120 per year to 
TEA recipients and $1.5 million to TEA enhancements to 
increase utility allowances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the hard, good work done on 
this file by the member from Rosemont certainly when she was 
the minister for Community Resources and Employment. I want 
to commend the work that’s been done on this file by the 
member from Greystone that’s been such an advocate for the 
poor in this province over decades in public service. I want to 
commend the work that’s been done by the member from 
Athabasca and the current member for the Department of 
Community Resources. 
 
And you know these are issues where we’re not where we need 
to be, Mr. Speaker. But I think that with this budget we’ve 
taken a giant leap forward in terms of getting to that place 
where no one really is left behind. Where we are making sure 
that the basic assistance is adequate — that it’s the help it needs 
to be; that it’s living up to the spirit and the work of people like 
Gerri Carroll, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also including in this budget $1.8 million for $720 per 
year on the provincial training allowance enhancement, again to 
provide the increased cost of living for students in training. We 
are providing $4.6 million to support child care — both new 
spaces and an increased subsidy to contribute to enhanced 
quality and assist parents to participate in the labour force. We 
are putting $17.1 million into community-based organizations’ 
wage increases and again, Mr. Speaker, an allocation of funding 
that I think is sorely needed and will be well put to use because 
these people are out there on the front lines, they’re doing some 
very difficult work often under very difficult circumstances. 
And I think what this government is doing is recognizing that 
important work they do and trying to back it up with more 
adequate funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many great things in this budget, I 
could go on for days and days and days, but in the interest of 
allowing my other colleagues a crack at the speech, I guess I’ll 
begin to wrap up my remarks. 
 

But I guess I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the 
budget quite obviously and quite proudly. I’ll be voting against 
the amendment put forward by the opposition. It’s an 
interesting amendment, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s infinitely 
worthy of being defeated. So as I say, I’ll be supporting this 
budget. I’ll be supporting the efforts of this government to help 
people build their future right here and to make sure that no one 
is left behind on the path to opportunity. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise in the Legislative Assembly today and enter in on the 
budget debate, to follow the fine speeches by my colleagues in 
this House, and I hope I’m able to worthily follow in their 
footsteps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sadly with regards to this budget and the people 
who I represent in the riding of Kindersley, there was little that 
seemed to come through for our geographical area. We have 
been fortunate to be blessed under the ground with reserves of 
petroleum in both natural gas and oil, and there has been 
increased activity all the way up from Macklin in the North, 
down to my own hometown of Eatonia in the South. 
 
What is tragic, Mr. Speaker, is that so many of these companies 
operating have come in across the border. They used to be 
located in towns like Kindersley and Unity, and after 1999 and 
continued New Democratic Party government they have sought 
greener pastures in Alberta as have many members of my own 
family and many of my neighbours and friends of our 
neighbours. Our communities as a whole in west central 
Saskatchewan has seen this out-migration of people. 
 
It is slowing, Mr. Speaker, and that I wouldn’t say is due to the 
fact of any good work of this government. It happens that the 
pool has gotten smaller and smaller, Mr. Speaker, and there’s so 
few left. There’s very few people left to leave. 
 
It’s challenging, Mr. Speaker, in the agricultural sector at home, 
in the most dire of ways. We have very large, well-established, 
successful farmers — through no fault of their own — looking, 
Mr. Speaker, at not being able to farm this year. There are 
record number of auction sales occurring throughout the riding 
and throughout the province. 
 
The credit union managers who I have spoken with have piles 
and piles of financial papers on their desk because various 
lending institutions have called their loans, and these producers 
have been scrambling to get credit. One of the large people in 
the agribusiness in the riding of Kindersley noted to me that 
there were many farmers who won’t be farming this spring. 
They just aren’t absolutely certain of that yet, because they 
haven’t been denied their credit when they come in either to get 
their parts or pick up their chemical or whatnot. And this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, did not address those concerns. 
 
It’s problematic, Mr. Speaker, having had the opportunity to 
live outside of this province to know what our Dominion of 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Canada sees Saskatchewan as. Largely we are seen as an 
agricultural province, and there’s nothing wrong with that. In 
fact there’s something to be proud of there. It builds a work 
ethic that is second to none right across this province. And we 
only have to travel to any jurisdiction where we have 
individuals that have left Saskatchewan, and they’ve done very 
well because of the backbone of the beliefs and ethics that come 
off of our agricultural sector. 
 
And years ago, I think this was something that the New 
Democratic Party or the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] felt akin to, but sadly that change has left us, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s reflected in the votes that are in the House 
now where the rural residents are represented mainly by my 
party. And the problem with this, Mr. Speaker, is at this point 
we see a budget exploiting this political divide and trying to 
sever our province into a situation of political haves and 
political have-nots. We see a corridor forming with gaps in it 
from the Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and the 
North versus the rest. This is not the Saskatchewan that I have 
in mind and I think it’s shameful that it’s this level of politics 
that is being played, Mr. Speaker, to hold on to power, to 
forward their own agenda. 
 
You can see, Mr. Speaker, in this budget . . . Just for example I 
had to deal with a parent today, a parent looking at retiring who 
has a child that is a teacher in rural Saskatchewan. And the 
school board, the new school board now amalgamated has taken 
on extra administration and they’re talking about cutting 38 
teaching positions. And they asked me and called and they said, 
is there any way that this could be true? And I said, sadly, I 
believe that it could be true and that more than likely this will 
happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when this happens it will undeniably be 
coupled with rural school closures. And the pain that these 
closures cause to a community as a whole, it’s not represented 
just in the education, Mr. Speaker. It’s economic, it ends the 
commerce in the town, it ends the cultural and the recreation 
abilities of those communities to support one another. 
 
And it bothers me that though it is an international phenomenon 
about rural depopulation, that one of the places in Canada that 
tends to lead has had no leadership from government for the 
past 13 years. It actually seems to the constituents that live in 
these ridings that they’re under attack. And we see this again 
with the closure of the highway depots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my less than illustrious political career, I’ve 
come to believe that there are few things that the persons of 
Saskatchewan really expect from us. They expect decent health 
care, they expect a fair and quality educational system, a road to 
drive on, and a government that hopefully will be answerable to 
them. And sadly, in the riding which I represent, those are 
things that my constituents do not see and they do not see it on 
a regular basis. And it makes the populace very cynical indeed 
when it looks like a good news budget — that’s what the 
government is stating — and yet for the communities which I 
represent, there’s very little that I can point to, to say this is 
going to be helpful for you. 
 
Now with that being said, Mr. Speaker, there was a movement 
to adapt the recommendations of the Vicq commission. And as 

members of my party have said, we welcome that. 
 
The problem in the larger political context which I see is that in 
the adaption of the Vicq commission, it is an attempt to move 
away into the centre to try to retain power hopefully on a 
marginal amount of swing votes in certain ridings. And having 
the basis of politics for these decisions is disheartening. Though 
they were overdue, I think the motive behind them becomes 
exceedingly problematic in that if this is a means to an end — 
and having studied some ethics — you know, the intent behind 
it becomes as important as what the substance of the move is. 
 
Sadly we have seen in the history of this province an 
impeccable ability by the party opposite to understand the base 
of the minimalist required in the political atmosphere and 
through that be able to retain power. This budget speaks highly 
to that tradition and will attempt once again to build these 
divisions amongst our society. And I find that problematic. 
 
There were small steps taken to increase social assistance 
payouts, and the government does, it does deserve 
commendation on that. Where the larger tragedy lies is the huge 
number of children that we have in this province who live in 
poverty on a day-to-day basis. 
 
The problems that we have amongst our First Nations and our 
First Nations children . . . And again as the Saskatchewan 
institute for technology, Indian institute for technology has been 
funded . . . That is a step in the right direction. But these things 
are so slow. They’re late, and they are following on an agenda 
that — I think if we looked at the larger picture — it is almost, 
almost to a T, callous which makes it very sad, Mr. Speaker, 
that we would have these tiny steps when obviously so much 
needs to be done. 
 
I know that there are members on the other side of this House 
that share the sentiments that children in poverty is shameful 
anywhere. But when we come from an agricultural province, 
when we come from a province which is a net exporter of food, 
the fact that we have children in poverty here at all becomes 
even more disgraceful. And yet this is not the basis of solving 
these problems from the budget that we’ve seen come forward. 
We’ve seen a small move to the centre, addressing what has to 
be the economic engine for this province as a whole. 
 
[16:15] 
 
In the past I believe that the GDP of the province has been 
controlled, directly or indirectly, in the neighbourhood of 
around 40 per cent. And this is a model, Mr. Speaker, that I 
don’t think is matched in very many jurisdictions in the First 
World. And in the event that it is, it’s not one that is globally 
competitive. I’ve spoken to this in the former budget debates in 
saying that we need to be competitive on a global basis. And the 
longer that we resist this, the more painful that transition is 
going to be. And the resistance that we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, in 
that the Vicq commission has been slow oncoming, has been 
demonstrated primarily through the exit of the population 
moving out of the jurisdiction. 
 
The future economy for all of Canada and for Saskatchewan is 
going to be service-based. And the movement in the agriculture 
sector towards that is not being aided by this government in any 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

means when individuals are forced to leave this province to find 
economic opportunity elsewhere. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
much of what’s come here has been too little, too late. And it 
becomes very difficult and highly problematic to be able to hear 
or articulate a vision of how we’re going to change things when 
we have this history behind us, with a party that has been in 
power for so many years. 
 
And I frankly don’t have an understanding, and I know that 
many of the constituents of Kindersley don’t have an 
understanding, of what a green and prosperous economy means. 
Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been re-elected here, I haven’t had the 
opportunity to enter into any sort of meaningful debate on the 
environment, and yet this is one of the main planks of the New 
Democratic Party’s platform for the last election . . . was that 
we were going to have a green and prosperous economy. 
 
I care about the environment. I care about it on my farm. I care 
about it for the whole province — air quality, water quality. 
These are things that are important to all of us. They’re 
important for business. They’re important for labour. They’re 
important. And we have a government that seized on the spin of 
saying, let’s talk about this as being important, but let’s actually 
deliver on nothing. 
 
And I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, since the 2003 election, any 
major environmental Bills that have come forth to be able to 
meet the demands and the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What this is an example of is, it is an example of a government 
that will once again try to split our populace, try to maintain 
power based solely on the intention of maintaining power. And 
by that I mean, Mr. Speaker, if there has to be a corridor of have 
versus have-not seats for the NDP to be re-elected, that will be 
the focus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farm economy is in the worst position it has 
been in, in eight decades. And this is absolutely amazing. 
Worse than that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe for a second that 
our commodity prices will vastly improve throughout the 
course of this year. This will mean that we will see near critical 
situations. 
 
My area, things are very tight, but we did have a good crop last 
year. But the reality is most acres probably will be seeded in the 
south end of the riding. I know that there are other ridings in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, where for the first time in history, 
last year we had land lie vacant because people couldn’t even 
get the taxes for it to be farmed. This is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker, 
and this is one where the federal government does have a 
responsibility. And I have every faith that the new Conservative 
administration is going to work towards this. 
 
What is not needed, Mr. Speaker, is flip-flops from our minister 
who, I understand, is going to be leaving for Ottawa today to 
speak to the federal minister where he has been calling for $200 
million of aid and then today comes to $570 million of aid. It 
frankly does not send a lot of credibility to Minister Strahl that 
this Agriculture minister really understands the nature of the 
problem which is out there and is existing, especially when 
various groups such as the Agricultural Producers Association 
of Saskatchewan will not accompany them and they’ve been 
calling for much higher numbers. 

What is needed, Mr. Speaker, is a change in government in this 
province. And there were small steps taken in this budget, but 
they are largely not going to benefit the people of Kindersley, 
the infrastructure in Kindersley, and that goes for most of rural 
Saskatchewan. And hence we have a division occurring, trying 
to have NDP have seats, non-NDP have-not seats, and I find 
this extremely troubling, and I think most of the electorate will 
too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that being said, I will be speaking in favour 
of the amendment, against the budget as it is put forth. And I 
would now defer to some of my more apt colleagues to enter 
into the debate and hear their views. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
a delight and honour to enter into the debate today, into our first 
budget debate of our second century. This is truly a memorable 
moment and something that’s very important, and I’m delighted 
to be here representing the riding of Saskatoon Centre, the 
constituents which have a lot of interest in the budget. We 
represent downtown Saskatoon and also some very important 
communities of Saskatoon that have a lot of history. And so 
they have a lot of interest in this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want it to be known that I’ll be of course voting 
for the budget as it’s presented by the Minister of Finance, the 
member from Regina South, and against the opposition’s 
amendment. And I have to say just that when I read the 
amendment, I was just amazed, and it left me wondering how 
the opposition has any credibility at all when it comes to 
financial matters when they craft such an amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget’s title, “Building a better future — 
Right here,” clearly outlines our objective. We have a plan, a 
blueprint to build a Saskatchewan future for all, right here. And 
it’s our first step in our second century that speaks to our 
priorities of a people’s agenda. Now, Mr. Speaker, this follows 
the work of our Throne Speech last fall towards our new 
century. This budget provides the tools to make the Throne 
Speech come alive and have meaning. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance remarked, this 
budget speaks for all of Saskatchewan. But in particular, it 
speaks to young people. We know that young people are critical 
to the success of our province. They are and will be the drivers 
of our economy, so it’s important to engage them now. 
 
Now the three themes of this budget provide a strong 
foundation for the government’s vision as outlined in our 
Throne Speech. And I want to quote that our vision is that: 
 

. . . of a province where no one is left behind on the path to 
opportunity, a province with an unbreakable social fabric, 
built on a foundation of diverse and growing communities, 
in a green and prosperous economy. 
 

Now the themes come clear and are well supported in our 
budget — unbreakable social fabric, diverse and growing 
communities, in a green and prosperous economy. This ensures 
that no one’s left behind on the path to opportunity here in 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to contain my specific observations 
to three areas of interest, labour, of course, and green initiatives. 
But first I want to speak to those initiatives that have particular 
meaning for those folks, young and old, who reside in 
Saskatoon Centre and the business community. 
 
Now this is actually a bit of a difficult task because there’s so 
much to profile. Some quick things come to mind. The $97 
million in increased municipal revenue sharing, the new 
training spaces, especially at SIIT — this is very important. The 
increase in health care allotment that will ensure the vitality of 
our health care system, the tuition freeze, the tool tax credit, 
safer communities — this is a very successful and a very 
important initiative for the people of Saskatoon Centre. The 
Junos are coming to Saskatoon; now that’s great news. Phase 
two of River Landing . . . and the list goes on Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to highlight some of those of particular interest to 
my neighbours and the community downtown. The first of 
course would be the business tax cuts. These are significant, but 
I believe the plan as laid out by Jack Vicq and his commission 
is sound, and clearly the time is right for us to make this 
investment. It is clear that businesses see this initiative as an 
opportunity to invest here in our province, creating jobs and 
opportunities and as well ensuring that wages and benefits are 
competitive. The time is now, and this is very essential. 
 
But just as important to my neighbours is the concept of the 
unbreakable social fabric. And clearly our commitment to those 
on social assistance and transitional employment allowance, 
with significant monthly increases, is worthy for us all to 
support. We will see increases of $40 per month and other 
increases as well. This is very good stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another worthy increase is for the KidsFirst program where we 
will see another 850 families be able to take part in this 
worthwhile initiative. This is very important to the people of 
Saskatoon Centre and right across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, it’s critically important that we 
continue to support the work of the CBOs [community-based 
organization] in our communities. And in ridings such as 
Saskatoon Centre, the work, the good work that’s done by the 
CBOs sector is critically important. 
 
I also want to say that the new work in improving school 
funding is a major step forward. I am delighted as an MLA 
representing Saskatoon to see this change that will have a 
significant impact on our Saskatoon and Regina schools. This is 
a big step forward and I know this will be greatly appreciated 
by students and families and all those associated with 
education. So I want to say a big thank you to the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a moment just to 
highlight the green initiatives as provided for in this budget. 
Many of them are very noteworthy. First, I want to wish our 
parks a very happy 75th birthday. This is a wonderful 
milestone, so congratulations to the minister and to the 
department. It should be a very exciting year in our parks across 
Saskatchewan. I would note though, Mr. Speaker — and I’m 

not sure if you would know this — that while our park system 
started in 1931 with six parks, our neighbour Manitoba is some 
30 years younger when their park system started in 1961. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the parks will model in many 
ways some of the innovative green strategies in terms of energy 
and recycling and water, and so I’m very much looking forward 
to seeing this come alive this year. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw attention to our clean coal 
enhanced oil recovery project. This is a very significant, 
innovative project for our country actually. This is a 
tremendous project that will have huge potential for reducing 
CO2 emissions. My hope that it is successful and that the federal 
government remains committed and on board. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the 2006-07 budget is also good news for 
the Department of Labour. This year’s budget provides a $1.1 
million increase in support of the department’s work, which is 
good news for the province as a whole. It’s good news because 
the Department of Labour works with both employers and 
workers to improve the health and safety in Saskatchewan’s 
workplaces. 
 
The importance of this work became evident earlier this year 
when each and every one of the 72 miners trapped underground 
by a fire in Esterhazy potash mine emerged unscathed. Thanks 
to our progressive approach to mine safety, lives were saved, 
families remained whole, and no one was left mourning for a 
loved one. Now the safe return of those potash miners placed 
Saskatchewan at centre stage as a world leader in the protection 
of its workforce. Mr. Speaker, in the days and weeks that 
followed the fire, media from around the world cited our 
regulations. Our mine safety inspectors have been asked by 
both the US [United States] and China to share what we know 
about keeping miners safe. The department, along with the 
mining industry and the miners themselves, should be very 
proud of that. 
 
The majority of the increases the department will get this year 
will be used to allow the department to do increased education 
and enforcement — work that builds healthy and safe 
workplaces, as well as work that helps to build fair and 
co-operative workplaces. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the budget this year will stimulate the 
economy by attracting new investment and creating more jobs. 
Building a robust and vibrant economy will improve the lives of 
Saskatchewan people. We are working together to make sure 
Saskatchewan is the best place to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
This government is also supporting our citizens to ensure that 
no one is left behind on the path to opportunity through 
enhanced social initiatives. This budget will help support the 
continuation of the department’s work to improve work 
opportunities for Saskatchewan residents. In the commission 
report on improving work opportunities for Saskatchewan 
residents, this government received 25 recommendations to 
improve the life of Saskatchewan people who struggle to obtain 
employment that will enable them to adequately care for 
themselves and their families. 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

Now clearly, Mr. Speaker, helping Saskatchewan women and 
men secure employment opportunities that allow them to better 
support themselves and their families is key to making that 
vision a reality. And, Mr. Speaker, while there is no 
one-size-fits-all solution for addressing this challenge, 
stimulating our economy is certainly an important piece of the 
puzzle. So too is providing opportunities for young people to 
gain the knowledge and skills they need to participate in the 
workforce. Mr. Speaker, this budget supports that goal. 
 
It will also continue to build on past commitments to child care, 
which we know is another important part of addressing the 
challenges facing some of Saskatchewan’s residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2006-07 budget also provides financial 
support required to review The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
The committee of review which I announced last month will 
look at The Workers’ Compensation Act and regulations as well 
as administration of the Act. This periodic review is conducted 
by a committee with equal representation from both employers 
and workers. Their work, which will include a public 
consultation, is important because the modern workplace is 
constantly changing and we need to ensure that our 
compensation system changes with it. 
 
One recent example of success in this area is the introduction of 
increased compensation protection for Saskatchewan’s 700 
full-time professional firefighters. As a result of this 
amendments, ureter, colorectal, and testicular cancer as well as 
lung cancer in non-smokers, and heart injuries that occur within 
24 hours of an emergency response are now presumed to be an 
occupational disease for full-time professional firefighters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made this change because it was the right thing 
to do, because it ensures that when these people need us most, 
we will be there for them. 
 
Now the current committee of review will begin consultations 
this fall, and I hope to receive their report by the end of the 
year. I look forward to seeing what new suggestions will be 
presented for ensuring that Saskatchewan continues to provide 
up-to-date compensation system that is fair and responsive. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Labour always does 
important work, and thanks to this year’s budget the department 
will enhance its ability to pursue prosecutions when situations 
against occupational health and safety legislation merit such a 
serious step. And I look forward to making additional 
announcements later this year about the ways in which the 
department will use some of its additional funding to enhance 
the operation of labour standards compliance unit . . . review 
unit. The upcoming year, Mr. Speaker, will be a good year for 
Saskatchewan and it will be a good year for the Department of 
Labour. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, as our province enters its 
second century and my home city, Saskatoon, celebrates its 
centennial year, I’m reminded of something that David Dinkins 
said as the first Black mayor of New York City, one of the 
largest cities in the world — we should vote for our hopes, not 
our fears. And if you were to listen to the opposition then we 
would soon become hopeless, lost, and afraid. Mr. Speaker, 
they absolutely have no credibility when it comes to financial 

matters. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s my intention to vote for the budget as 
presented by the Minister of Finance and against the 
amendment presented by the opposition. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise today and debate the budget 
speech. I’d just like to start off with some comments made by 
the member from Regina Coronation Park. He got up and he 
talked about, oh the people on the other side, they’re not even 
talking about the budget. And then what did he do? He talked 
about the ’60s, the ’80s. He talked about everything else other 
than the budget and yet he complains that we aren’t talking 
about the budget. Talk about credibility and talk about integrity. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to talk about the budget because I had 
the opportunity this weekend of touring my constituency. And 
when I went around asking people, what did you think of the 
budget? — I got quite a number of mixed reviews. They ranged 
from, oh I see they adopted your tax cut from the Saskatchewan 
Party proposal. I said, yes they did. And the range the other way 
went to, believe it or not, laughter. Now when people laugh at 
something like the budget, I think that should be very 
embarrassing for the members opposite that somebody will 
actually laugh at it. And the reason they laughed at it . . . As 
people are aware, I represent a rural constituency, and what did 
this budget provide for the rural people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a farm crisis out there and it’s not 
recognized by the NDP government or the Minister of 
Agriculture. And when I talk about farm crisis, I talked to an 
individual and he explained to me — he said, he said, I cannot 
get money from a financial institute to put in my crop. Here I’m 
in a position, I have continuous crop for three years, there’s no 
way that I can put the crop in without fertilizing and I cannot 
get money for fertilizer from any financial institution. What do I 
do? So he’s caught between the proverbial rock and a hard spot, 
because he cannot get money for fertilizer, therefore he cannot 
sow a crop. And that’s happening unfortunately to too many 
places around this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, talk about the tax reductions. And the NDP 
government actually adopted the Vicq commission 
recommendations which were provided to the Vicq commission 
. . . Contrary to what anybody on that side of the House thinks, 
the recommendations to the Vicq commission came from our 
Finance critic and they were adopted in total. Our 
recommendations were adopted by the Vicq commission. So 
we’re very, very glad to see the Vicq commission 
recommendations adopted by this government. 
 
But I have a little bit of an issue of sorts with it, from their 
perspective. Here we have the left, the far left, and the extreme 
far left, talking about tax cuts. It must have been a real issue in 
that caucus over there talking about tax cuts. And I went and 
reviewed the manifestos — both of them; the Regina one and 
the other one — and you know what? You cannot find tax cuts 
in either of the manifestos that I viewed. So for some of those 
people over there that are so far left, how could they even sit in 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

caucus or cabinet and talk about tax cuts? We’re very, very 
pleased that they reduced the taxes, but it must have been quite 
interesting within caucus or cabinet to debate the tax cuts within 
their caucus. 
 
Now you have to look at also, Mr. Speaker, what did the NDP 
government do to create this economic boom? We know that 
we’re in an economic boom. We also know we’re losing jobs, 
but we’re in an economic boom. And I have to ask the question, 
and I asked the question as I was talking about the budget 
around the constituency and in Regina these last few days is, 
what did this government do to create the economic boom, 
supposedly, that we’re in right now? And you have to look at 
. . . was it something within their plan? And I asked that 
question, I asked that to people. What part of the NDP plan 
created the economic boom? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, people in this province have never even 
heard of a NDP economic plan. They could not identify one 
single issue of a plan from the NDP government that could 
create an economic prosperity or economic prosperity in this 
province. So I asked them — I asked them flat outright — do 
you think it was the green and prosperous economy that created 
all this economic boom? And again you get laughter. People on 
that side of the House can’t even tell us what a green and 
prosperous economy is. 
 
So when you ask the public, tell me, was it the green and 
prosperous economy that created this economic boom? And 
there’s nothing there. So I said to them, well do you think it was 
their available hours of work legislation that they introduced? 
Was that the driver for this economic prosperity in the 
province? Well again you get chuckles. 
 
So what was it? What was it that that government did to create 
this economic prosperity that we’re in in this province? Well 
absolutely nothing. The economic prosperity of this province 
today is because of the oil and gas prices around the world — 
the oil and gas prices. 
 
Now I rhetorically ask, what caused the oil prices to go up? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas prices around the world went 
up directly because of the Iraqi war. So let’s throw that back to 
the NDP. They didn’t support the Iraqi war. They didn’t want 
any part of it. So isn’t it ironic that here they’re totally against 
the Iraqi war — they’ve said that vocally — and yet it’s the 
Iraqi war that has provided this economic prosperity for the 
province of Saskatchewan? You talk about falling in a cesspool 
and come out smelling like a petunia, that’s exactly what’s 
happened in this particular case. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on the fact that the tax 
cuts were very much a Saskatchewan Party proposal. That’s 
why we refer to the people opposite as NDP lite now. 
 
But one of the places they did not go . . . They brought in the 
tax cuts, but tax cuts is only one part of a plan for economic 
prosperity, continued economic prosperity in this province. One 
of the other aspects is creating a competitive labour market, 
creating a competitive labour market. That was not done in this 
budget. There was nothing mentioned in this budget on that. 
 
Limiting government intervention in the economy, now that’s a 

huge one. And I want to come back to that because limiting 
government intervention in the economy . . . Now in the budget 
someplace there’s $25 million more for investment. There again 
is a government investing against private business. 
 
Now I want to carry on a little bit there because we have people 
from the other side that feel that the government has to be 
involved in the economy, which I totally disagree with. 
Government should be setting the infrastructure and setting the 
regulation and get out of the way. But what do they, what do 
they do over there? They wish to be involved in the economy. 
Well let me just give you a little bit of a rundown on some of 
their success stories, or lack thereof, of investing in the 
economy. 
 
Now let’s just look at SaskTel. We have tappedinto.com — this 
was an investment into the economy — $6.7 million loss; 
Persona, $9.4 million loss; Navigata, who knows what we’re up 
to today. Navigata we talked about today, and we’re somewhere 
to 60 to $70 million loss and climbing. Contrary to what 
members opposite said, it’s going to make a profit — two years 
ago, three years ago, last year — and this year we’re into the 
tank for another $21 million or so. 
 
How about Retx.com? That was only $26 million, Mr. Speaker. 
That didn’t even match the SPUDCO one. NST [NST Network 
Services of Chicago] was $16 million. Clickabid, Clickabid lost 
$1.9 million; Soft Tracks, $2.2 million; Ag Dealer, $8.9 
million; BWI [Business Watch International], $2.2 million. 
That’s in SaskTel alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s that government’s record of investment in the economy. 
The NDP record of investing in the economy through SaskTel 
alone is a $126 million loss, and I repeat — loss. How about 
SaskWater? How about SPUDCO? We have the member from 
Prince Albert who is the infamous dealer of SPUDCO and that 
was a $35 million loss. Now that we’re getting up close to $70 
million in Navigata, I think the current Minister of Highways 
will probably want to reinvest in potatoes so he can get back up 
in the top part of the poll of losing money. 
 
[16:45] 
 
How about SaskPower? We’ve heard about Channel Lake in 
Guyana. That’s only $17 million loss. SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance], $16.1 million loss in Coachman 
Insurance. How about mega bingo? What a thing to get into — 
mega bingo. Well it was only an $8 million loss, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s small potatoes compared to SPUDCO. How about the 
ethanol deal? How about the ethanol deal? That was only 
$750,000. But the fact that there was such fanfare about going 
out and the government being involved in this new ethanol 
project, and I think the only thing left out there is the hole 
where the spade went in because that’s all that ever happened 
out there. How about Pangaea? A $3.5 million loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this comes to a total of $207 million — $207 
million. Now I want to add to that, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 
500 per cent over budget for ISC [Information Services 
Corporation], Information Services — 500 per cent over 
budget. Now I have not talked about the Meadow Lake pulp 
mill as yet but if you add that in, there is over $1 billion lost by 
that NDP government in investments outside or where they 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

shouldn’t be investing as far as I’m concerned — $1 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk in my few minutes I have left about 
a couple of other things. One is out-migration. We talk about 
out-migration. What is there in this budget to keep young 
people here? We hear the continuous rhetoric. Oh this is going 
to keep our young people here. We’re investing in the future of 
our young people. That’s been going on for how many years? 
The figures are since the current Premier took office that we 
have lost something like 2,000 — actually we lost 2,065 people 
in the last quarter. Since the current Premier took office this 
province, this province has lost 12,758 people. 
 
Oh but we’re working to keep our young people here. We’ve 
got a plan to keep young people here. How often can people of 
this province hear that rhetoric and not see any results? 12,758 
people out of this province. But we have a plan to keep young 
people here. We hear that so often it’s almost getting tiresome 
hearing that because there’s no plan to go with it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other problem that we have with that is 
called the demographic doughnut. We are increasing the . . . We 
have the highest proportion of people under the age of 15 and 
over the age of 65. It’s the people in between the age of 15 and 
65 that we have a low number. That is called the demographic 
doughnut. 
 
From 2001-02 to 2004-05, Saskatchewan lost 8,701 people 
between the ages of 20 and 29. Now how can anybody on that 
side of the House say well that’s all right, it’s a glitch. We’ve 
heard it’s a glitch; it’s an aberration. I think they ought to call it 
what it is — and that’s a disaster. And that’s exactly what it is. 
It’s a disaster that we’re losing young people from this 
province. And what do they do about it? Nothing, nothing. A 
little bit more rhetoric, a little more rhetoric. 
 
Now I want to just touch on immigration because by the NDP’s 
own admission, their plan is a failure to keep young people. It’s 
a failure. And this is by their own document, their budget 
document. Their job creation numbers for 2006 are cut by 
one-third — by one-third. They set a very low target, Mr. 
Speaker. Can’t meet it and so they change their numbers 
downward in a budget that they say this is going to attract 
young people to our province. 
 
And they don’t have the intestinal fortitude to even put numbers 
on it. Oh of course, as the Minister of Industry and Resources 
said one day in the House, he said well, you can’t put numbers 
on unless you have a plan. Well obviously they don’t have a 
plan, which we’ve been saying all along. 
 
But here, we’ve got the job numbers that they’re aiming to 
create down by one-third, down by 1,600. And I want to talk 
just about that for a minute because, on the other hand, we have 
the Minister Responsible for Immigration saying, saying that 
we’re going to have 5,000 people immigrate into Saskatchewan 
within the next year. A lot of fanfare, stand up and say 5,000 
people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to identify the dichotomy in this. 
We’re creating 3,200 jobs, we’re keeping young people in the 
province, and we have 5,000 immigrants coming in — it 
doesn’t compute. Are we going to have 1,800 immigrants? 

Even if no young people stay, there’s still an 1,800 person 
shortfall compared to the number of jobs that they have stated at 
3,200 and 5,000 immigrants. Is it the minister’s idea that we’re 
going to have 5,000 immigrants come into this province, but 
we’re going to create 3,200 jobs. Therefore we’ll have 1,800 of 
them on what? Social Services? I mean how, how ridiculous 
can this be. We want 5,000 new people in here but we do not 
have the courage to put a number up that we’ll create jobs for 
all of these people we’ve got coming into this province — 
absolutely, absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget also we hear from the people across 
the way and says, no one left behind. Well if you’re an NDP 
supporter, I guess you’re not left behind because we notice in 
the budget document FTEs [full-time equivalent] are up by 262 
people. That’s full-time equivalents are up. The government is 
growing. If you’re part of the NDP organization, you’re not left 
behind; government is increasing. 
 
How is the rest of the province doing? How are the rest of the 
province . . . We already talked about the job losses. We’ve got, 
we’ve got piles of job losses. I think it’s 5,000 or something job 
losses that we’re looking at right now. But if you belong to the 
NDP organization you’re not left behind because FTEs within 
their own budget document are going up. 
 
And in addition to that, here’s something very interesting for 
the people of the province to understand. If you happen to be 
working in the Premier’s office, if you’re working in the 
Premier’s office, you get along just fine. There’s no FTE in the 
Premier’s office or Executive Council. But, but by their own 
budget document, the budget is going up by $600,000 in the 
Premier’s office — $600,000, a 7 per cent increase. It’s over a 7 
per cent increase. 
 
Now you go out and try and explain this to people that can’t put 
crops in the ground, because they have no money, and then go 
ahead and tell them that well Executive Council is going up by 
$600,000. That really doesn’t make a lot of sense to the people 
out there that are really, really suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to touch on the debt. We heard the 
Minister of Finance get up and we’ve heard other members get 
up and talk about the fact that we have lowered, we have 
lowered the debt by $101 million. How many times have we 
heard that? Budget day people on that side gave a round of 
applause for the fact that the debt was going down by $101 
million. Now this is in their own document — their own 
document — and it says that the net debt increase is $288.5 
million increase. Now how can they get up and talk one hand 
that the debt’s going down, and in their own document it’s gone 
up $288.5 million? Mr. Speaker, I’d like somebody on that side 
of the House to explain that to the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I gather my time is up. So you can tell from my 
comments, I will be supporting the amendment and I will not be 
supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Carrot River Valley 
on his feet? 
 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Mr. Kerpan: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted for a guest’s introduction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am happy to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a friend of mine and a friend of Saskatchewan Party 
politics from Saskatoon, Mr. Philipp Strenger. Philipp was a 
candidate for the Saskatchewan Party in the last provincial 
election, and as well has been active in politics in Saskatoon for 
many years. 
 
And I’d like to welcome Philipp to his Legislative Assembly 
here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to rise and enter into the budget debate, 
speaking of course in favour of the motion before the Assembly 
and against the amendment placed by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all you would have to do is visit the constituency 
of Regina Wascana Plains to see why this is an important 
budget and very worthy of the support by all members of this 
Assembly. We are a part of a rapidly growing southeast corner 
of Regina, home to many businesses and persons who run their 
own businesses or are part of the executive of many corporate 
businesses. We are also employees in the business sector. There 
are Crown employees. There are farm folk. And they are all 
well aware of the many tax reductions and tax measures and 
incentives that have been put in place over the years by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the many years that I’ve been here there has not 
been one budget that there hasn’t been some form of tax 
measure and tax incentive. And after the supper hour, Mr. 
Speaker, I would be glad to tell everyone about those measures 
and about the pride I have in the budget that is before the 
Assembly. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to recess 
the debate. 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it being near 5 
o’clock, this House stands recessed until 7:00 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1048 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1048 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1050 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1050 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1050 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1050 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Anniversary of Vimy Ridge 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1050 
 Saskatoon Haberdasher Honoured for 50 Years in Business 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1051 
 Saskatchewan First Nations Person Elected to Federal Parliament 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
 Martensville Nomination Meeting 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
 Representatives to National Aboriginal Hockey Championships 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
 Government’s Attitude to Business 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1052 
 Support for 2006 Budget 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Job Creation and Economic Growth 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1053 
 Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1054 
 Navigata’s Financial Performance 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
 Former Member’s Employment with the Legal Aid Commission 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1056 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1056 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1057 
 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1058 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1060 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1062 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1068 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1071 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1073 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1075 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


