






















































Hansard: November 13, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 11A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 327 
 November 13, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition again today on behalf of individuals from the Cypress 
Hills constituency concerned about the condition of Highway 
18. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed from the communities of 
Maple Creek, Gull Lake and Fox Valley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition calling on the 
Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps and ensure the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highway employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Manitou, Melville, Watrous, and Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 15(7) are 
hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: were percolation tests 
done on the groundwater in the RM of Corman Park in the 
years 2005 and 2006, and if so, what were the test results 
and to provide copies of those test results? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: what was the 
total number of foster homes in the province before the 
launch of the recruitment campaign of March 23, 2006? 
 

A second question, I give notice that I shall on day 16 ask the 
government the following question: 

 
To the Minister of Community Resources: what is the total 
number of foster homes in the province today, November 
13, 2006? 
 

One additional question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
foster homes in the province exceed the legal limit for the 
number of children occupying the house? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
welcome to the Assembly today three very special guests. Mr. 
Speaker, they are seated in your gallery. I welcome today Tyler 
Lewis, Canadian Idol star and Tyler’s parents, Neil and 
Lorraine Lewis all from Rockglen and now well known across 
the nation. Mr. Speaker, all members will know that 
Saskatchewan has had a pretty good record when it comes to 
the CTV program Canadian Idol, and Tyler has kept that record 
going this year. We congratulate him on his great success. We 
congratulate him on his talent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago in the rotunda, we had a 
ceremony to recognize Tyler’s talent and his future in this 
province and in this country. So I’d ask all members to 
welcome the Lewises. And with Tyler and his parents are other 
members of his family and a number of fans who have joined us 
today, including my wife, Betty. 
 
So I would ask all to join in welcoming Tyler and his parents to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, it’s an honour to join with the Premier in welcoming 
Tyler and his family and fans to the Legislative Assembly. 
Once again Canadian Idol proved to be a great source of pride 
and inspiration for the entire province because of Tyler’s efforts 
this time around. So we want to welcome him here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty sure that the verbatim transcript of 
the Legislative Assembly has never contained the words 
Rockglen rocket. And so now that’s changed, and it should 
because of Tyler’s efforts. Welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the Assembly four people 
who are very important in my life. They’re way up in the back 
there: my husband Don, if he could just stand; my mother, 
Charlotte, Charlotte Nijman from Saskatoon. And last time 
these two people were in the legislature, you could only see one 
of them. This is my daughter, Heather, and now my new 
granddaughter, Annika. I’d like you to welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming Tyler, Lorraine, and Neil to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
As the member from Rosemont may know that Rockglen is 
actually in the Wood River constituency, and these are 
constituents of mine. I’d also like to welcome the friends of 
Tyler that are in the audience and also the rest of the family 
that’s there. So I would ask people to join me in welcoming 
them again to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Huskies Win the Hardy Cup 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. As tough as 
yesterday was for Saskatchewan football fans right across this 
province, Saturday was a great day as the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] Huskies defeated the number one ranked 
University of Manitoba Bisons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we’re fortunate enough 

to have two Huskie football alumni. We have the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs who played offensive line in the ’80s, 
and we have the member for Lloydminster who played for the 
Huskie football team in 1959. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: —Insert your leather helmet joke here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the U of S Huskies football program has been the 
envy of the nation for a number of years now. And by winning 
their third Hardy Cup in a row and their fourth in five years, 
their record begs the question: is there another CIS [Canadian 
Interuniversity Sport] program as successful as the U of S 
Huskies? 
 
Arguably the CIS’s best head coach, Brian Towriss, did a great 
job of preparing his team and players as they came into the 
Hardy Cup as underdogs, Mr. Speaker. I’d also especially like 
to acknowledge the work of my good friend, Ed “Car Bomb” 
Carleton, the defensive coordinator, for his work for preparing 
the defence. They held the Bisons to a season low 15 points in 
that game. 
 
Congratulations to the parents and all the volunteers of the 
Huskies, and most importantly, congratulations to the players 
who are disciplined and focused and played their hearts out. 
And because of their efforts, the Huskies are one more win 
away this weekend against the Ottawa Gee-Gees from having a 
huge home field advantage in the PotashCorp Vanier Cup to be 
held in two weeks. Congratulations to the Huskies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

2006 First Nations Achievement Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday evening, I along with the Minister of First Nations 
and Métis Relations and a number of colleagues from the other 
side of the Assembly attended the 2006 12th annual First 
Nations Awards, a project of the Women of the Dawn. I want to 
congratulate all the nominees as well as the organizers, 
sponsors, and volunteers of this very important event. 
 
And the winners of this year’s First Nations Awards are Trudy 
Morin of the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation for education; 
lifetime achievement, Herb Strongeagle of Pasqua First Nation; 
journalism, Mervin Brass of Key First Nation; medicine and 
health, Milton Paquachen, Fishing Lake First Nation; Raymond 
Shingoose of Cote First Nation for social work; Derek Big 
Eagle of Ocean Man First Nation for business; community 
work, Chief Austin Bear of Muskoday First Nation; sports and 
recreation, Anthony Scales of Gordon First Nation. 
 
The youth award went to Alexis Dustyhorn of Kawacatoose 
First Nation; Ray Sanderson of the Chakastaypasin First Nation 
— pardon me, Mr. Speaker — received the Veteran’s Award; 
for science and technology, Herman Michel from Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation; for justice, Donald Worme of 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

Kawacatoose First Nation; and for arts and entertainment, 
Evelyn Poitras, Peepeekisis First Nation. 
 
Congratulations to all these fine winners. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the members 
opposite in congratulating the people who were at the First 
Nations Awards, the winners on Thursday night. 
 
And two of my colleagues and I had the privilege of attending 
this 12th annual First Nations Awards. It was a gala evening 
event recognizing the efforts and achievements of First Nations 
in 13 areas. I’d like to congratulate Trudy Morin on education, 
Herb Strongeagle for lifetime achievement, Mervin Brass for 
journalism, Milton Paquachen for medicine and health, 
Raymond Shingoose for social work, Derrick Big Eagle for 
business, Chief Austin Bear for community work, and Anthony 
Scales for sports and recreation, Alexis Dustyhorn for youth, 
Ray Sanderson for veterans, Herman Michel for science and 
technology, Donald Worme for justice. And the Arts and 
Entertainment Award went to Evelyn Poitras. 
 
Part of the evening’s entertainment was musical selections by 
Chief Lawrence Joseph, Chief Marcel Head, and Perry 
Bellegarde. These are very talented gentlemen. All the guests 
who were present are extremely proud of the achievements of 
all of those honoured at the awards. With individuals like these, 
it’s little wonder why Saskatchewan’s First Nations are role 
models for the entire country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

A Weekend of Football 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to make a 
comment about the past weekend of football. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even with the presence of Gainer the Gopher 
and some third quarter flashes of football brilliance, this was 
not enough for the Roughriders to achieve victory in 
yesterday’s western final against the BC Lions. And the Riders 
will unfortunately not be making the trip to Winnipeg next 
week to compete for the Grey Cup — Mr. Speaker, a sad day in 
Riderville for all of us here. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the University of 
Saskatchewan Huskies did travel to Winnipeg this past 
weekend and defeated the number one ranked and previously 
unbeaten University of Manitoba Bison 32-15 to win the Hardy 
Cup — advancing them to the Mitchell Bowl and taking them 
one step closer to the Vanier Cup, symbol of Canadian 
university football supremacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth time in five years and the third 

year in a row that the Huskies have won the Hardy Cup, and 
they did it with authority. The Huskies had 527 yards on 
offence and did not allow the Bisons a point in the last 33.5 
minutes of the game. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the 
Huskies players and coaches on a game well played and wish 
them every success against the Ottawa Gee-Gees in the Mitchell 
Bowl next week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Gala Centennial Event in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday I was among several 
MLAs who had the privilege of attending Saskatoon’s final gala 
centennial event at TCU Place in Saskatoon. During the 
afternoon, there was a free showcase consisting of interactive 
and static displays. At 6 pm there was a theatre show called 
This Is My House. This is written and directed by Sean Hoy. It 
was a wonderful blend of live performances and video images. 
The theatre show was followed by a gala banquet with guest 
speaker, Piya Chattopadhyay, a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] journalist with deep Saskatoon roots. 
 
This event capped off a year of festivities which included a 
New Year’s fun day in the park. I attended that event, was able 
to serve hot dogs to the people that were there — perhaps a 
future career option in case I’m unsuccessful here, Mr. Speaker. 
There was also a July 1 celebration and a street party on the 
19th Street bridge. It was a wonderful year to be a Saskatonian 
and to bask in community pride. 
 
Saskatoon has come a long ways since the days of John Lake, 
Chief Whitecap, and the Barr colonists, from the days of 
Saskatoon being a temperance colony to the merger of Nutana 
and Riversdale in 1906 to the synchrotron in recent years. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Mayor Don Atchison, councillors, and 
all volunteers and citizens of Saskatoon for a successful 
centennial year and to wish them well for the next 100 years. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Taking a Stand Against Bullying 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today marks the beginning of National Bullying Awareness 
Week in Canada. This year’s theme is Stand up!(Be a Friend). 
Schools are being encouraged to involve their students and help 
make a difference by taking a stand against bullying at school 
and in the community during this special week and throughout 
the year. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to making 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work, and 
build strong futures, and we are addressing this issue of 
bullying. 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Today as part of Saskatchewan Learning’s caring and respectful 
schools initiative, we’ve announced a new bullying prevention 
model policy to assist schools, to strengthen their current 
policies and practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this policy was written in response to school 
divisions’ requests for a definition of bullying and a model 
policy to enable schools, school divisions, and communities 
across the province to work toward a common approach to the 
prevention and reduction of bullying. Key components include 
an outline of roles and responsibilities of boards of education, 
educators, parents, caregivers, students, school community 
councils, and the community members for preventing and 
reducing bullying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that bullying is a serious matter with 
wide-ranging consequences not just for students but for schools, 
families, and communities. And we want to ensure that our 
schools remain places where students and staff alike can learn 
and work in a positive and safe environment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Davidson Branch of the Royal Canadian Legion 
Celebrates Anniversary 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Davidson Branch 51 of the 
Royal Canadian Legion recently celebrated their 80th 
anniversary. 
 
On October 26, 1926, the branch received its charter of the 
Canadian Legion of the British Empire Service League. In the 
early years, meetings were held in a tiny building located 
behind a store on Main Street in Davidson. In 1947 the local 
branch purchased a building from the Davidson airport. They 
sawed the building in half, selling off one portion and keeping 
the other. The sale of the other helped pay for the portion that 
was kept. This then became their hall and was utilized for 
meetings, dances, and various other functions in the 
community. 
 
Local veteran Carl Gregor has been a member of the Legion for 
61 years and has many memories of the various events that have 
been held throughout the years. He also realizes the importance 
of ensuring that our younger generation remain active in 
keeping the significance of the Legion and Remembrance Day 
alive. 
 
The Legion has remained active in the Davidson area holding 
Remembrance Day services at the school as well as their 
community service on November 11. The Legion has also 
supported programs for youth, such as cadets, athletic 
competitions. They continue to be active in fundraising events, 
such as their annual strawberry social which is a favourite 
among the local residents. 
 
I ask the members to join me in congratulating the Davidson 
Branch 51 of the Royal Canadian Legion as they celebrate their 
80th anniversary. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Shortage of Health Professionals Impacts Rural Hospitals 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 31 
Spiritwood hospital was closed to patient care and today 
nothing has changed. Spiritwood is still closed. Patients are 
being ask to go to either Shellbrook or Prince Albert, but here’s 
the problem with that, Mr. Speaker. Shellbrook Hospital shut 
down over the weekend because of the Norwalk outbreak. No 
new patients have been admitted, and it is unclear when the 
hospital will resume services. That means all emergencies in the 
region will have to go to Prince Albert. But if you remember, 
Mr. Speaker, there is no radiologist in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health, can he explain why he 
has allowed the shortage of doctors in the P.A. [Prince Albert] 
region to spiral out of control? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite knows, and I hope he and his 
constituency office are promoting the fact, that there will be a 
community meeting in the Spiritwood-Shellbrook area in two 
days from now, organized to help the community participate in 
both an understanding of the circumstance that exists in that 
area and participate, Mr. Speaker, in assisting the regional 
health authority in doing what it can with regards to recruitment 
efforts for the area and the region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this community meeting is a very important part 
of the communications process. When incidents like this 
happen, Mr. Speaker, I commend the regional health authority 
for working with the community in communicating this 
information to the citizens who live there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: I 
will be there. Will you be there? Or will you bring somebody to 
the table there with some answers? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to speak 
through the Chair as he’s putting his question. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 
be there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health said, rural hospital closures 
are a fact of life. But I don’t think he understands the urgency 
facing Saskatchewan families in my hometown of Spiritwood 
and neighbouring communities of Shellbrook and Big River. 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

Mr. Speaker, a CBC story published on Friday featured a health 
region official saying, and I quote, “The closure of the 
Shellbrook hospital will stretch emergency resources, especially 
since there is . . . no [current] emergency service in nearby 
Spiritwood.” 
 
And another further quote. “With no emergency room service in 
Shellbrook obviously there is a concern about the time to get to, 
perhaps, Prince Albert for an emergency.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the domino effect in rural Saskatchewan is real 
and is affecting small towns in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, why has this government allowed this crisis situation 
to develop? What is he going to do, what is the minister going 
to do to fix the failing health care system in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite, when he talks about fact of life, is actually 
quoting the leader of his own party and not this member. Mr. 
Speaker, I have not said that, and we know that the Leader of 
the Opposition has on occasion done cut-and-paste quotes for 
members of this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on occasion we have physician shortages in this 
province that create crisis situations in specific hospitals. Mr. 
Speaker, the regional health authorities have to do what needs 
to be done to ensure that, number one, the public is informed, 
and number two, that safe and secure measures are taken to 
ensure the safety and security of patients within that region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year this government has negotiated a new 
contract with the Saskatchewan Medical Association that will 
assist us in recruitment and retention issues for physicians in 
rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work on 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: —Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to report 
that two health centres in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 
were forced to shut their doors over the weekend. The Coronach 
Health Centre shut down because of a lack of doctors. The 
Bengough Health Centre also shut down for the same reason. 
Mr. Speaker, two separate health centres shutting down for the 
same reason, a lack of health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Health please explain why 
these two health centres were forced to close their doors over 
the weekend? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

again, as I’d indicated to one of the other members opposite last 
week, I hope the member opposite is not suggesting that we 
keep a facility open when there are no physicians available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authorities take action to 
ensure that the patients are safe and secure. Mr. Speaker, as I 
started to indicate earlier, we’ve negotiated a contract with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association that puts more resources 
into physician recruitment and retention. Mr. Speaker, we have 
put in place, earlier this year, $25 million to ensure that we have 
some programs in place to deal with recruitment and retention 
of nurses and other health professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have demonstrated very clearly that we are 
concerned about the shortage of health professionals in this 
province, and we are doing everything we can to ensure that we 
are competitive with other provinces where shortages also exist. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
as the government is well aware and that minister is well aware, 
Coronach is a major energy producer in Saskatchewan. A 
quarter of all the electricity produced in this province comes 
from Coronach. It is a community full of people who work hard 
to fill this need. And this line of work can be dangerous, Mr. 
Speaker. The potential for a serious emergency is very real. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing to ensure Coronach has 
enough doctors so the health centre remains open all the time? 
What is he doing to make sure the residents and workers of 
Coronach have a health centre to go to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite had not yet been elected when this 
government brought in a budget in spring of this year — a 
budget that put more resources into the health sector, Mr. 
Speaker, than at any time in the history of this province. 
Included in that budget presentation, Mr. Speaker, was the 
introduction of and funding for a recruitment agency, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that regional health authorities had additional 
tools at the provincial level to do the recruiting efforts that 
needed to be done to ensure that there were enough physicians 
and health professionals in this province to keep these facilities 
open. Mr. Speaker, that recruitment agency is hard at work 
currently. Mr. Speaker, we have had interest expressed from all 
over the world, thanks to that agency being in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no physicians, there are no nurses, there 
are no health professionals unemployed in our communities 
anxious to go work in rural Saskatchewan or anywhere else. We 
are working at bringing new . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Milestone, Indian Head. 
 

Recruitment and Retention of Health Care Professionals 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately every day we see and hear more evidence that this 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government has made an 
absolute shambles of our health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It doesn’t matter whether it’s doctor 
shortages, whether it’s nursing shortages, whether it’s hospital 
closures, whether it’s cancer patients dying because of 
misdiagnosis under this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
absolutely unacceptable. 
 
But unfortunately these problems aren’t new. Five years ago the 
Premier, the now Premier released the much-touted action plan 
for health care and since then things have only got worse. Once 
again we see this NDP government is extremely long on words 
and short on results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why could the health care minister allow such a mess of this 
health care system under his watch? When will he start doing 
his job and make sure the professionals we need in this province 
are here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
interesting that the member opposite talks about every day the 
health system gets worse, Mr. Speaker. It only gets worse when 
the member opposite gets up and speaks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the summer months when the legislature 
wasn’t sitting, we had very few cases coming forward, Mr. 
Speaker. Very few cases. Because we were working, Mr. 
Speaker, with the communities, with the quality of care 
coordinators, Mr. Speaker, with the health regions and the 
patients of this province to ensure that a lot of the needs of the 
Saskatchewan patients were met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been appointed Minister of Health and 
working on the efforts of the previous minister, Mr. Speaker, 
we have made tremendous progress on surgical waiting lists, on 
MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] waiting lists, on CT 
[computerized tomography] waiting lists. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
number of physicians practising in this province over the last 
four years has increased by 9 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
2001 the Premier talked about stabilizing hospitals in 
Saskatchewan. Well in NDP words, if stabilizing means closing 

hospitals, they’re right on track for stabilizing. But 
unfortunately it does absolutely nothing to stabilize people’s 
attitude towards this government when it comes to health care 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen hospital closures in Kamsack, Canora, Preeceville, 
Spiritwood, Arcola, Big River, Central Butte, and now 
Bengough and Coronach. Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely 
unacceptable. If stabilizing is hospital closure, you guys are 
doing a wonderful job, Mr. Speaker. This NDP government is 
doing a wonderful job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one can believe this NDP government when it 
talks about recruitment and retention because five years ago 
they talked about the same problems and have done nothing. 
When will it start living up to the words it likes to talk about 
and actually recruit and retain health care professionals in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite surely understands that when the New 
Democrats took government in 1991, we spent about four years 
rebuilding the provincial economy — the provincial budget 
actually, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, there were a 
number of facility closures across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995 the federal government changed the way 
in which it financed education and health care. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, the system needed to consolidate itself. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in 2001 we recognized that there were 
additional resources. The economy had re-energized itself. The 
economy was rebuilding. And we started to make headway, Mr. 
Speaker, in picking up the pieces after picking up after them 
across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in 2001 the report came out. In 2005 the health human 
resources report came out. Waiting lists are down. More 
physicians are at work . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister does a great job 
in reciting all the reports and all the studies that they have done, 
all the words that they can produce. But what they’re not 
producing is physicians to keep the hospitals closed all over 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately this 
minister is talking about it as if it’s a fact of life. I quote from 
the Leader-Post, an article by James Wood. And he says, “The 
suspension of hospital services in rural Saskatchewan is a fact 
of life, [says] Health Minister Len Taylor . . .” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a complete admission that they’re failing in 
the health care system. But the people they’re failing are people 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

across Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan when they go a 
facility to receive emergency care, and it’s closed, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the minister start living up to the words 
that his government said in the health action plan and 
guaranteeing access to primary care within 30 minutes of where 
they live, because they’re absolutely not living up to that 
commitment? 
 
Is that commitment just words or will they start living up to that 
commitment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Since 2001, Mr. Speaker, all of the efforts that we’ve made in 
this province flowing out of the action plan, Mr. Speaker — the 
recommendations that were made, the directions that have been 
taken — have resulted, Mr. Speaker, in a circumstance where 
we now have 9 per cent more physicians working in this 
province than we did in 2001, Mr. Speaker. That’s progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hospital closures that the member opposite 
talks about are temporary closures, Mr. Speaker. These aren’t 
permanent. They are temporary closures meant to ensure that 
we can deliver safe and secure care to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. As the additional recruitment and 
retention efforts unfold, Mr. Speaker, we will see more 
physicians operating and working in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, we will see more nurses in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, we will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s reassuring news to 
people around Saskatchewan. If they get sick, make sure they 
don’t do it when this hospital is closed temporarily, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not how it works in rural Saskatchewan. That’s 
not how it works anywhere in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, the member from Canora-Pelly 
suggested a hospital hotline to notify people of all the hospital 
closures we’re facing in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that 
suggestion was made tongue-in-cheek, but unfortunately it 
might be true. We might need something like that when you 
look at the rash of hospital closures we’re seeing in the 
province. 
 
Just imagine some day if one of your loved ones suffers from a 
heart attack or a stroke or is an accident victim and they rush 
them to the hospital only to find out that it’s closed. Let’s say 
that hospital might have been Spiritwood and it’s closed. 
Imagine them then going to the Shellbrook Hospital only to find 
that is closed as well. Then imagine them going to Prince Albert 
where there’s no radiologist. This is the type of health care 
system under the NDP government and they ought to be 
ashamed of themselves. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member proceed to his question 

directly. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to 
the guarantees that they made in their own health action plan 
and ensure that there is primary care within 30 miles of every 
resident in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to be able to say that this government is committed 
to the development and the further enhancement and expansion 
of primary health care in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s something that we’ve been committed to. We are 
working with a tremendous number of people across this 
province, within the communities, within the associations, 
within the stakeholders’ groups, Mr. Speaker. Primary care 
delivery in this province is going to assist us in providing better 
care throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the regional health care authorities 
throughout this province have got responsibility to ensure that 
they’re able to deliver care within the regions in a manner that’s 
safe and secure for the people who live there. Mr. Speaker, the 
circumstances that we’re experiencing today are a direct result 
of a number of things that are happening throughout . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Departure of Labour Relations Board Official 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. Does the minister recall 
the answer that he gave to me on May 10, 2006 in this 
Assembly regarding the departure of the former Vice-Chair of 
the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we 
know, Mr. Matkowski has decided to seek resolution of this 
matter before the courts, and so to that end I think it would be 
inappropriate to comment further on that. I know that we had 
quite a discussion in the House over that issue, but to the 
question about May 10, I’ll have to look specifically at Hansard 
for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
let me read from Hansard on page 1608 from last session. And 
it’s the words of the Minister of Labour, and I quote: 
 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Well let me repeat this again. There was no political 
interference. No one was forced to resign or pushed out of 
their jobs. The term expired. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was the minister’s answer on May 10, 2006. 
And I ask him to consider this next question very carefully. Is 
that his answer today, or has he changed his mind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly Mr. 
Matkowski has decided to pursue this through the courts, and I 
think it would be inappropriate to be drawn into a discussion of 
this right now, so I’d leave it at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question again to the Minister of Labour. On May 
20 the Regina Leader-Post quoted the minister as saying, and I 
quote: 
 

We stand by, I stand by our deputy minister on this. It’s 
very clear there was no political interference. No one was 
forced to, asked to, resign and that is our position. 
 

Mr. Speaker, is that what the minister said and would he say the 
same thing today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said, this item is 
before the courts. Mr. Matkowski has decided to pursue that, 
and I think it would be only appropriate to allow him and 
ourselves to have our day in court. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear from this 
government’s intentions right off the very bat when the headline 
reads in the Leader-Post, “Province plans to fight lawsuit.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour, I would ask him this 
question then if he can’t comment on the other ones: has the 
minister read the statement of defence from the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the Department of Labour, in the matter of Mr. 
Matkowski? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, clearly it would be 
inappropriate to be drawn into this in this House, debating 
something that really should be discussed fully in the court. So 

we’ll leave it at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister has indicated that he does not want to 
comment on his own remarks. So I’m going to ask this 
question, Mr. Speaker. And I refer the minister to point no. 10 
on page 3 of the statement filed by the Department of Labour, 
the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it says, and I quote, “Mr. Craik went on in that 
conversation to say that he believed the best course of action for 
the Plaintiff was to spend the next few months catching up on 
all of his decisions and then to announce his resignation from 
the Labour Relations Board . . . ” 

 
Mr. Speaker, when the deputy minister of Labour comes to your 
office and tells you to announce your resignation, isn’t that 
being forced to resign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Matkowski has 
decided to pursue this through the courts and we want to make 
sure he gets his fair day, we get our fair day. I think it would be 
entirely inappropriate to have this discussion in this House and 
affect that route. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From an article 
written by Veronica Rhodes in the Leader-Post, as I’ve already 
quoted it in this Assembly, it says that the deputy minister said 
this: “No one was forced to, asked to, resign and that is our 
position.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister knew that his deputy minister had 
approached Mr. Matkowski and said, this is what I intend for 
you to do; you should resign. The minister stands in this 
Assembly and says, I didn’t know about that; this didn’t really 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that I ask of the Minister of Labour is 
this. It’s obvious from the comments of Mr. Matkowski, in fact 
it’s obvious from the statement of defence of this very 
government — everyone agrees. The former Vice-Chair of the 
Labour Relations Board was forced to resign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Minister of Labour say the opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s really 
important that in this House we allow people to have their day 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

in the court and that it’s fair. When I look across the way and I 
see this party, the Saskatchewan Party, who’s bent on attacking 
working people in Saskatchewan . . . You listen to what they do 
and the attacks they launch on the working people. It’s 
shameful. It’s shameful. On this side, Mr. Speaker, our target, 
our goal is to make this place . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members will come to order. 
The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Saying this province is focused on 
making this place, this province, the best place to raise a family 
and to work. Mr. Speaker, we strongly believe in protecting 
people’s rights here, workers’ rights. That’s essential to a strong 
province. And we stand by that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
we are asking for is on behalf of people in Saskatchewan to 
ensure that that minister makes statements in this House that 
accurately reflect what has happened in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read, I want to read the entire statement 
quote of the Government of Saskatchewan. And this is from 
page 3 of their defence, and it says this: “On June 24, 2005, Mr. 
Craik spoke with the Plaintiff . . . ” It clearly says on June 24, 
2005. 
 
At the end of the statement, Mr. Speaker, the comment is this. It 
says that he should catch up on all of his material “. . . and then 
to announce his resignation from the Labour Relations Board on 
the basis that he would be paid to the end of his term of office 
as prescribed in . . . Order-in-Council.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what that is saying is that this minister was aware 
that his deputy minister was asking for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Would the member please put 
his question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Will the minister reflect on this comment of 
his Government of Saskatchewan statement and indicate 
whether or not it is factually correct? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is clearly no Perry Mason. But I want to say this. We will allow 
this to have its way through the courts and I think that’s entirely 
appropriate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take this opportunity to say, as 
Minister of Labour, I am deeply concerned about the 
allegations, the tone of the questioning opposite. We know the 

leader of the party opposite has said, and I quote, on CJME, that 
they will “go to war” with working people here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, when they start 
attacking the working people here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 16, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
be now introduced and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 16, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 27, The Film Employment 
Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Bill No. 28 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. I’m sure 
that there are very important things that the members have to 
talk about, but at this stage I’d ask members for order so that 
the Minister of Government Relations can move his motion. 
The Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
28, The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by . . . Bill No. 28, The 
Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Labour Standards Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards 
Amendments Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 29, The 
Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 29, The Labour Standards Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, The 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 30, The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair Recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 31, The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 31, The Regional Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to moved that Bill No. 32, The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act be now introduced and read for 
a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 32, The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Orders of the day . . . Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. I . . . Order. Order. Members will come to order. 
And I would ask members not to do indirectly what they are not 
allowed to do directly, and that is to involve members in the 
gallery indirectly in the debate. Members will come to order. 
The members will stay to order. Orders of the day . . . Order. 
Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
wish to table responses to written questions no. 24 to 32 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The question that was called 
was question 23. Order. The Chair recognizes the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the response to 
question no. 23 be converted. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 23 be deferred. Order. Order. 
The response to question 23 . . . or question 23 has been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). Question 24 should 
be called. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the House has been having a 
little difficulty hearing proceedings, and I believe that the 
answer to question 23 has been provided to the Table. Is this . . . 
24 through 32 have been provided to the Table and therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, the Government Whip has moved to convert 
question 23, and questions 24 to 32 are provided. 
 
The Speaker: — Albeit done clumsily, I believe maybe that 
will satisfy the conditions. The question 23 was called, and the 
member responded, I believe, to questions 24 through 32; 
therefore I will accept that questions 24 to 32 have been 
submitted. Subsequent to that, question 23 has been converted 
to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 

Removing Non-Renewable Resource Revenues 
from the Equalization Formula 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 
my remarks, I will be moving a motion to the effect that the 
Assembly urge the Prime Minister of Canada, Prime Minister 
Harper, to honour his commitment to remove non-renewable 
resource revenues from the equalization formula. And I’ll be 
moving that because it has very substantial consequences for 
Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m very pleased to be able to speak on behalf of this motion. 
It’s certainly a topic that I have spoken to many people about 
quite a bit over the course of the last few months. And when I 
speak about the topic, Mr. Speaker, I tend to do so in the 
context of three themes. One is a question of commitment, 
another one is fairness, and another one of opportunity. 
 
So I’d like to start with commitment. There is no question in 
anyone’s mind that this federal government has committed to 
removing non-renewable resource revenues from the 
equalization formula. In January of last year, 2005, now Prime 
Minister Harper, then leader of the opposition, Stephen Harper 
— the man is now the Prime Minister — wrote in a letter, and I 
quote, “We believe that a new equalization formula should 
exclude non-renewable resource revenues . . . ” 

 
A couple of months later, in March 2005, the Conservative 
Party actually moved a motion in the House of Commons 
calling for that to happen. At that time, Regina Lumsden-Lake 
Centre Member of Parliament Tom Lukiwski had this to say, 
quote, “. . . non-renewable natural resources should be removed 
from the equalization formula.” 
 
There are more examples of members of the current 
Saskatchewan Conservative caucus repeating this promise, in 
fact too many times to count, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 
Conservative Party believes so much in this promise that they 
took the time to include it in their last election platform which 
we very much appreciated. The platform said, and I quote: 
 

A Conservative government will: . . . Work to achieve 
with the provinces permanent changes to the equalization 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

formula which would ensure that non-renewable natural 
resource revenue is removed from the equalization 
formula to encourage economic growth. 

 
And there’s nothing unequivocal or vague about that promise, 
Mr. Speaker. That promise, which has been calculated to be 
worth $800 million a year for the people of Saskatchewan, was 
the Conservative government’s number one commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the people of Saskatchewan 
responded by electing 12 Conservative members of parliament 
to represent this province in our federal government. 
 
[14:30] 
 
It was something the Prime Minister acknowledged the last time 
he was in Saskatchewan. He stated quite clearly that his 
government is aware of its election commitments and prides 
itself on keeping those commitments. That is something the 
people of Saskatchewan can appreciate, Mr. Speaker. And 
people of Saskatchewan know that there is no bigger 
commitment that has been made to them than the 
Conservatives’ $800 million promise to Saskatchewan. And it’s 
time for that promise to be kept, Madam Speaker. 
 
As I said earlier, this is a question of not only commitment but 
also of fairness. The promise was made because the federal 
Conservatives recognized that it was the right and fair thing to 
do. They saw the deals that were struck with Newfoundland and 
Labrador and the province of Nova Scotia in which those 
provinces were now allowed to retain 100 per cent of their 
resource revenues. 
 
In comparison, Saskatchewan has in its history completely 
flipped the notion of 100 per cent retention on its ear because 
Saskatchewan has seen 100 per cent or even more of its oil and 
gas revenues clawed back by the federal government — not 
retaining a cent, Madam Speaker. 
 
I should add that this provincial government agrees with and 
supports the deals struck with the Atlantic provinces and has 
argued for the same fair treatment. Those deals with the 
Atlantic provinces are a recognition of the fact that it is not 
right to strip a province’s non-renewable resource revenues. To 
put it simply, once a barrel of oil is gone, it is not coming back. 
 
Now the previous federal government seemed to recognize this 
at least when it comes to the Atlantic provinces when the 
Atlantic accords were struck. The current Conservative 
government clearly recognizes it too. 
 
Madam Speaker, you may ask yourself why the provinces of 
Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia are entitled to 
keep their non-renewable resource revenues while the province 
of Saskatchewan is not. Because to any rational person, this is 
not fair. It’s something the Conservatives realized when they 
promised to change the equalization formula. And I don’t have 
a good answer to why Saskatchewan does not get the same fair 
treatment. And I can state with a high degree of certainty, 
Madam Speaker, that no one in Ottawa has a good answer for 
this either. 
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the 
question of a consensus among the provinces as a condition for 

providing Saskatchewan with a fair deal, such as has been 
promised to the people of Saskatchewan. I do not foresee, and 
neither would any reasonable observer, that there will ever be a 
consensus among the provinces on changes to the equalization 
formula, especially when it pertains to the question of treatment 
of non-renewable resource revenues. However it is clear that no 
such consensus is needed. Equalization is a federal government 
program. And although we can applaud their efforts to work 
with the provinces, the federal Conservatives certainly were 
aware that consensus is not required when they made the clear, 
unequivocal promise to change the equalization formula. 
 
Now there are some in the national media who would have 
looked at this situation and said the O’Brien report is the best 
compromise. They have suggested that it would be the best 
route for the Prime Minister when it comes to addressing the 
so-called question of fiscal balance. What these media 
commentators do not realize is that the O’Brien report is 
flawed. 
 
The O’Brien panel, which was struck by the former federal 
government to consider the question of equalization, found on 
the one hand that in principle resource revenues should provide 
a net financial benefit to the owners of that resource. There is a 
recognition that under Canada’s constitution provinces own 
their natural resources and, as such, it is fair that the residents of 
these provinces ought to be the primary beneficiaries of the 
development of those resources. 
 
On the other hand, the O’Brien panel’s recommendations 
include a cap on fiscal capacity that does not respect this 
principle. In effect, Saskatchewan would not today be much 
better off. It would receive $16 million net from the federal 
government as opposed to $800 million net on an annual basis 
from the federal government. And, Madam Speaker, that’s a 
difference that we can all appreciate. That is a difference that 
we can all understand. 
 
Madam Speaker, we will continue to call on the federal 
government to carry through with its commitment to remove 
non-renewable resource revenue from the equalization program. 
Doing so would ensure that the residents of Saskatchewan 
would benefit from resource development in a way that 
residents of other energy-producing provinces benefit from their 
resource developments. 
 
As I said at the outset, when I talk about equalization, the 
conversation usually involves three themes. I’ve already talked 
about two of those themes — commitment and fairness. I’d like 
to finish today by talking about the third theme — opportunity. 
 
Today Saskatchewan is certainly a place where there is lots of 
opportunity, and that is thanks to the hard work of the people of 
this province. Saskatchewan people know that this province’s 
finances were not always in such good shape. Their province 
was once nearly crippled by debt and burdened by poor credit 
rating as a result of action by government in the 1980s. And it’s 
not hyperbole to say that unlike the Saskatchewan Party spin 
doctors who are encouraging members on that side of the House 
to say something completely different in debate, today thanks to 
the hard work and sacrifice of the people of Saskatchewan, we 
have made headway on the debt. And we now have a stellar 
credit rating. 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

The economy has grown, strengthened, and diversified. And 
because of actions of this government — not to be confused, 
Madam Speaker, with the words of the opposition — the people 
of Saskatchewan are benefiting from this accomplishment. 
 
But I think there is an awareness that we have an opportunity to 
make this province even stronger if the federal government 
fulfills its $800 million promise to Saskatchewan. Truly it 
represents an unprecedented opportunity in the history of this 
province — an opportunity to transform Saskatchewan’s 
economy so that we are a have province on a permanent basis 
rather than have our fortunes largely determined by the world 
price of select commodities. 
 
Should the federal government keep its $800 million promise to 
Saskatchewan, we have committed that the money will be 
invested in our economy. We will cut more taxes. We will pay 
off more debt. We will invest in post-secondary education skills 
training. And we will build a stronger infrastructure. 
 
By doing so it will make our province a better place to work 
and a better place to do business. It will help fuel a 
Saskatchewan economy that will have more opportunities for 
young people right here at home. It will make life better for 
average Saskatchewan families. And, Madam Speaker, we 
know that by making Saskatchewan stronger, we will also help 
to make Canada a stronger country. 
 
So today I urge all members of this House to support this 
motion. If the federal government keeps its $800 million 
commitment to Saskatchewan, that will finally result in fairness 
for our province. And it will give this province the opportunity 
that Saskatchewan people deserve. And therefore, Madam 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina South: 
 

That this Assembly urge Prime Minister Harper to honour 
his commitment to remove non-renewable resource 
revenues from the equalization formula. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, the Minister for Government Relations, 
and seconded by the Minister of Finance, the member for 
Regina South: 
 

That this Assembly urge Prime Minister Harper to honour 
his commitment to remove non-renewable resource 
revenues from the equalization formula. 
 

I recognize the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m pleased today to rise in support of the motion 
moved by my colleague, the minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs, as it pertains to equalization. 
 
I’ve heard the federal Finance minister say that as soon as the 
word equalization is uttered, people’s eyes glaze over and they 
seem to fall asleep. Perhaps we could substitute a different 
word, and that word would be fairness because that’s really 
what this debate is about today. It is a question of fairness. 
 
What we are asking today is that the Prime Minister, who 

recognized as he was campaigning for that office that 
Saskatchewan was being unfairly treated, we are asking today 
that he keep that promise and do so on a timely basis. 
 
There’s absolutely no doubt that as we take a look at the 
situation as it has been outlined by my colleague in his 
introductory comments to this resolution, that it is clear today 
what the issues are. We have a situation today where 
Saskatchewan is drawing upon its vast natural resources — its 
non-renewable natural resources — in a way to be able to 
support our social programs, to be able to support our economic 
growth, to be able to support the tax cuts that are helping propel 
our economy forward. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a remarkable time in 
Saskatchewan’s history. It’s interesting to note that in the last 
10, 12 years the GDP [gross domestic product] of this province 
has doubled. It is remarkable to know that we’ve reached a 
30-year record in terms of the number of people working. That 
we’ve been able, by marshalling the resources of this economy, 
to cut royalties, to be able to increase production, to be able to 
cut property taxes, income taxes, sales taxes to the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We’ve done that by using Saskatchewan’s resources. But those 
resources are being depleted. Natural resources — the 
non-renewable natural resources — are a one-time opportunity 
that we have to extract them, to sell them, and use those returns 
to the benefit of our economy. This is fundamental, and 
understanding this is fundamental to understanding why 
equalization is such a critical issue for us to deal with. 
 
Today we are being unfairly treated in equalization because we 
are not being allowed to keep the full benefit of the resources 
that are constitutionally guaranteed to us. As we extract those 
resources, as we seek the sale of them, as we get the return on 
the royalties, there is a clawback mechanism through 
equalization that draws back the benefit the Saskatchewan 
people should be receiving. It’s not an unsizable amount. 
 
The Prime Minister himself when he was the opposition leader 
indicated that he believed that that amount was about $750 
million a year. Through a little refinement we’ve taken a look at 
those numbers, and we tend to agree with the Prime Minister. 
That number is likely somewhere between 750 and 
800-and-some million dollars a year that is flowing out of this 
province to Ottawa, being redirected by Ottawa to support the 
programs of other provinces. 
 
All we are calling for under this is for the Prime Minister to 
keep the commitment he made to Saskatchewan people when he 
was campaigning and to allow us to draw first upon those 
resources for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. This is a 
constitutionally guaranteed premise. This is an issue of fairness. 
This is the opportunity we have today in this province to move 
this province forward. 
 
The members mocked the ad campaign that we’ve undertaken 
to imagine what the province would be like with an additional 
750 to $800 million, but it is a compelling argument to imagine 
what it is we could do today if we had the same deal that 
Alberta had 20 or 30 years ago, if we had the same deal that the 
Atlantic provinces have today. 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

It’s interesting that the federal government defends and has 
indicated they will keep the Atlantic accords in place even 
though there is no constitutional recognition that those Atlantic 
provinces have a right to access the revenues from those 
offshore reserves. It’s interesting that the federal government is 
prepared to allow those provinces to benefit from the resources 
that are not located in their province but offshore, when they 
refuse to allow us to benefit from the resources right under our 
own feet. It is a question of fairness. 
 
We support the approach that was taken to allow the Atlantic 
provinces that money to move their economy forward, to spend 
it on development, to help move their economy in a different 
direction. All we ask now is for the same treatment for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The federal government has done some work on this. I 
appreciate the fact that they continued the expert panel that the 
Liberals had appointed, chaired by Mr. O’Brien, the former 
deputy treasurer of Alberta. It is an interesting piece of work in 
that the O’Brien report itself indicates that even under the strict 
conditions that he applies, Saskatchewan is entitled to . . . 
Saskatchewan people are entitled to half a billion dollars more 
in annual allotment than they currently get, that we should be 
keeping half a billion dollars more that we send to Ottawa on an 
annual basis. That’s O’Brien’s conclusion. 
 
Now the problem with the O’Brien report is that to then square 
it with the statements of the Conservative government, he’s 
introduced this idea of there being a cap which then again claws 
back all the benefit. 
 
We need an end to the clawback. We need an end to the unfair 
treatment. We need an end to an equalization formula that is 
based on the old-fashioned idea of welfare for provinces. 
Equalization today provides us with a unique opportunity to 
look at it as a development fund, to look as those as ways that 
we can use that money to further change our economy, to 
reduce taxes, to spend money in the development of our 
resources, to continue to support our communities so that 
they’ve got the infrastructure that’s necessary to move this 
modern economy forward, to build on the growth that we have, 
and to make a better future for ordinary families here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
That’s what we’re asking for. We’re not asking for anything 
different than what Atlantic Canada already got. We’re not 
asking for anything different than what Alberta already got. 
We’re asking for the same deal. Now we’ve been patient about 
this. We believe the Liberals should have dealt with this when 
they had the opportunity. And I’m disappointed that the federal 
government didn’t do more when the Liberals were there. 
 
That being said, I’m not quite sure what it is that’s taking this 
administration so long to enact and implement the promise that 
they have so clearly, and I would argue, eloquently articulated 
in the House of Commons. People should read the Prime 
Minister’s speech when he was the opposition leader. People 
should see what it is that he says about us having a $750 million 
entitlement to Saskatchewan people. And I think if they did, 
they’d understand why it’s so important that we ask the Prime 

Minister to keep his promise. 
 
Today, as with every day since this Conservative government 
was elected, another $2.2 million will flow out of this province 
to Ottawa’s coffers. Ottawa will use that money to support 
economic development and tax cuts and social programs in 
other provinces. All we’re asking is that we would be able to 
use that money first here at home in Saskatchewan. Let’s use 
that money here to cut taxes, to benefit programs, to build our 
community infrastructure. Let’s use that money here to make 
Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
I guess one of the questions that I have as we take a look at this 
debate moving forward, one of the questions I have is, who is it 
today that’s speaking up for us in Ottawa? Who is it today that 
is representing Saskatchewan people in Ottawa? 
 
When the opposition Conservatives were in opposition, they 
were constantly critical of Ralph Goodale and the Liberal Party 
for not enacting a Saskatchewan accord similar to what the 
Atlantic provinces did. They said it would happen overnight if 
they got elected. It was a simple solution they said, a quick fix. 
They’ve been in office now some . . . oh I guess longer than the 
Clark government was, I read the other day. They’ve been in 
office longer than Joe Clark’s administration was, and yet they 
failed to keep this promise. I wonder who it is that’s speaking 
up in parliament on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
I listen to the debates in parliament on fiscal fairness and on the 
equalization issue, and I hear very loud, strong voice from 
Quebec. I hear the Quebec MPs [Member of Parliament] 
standing up and saying that they want their fair share. We read 
in the papers that within the Conservative caucus that the MPs 
are standing up from Quebec and saying Quebec deserves its 
fair share. 
 
What happened to those 12 Conservative MPs that were elected 
to represent Saskatchewan people? Did their voice fall silent? 
Did they forget about it? Did they just say it to get elected? Or 
are they actually still working on it? This is a big question 
today. Where is that Saskatchewan Conservative caucus on 
equalization? Where are they pushing forward this issue on 
behalf of their constituents? 
 
If the issue was fairness when the Liberals were in office, surely 
today the issue is still fairness when the Conservatives are in 
office. In fact it should be one that’s even more clear when the 
Prime Minister himself has outlined in his speeches that he 
would undertake this change, when he has campaigned to make 
this change. 
 
I want to say one further thing before closing. That perhaps one 
of the most difficult parts about the current equalization formula 
is that not only does it not recognize our access to the resources 
that are here in Saskatchewan and the belief that those should 
be to the benefit of Saskatchewan people. Not only does it fail 
to recognize that; it has built into it a rather peculiar formula 
that actually claws back more money even when it’s recognized 
that it’s entitled. 
 
It’s roughly believed in the current formula Saskatchewan is 
entitled about $142 million worth of equalization, even with 
resource prices where they are today. Through a process called 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

associated equalization, all of that money — all of that money 
— is clawed back. Saskatchewan receives nothing. Fair enough. 
If other provinces were in the same situation, I’d say fair 
enough. But they’re not. 
 
Newfoundland-Labrador is not. Nova Scotia’s not. Alberta 
wasn’t. And even our neighbouring province of Manitoba, 
which has roughly the same GDP per capita, has a slightly 
different mix in its economy in that it’s done . . . their resource 
base is largely through renewables, Manitoba gets $1.5 billion 
more annually than Saskatchewan. Our neighbouring province 
with roughly the same population, the same demographic, the 
same geography, the same per capita GDP, ends up with more 
than Saskatchewan does — $1.5 billion more than 
Saskatchewan does. 
 
And one can only ask, how and why and how and why is that 
allowed to continue? And I’m not saying, take this away from 
Manitoba. I’m not saying we should level down. I’m saying, let 
us raise the bar, let us raise the issue of fairness, and let us deal 
with it as the Prime Minister has outlined. I don’t think it’s an 
unreasonable thing to ask for fairness within the federation 
because that’s really what this is about. It’s not about 
equalization. It’s about fairness; it’s about fiscal fairness. And 
that’s something we all should be addressing. 
 
I worry a little bit in terms of where we are today in this debate, 
that we need again to call this legislature to support 
Saskatchewan’s case. It troubles me that the MPs, the 
Conservative MPs in Ottawa are saying nothing about this. And 
I have to ask, at what point is it that Minister Flaherty and 
Prime Minister Harper will make good on their commitment to 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
And I had the opportunity to meet with Minister Flaherty I 
guess a little over two weeks ago now to talk about this and a 
number of other issues. He tells me in that meeting that he is 
looking — perhaps as early as the federal-provincial Finance 
ministers’ meeting in December — to bring forward options. 
But those again appear to be attached largely to O’Brien, which 
recognizes an entitlement and still claws it back. This does not 
meet the test of fairness. 
 
Now I appreciate that in response to that conversation and 
conversations that the Premier has had with Prime Minister 
Harper, that we have agreed that officials should meet and 
begin working through details of what a response would look 
like; that we should see what would be necessary to get an 
equalization agreement that does meet the Prime Minister’s test 
for fairness and our request for fairness. That is the work that’s 
being undertaken today. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, while that work goes ahead and 
while we’re prepared to be patient and we want to work with 
the federal government, we know that by the end of today 
another $2.2 million will have flowed out of Saskatchewan to 
Ottawa. That $2.2 million today will be redistributed by Ottawa 
to the benefit of other provinces. 
 
We want to be good corporate citizens. We want to be good 
Canadians. We want to be partners in the federation, but we 
want a fair deal too. That’s what this resolution calls for. That’s 
what we have been pressing Ottawa for. That’s what we ask for 

the support of parties in this legislature for. And that is what we 
are calling on Saskatchewan’s 14 members of parliament, 
including the 12 that sit on the government benches — a record 
number since the Diefenbaker years — that’s what we are 
calling on these groups to do. Join us in that fight for fairness 
and let’s get this fixed. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to participate in 
today’s debate on behalf of the official opposition 
Saskatchewan Party. The motion before us reads: 
 

That this Assembly urge Prime Minister Harper to honour 
his commitment to remove non-renewable resource 
revenues from the equalization formula. 

 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, supports this motion and 
we will be voting in favour of it. We are supporting this motion 
for two main reasons, Mr. Speaker. First, it is consistent with 
the position that we have always taken — that Saskatchewan 
deserves a fair equalization deal that excludes non-renewable 
natural resource revenues from the equalization calculation. 
Second, Mr. Speaker, we support this motion because it is 
consistent with the efforts that have already been taken by the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party who, through letters and 
phone calls with the Prime Minister, has emphasized the 
importance of a new equalization deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to elaborate on these two points 
though, Mr. Speaker, because while we support the motion, we 
do not believe that the lobbying efforts undertaken to date by 
the NDP government have been effective, nor have they been, 
Mr. Speaker, a good use of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The Prime Minister made a commitment in the last election to 
exclude non-renewable natural resources from the equalization 
calculation and we expect the federal government to honour that 
commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been consistent in our 
position that the current equalization formula is flawed. 
Saskatchewan deserves a fair equalization deal that exempts 
non-renewable natural resources from the equalization 
calculation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the former Liberal government cut a side 
deal with Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and Labrador to 
exempt their oil and gas revenues from the equalization 
calculation, the Saskatchewan Party demanded that the federal 
government treat Saskatchewan fairly. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
are certainly encouraged that the current federal government has 
made a commitment to move to a 10-province standard and 
exempt non-renewable natural resources from the equalization 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

calculation. 
 
Following the election of the current federal government, the 
Saskatchewan Party reiterated our support for a new 
equalization deal. Recognizing that it would take time for a new 
government to address this issue, we also called upon the 
federal government to make any new equalization deal, Mr. 
Speaker, any new deal retroactive to April 1, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not just stated our position in favour of a 
new equalization deal. We have presented Saskatchewan’s case 
to the Prime Minister, to the federal Finance minister, and to the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition 
has written and spoken to the Prime Minister on this issue and 
we have impressed the importance of this to Saskatchewan’s 
MPs. 
 
As Finance critic, I have spoken directly with the national 
Finance minister and to Saskatchewan’s members of 
parliament, Mr. Speaker, who time and time again have raised 
this very issue on behalf of their constituents, on behalf of our 
constituents, on behalf of Saskatchewan residents in the 
national Parliament of Canada. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was the 
Saskatchewan Party that moved that equalization be the first 
order of business in the 2005 spring session. 
 
Perhaps most importantly though, Mr. Speaker, the official 
opposition has offered to accompany the Premier and the 
Finance minister or whoever the Premier chooses in a 
delegation to Ottawa to press Saskatchewan’s case. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s be clear. The opposition has extended our hand to 
work with the government in this case. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that an issue as important as 
equalization transcends partisan politics, Mr. Speaker. That is 
why I am reiterating again today our offer on behalf of the 
official opposition to join with the government in a trip to 
Ottawa or whatever it takes for a new equalization deal for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly understands the 
importance of renewing equalization so that it exempts 
non-renewal natural resources. But frankly, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan have been less than impressed by this 
government’s actions on this file so far. 
 
At a time when Saskatchewan people are looking for leadership 
from their provincial government, the NDP strategy has been to 
rely on gimmicks and advertising campaigns. Last year, the 
NDP trotted out their raise a flag or raise a flag . . . I’m sorry, 
Mr. Speaker, Raise a Flag for Fairness campaign at a cost of 
more than 268,000 taxpayers’ dollars. Mr. Speaker, that NDP 
advertising campaign achieved very little. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has launched yet another 
expensive advertising campaign — this time at a cost of 
300,000 taxpayers’ dollars — to ask Saskatchewan people to 
imagine, Mr. Speaker, to imagine what a new equalization deal 
could do for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, they don’t need to be 
convinced that a new equalization deal is necessary. What they 
need is a government that will go to Ottawa and get the deal for 

them. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is willing to join the 
government to make the case on a new and fair equalization 
deal for Saskatchewan. And I would hope that the government 
and the Premier would consider this offer as a positive 
alternative to yet another failed or wasteful advertising 
campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports this motion. We 
have the confidence that the Prime Minister will honour his 
commitment. And we will continue in our efforts to ensure that 
the federal government understands the importance of this issue 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to put a 
few comments on the record in what is an extremely important, 
an extremely important debate because of the importance of this 
matter to the future of this province, the future of our families, 
to building a better future here for our families and for our 
young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to hear the critic of Finance 
from the opposition say that they will be supporting this motion. 
He makes the point that this is done in a non-partisan way and 
then he talks about the Saskatchewan Party at length during his 
presentation. That aside, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the 
comments from the critic across the way and I look forward to 
comments hopefully in this debate from the Leader of the 
Opposition. Such a significant debate, I would hope we would 
hear also the comments of the Leader of the Opposition this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to again place on the record the 
commitment that the current Prime Minister of Canada made 
during the 2006 federal election campaign. Mr. Speaker, I am 
quoting directly here from the Conservative Party’s 2006 
election platform, Mr. Speaker. They said, and I quote: 

 
A Conservative government will: 
 
Work to achieve with the provinces permanent changes to 
the equalization formula which would ensure that 
non-renewable natural resource revenue is removed from 
the equalization formula to encourage economic growth. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was a welcomed commitment. That 
commitment was welcomed by the people of Saskatchewan 
when made by the Conservative Party because this is precisely, 
precisely, Mr. Speaker, what we have argued for a number of 
years with the former Liberal government that the exclusion of 
these non-renewable natural resource revenues from the 
equalization formula — therefore providing an opportunity for 
Saskatchewan people to retain in this province the benefit of 
our non-renewable natural resources — gives us then the 
opportunity to take those resources, to take those revenues and 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

build a strong economy here for our people. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, we very much welcomed the commitment of the 
Conservative Party. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I welcomed a letter from then leader of 
the opposition, Mr. Harper, to all premiers, including myself, 
which again he committed in writing to the premiers of Canada 
this very, very significant promise, Mr. Speaker, that he as 
Prime Minister would ensure that non-renewable natural 
resources are excluded from the equalization formula. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this matter of equalization in many ways is 
a very complicated — unbelievably complicated — matter. But 
there are some issues here, Mr. Speaker, that are not 
complicated at all. Very simple facts. Fact number one. It is a 
promise made to the people of Saskatchewan, for that matter the 
people of Canada, that the non-renewable natural resources, 
revenues from those resources should not be calculated . . . 
should not be included in the calculation of a fair and just 
equalization formula for all Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the leader of 
the . . . or some from the opposition seem to cheer from their 
seats. They want to make this a non-partisan debate. If they 
want to have the partisan debate, we can do that, Mr. Speaker, 
but I will argue this is a matter of significance to the whole 
people of Saskatchewan and the opposition should be with us 
on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fact number one, it’s a promise made to the people 
of Saskatchewan by the Conservative Party and the current 
Conservative Government of Canada. 
 
Fact number two, Mr. Speaker . . . And these are not numbers 
that come from this government caucus or for that matter from 
that opposition. It is defined by this Conservative government 
in Ottawa to mean in the neighbourhood of $850 million 
annually for the people of Saskatchewan — $800 million of 
retained revenues in this province. 
 
Those are not our numbers, Mr. Speaker. Those are numbers 
that have been provided by the national government, that have 
been promoted by Conservative members of parliament from 
this province. In fact there’s one Conservative Member of 
Parliament from this province said this deal should be worth 
more than $2 billion to the people of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not unreasonable. We recognize that the 
appropriate, the appropriate amount in a fair calculation of 
resource revenues for the people of Saskatchewan would 
amount to about $800 million a year. That’s fact number two. 
 
Fact number three, Mr. Speaker, when we are talking about the 
non-renewable natural resources, we’re talking here about 
resources that once taken are never returned. The barrel of oil 
can only be taken from the ground once. As guaranteed by 
constitution, that barrel of oil, that cubic foot of natural gas is 
the property of the people of Saskatchewan. When it is taken 
from the ground, it is only taken once. It can never be retaken. 
It is not a renewable resource, Mr. Speaker. And therefore when 
the benefits of that resource are accrued, they should accrue to 
the owner of that resource, that being the people of 
Saskatchewan, so that those benefits can be reinvested for the 
long-term future —reinvested in education, reinvested in 

highways and transportation, reinvested in renewable energy 
sources, Mr. Speaker, reinvested in conservation of energy, Mr. 
Speaker. Those resources can only be taken from the ground 
once. These are non-renewable resources, and that’s a fact. 
 
Fact number four, Mr. Speaker. Under the current Liberal 
government, this reality was recognized, recognized on behalf 
of the people of Newfoundland and Labrador and the people of 
Nova Scotia when the former federal government signed the 
Atlantic accords with these two provinces to ensure just that 
this principle was put into place for those provinces and their 
people. So that the non-renewable natural resources of 
Newfoundland and Labrador, the non-renewable natural 
resources of Nova Scotia now being developed off-shore would 
benefit first of all and primarily the peoples of Newfoundland 
and Labrador, the peoples of Nova Scotia, the Atlantic Accord 
was signed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have supported very much the Atlantic Accord, and we 
have enjoyed the support of the Atlantic region in maintaining 
this principle now for all Canadians and for Saskatchewan. 
That’s a fact. 
 
And a fact that is not well-known, Mr. Speaker, is that when 
Alberta was in the process of developing their vast natural 
resources — non-renewable — some years ago, a similar, a 
similar arrangement was made with the province of Alberta so 
that those resources being developed could be retained in 
Alberta for the benefit of Albertans in future. 
 
And the simple fact today, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan is 
not being allowed to do the same thing, and that’s what this 
issue is all about. It is, Mr. Speaker, retaining the benefits of our 
non-renewable natural resources here in the province of 
Saskatchewan that they may be invested in Saskatchewan 
communities, in Saskatchewan infrastructure, in Saskatchewan 
people, to build for our future — a secure future for our 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have listened to some of the debate that’s 
happened in this House over the last number of weeks. And I 
have been concerned since I heard the member from Wood 
River who in his remarks to the Throne Speech, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, at some other point liken equalization to the concept of 
a handout from Ottawa. This is what the member from Wood 
River said. This is October 30, 2006. Quote the member of 
Wood River: 
 

. . . this is what this government is doing with the feds all 
the time. They’re poking their finger in their eye with their 
right hand and their left hand is out for money. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if there is some confusion in the member 
opposite’s understanding of equalization or some confusion in 
the opposition caucus benches, let me clarify that confusion. 
Equalization is not a handout from Ottawa. It is not a handout 
from their Conservative friends in Ottawa. 
 
Equalization is a redistribution of wealth in this nation based on 
fairness and justice. By excluding non-renewable natural 
resources from the calculation of equalization, we are not 
seeking a handout, Mr. Speaker. We are seeking the justice. We 
are seeking the fairness that is required here. 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, all Canadians, all Canadians contribute to 
equalization because all Canadians contribute to the national 
revenue. It is from that national revenue that each and every 
national government is obliged by constitution to provide a 
process of equalization, to provide, Mr. Speaker, the terms and 
conditions on which those numbers are decided. 
 
This is not a handout. The member of Wood River wants to call 
it a handout. It is not a handout, Mr. Speaker. It is the fairness 
and the justice of living in this country. And his party, now 
sitting in the government benches as opposed to opposition in 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, it is time for them to come through on 
their promise. It is time for the federal members of parliament 
in Saskatchewan to come through on their promise. And that’s 
why the importance of this resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This means $800 million — $800 million of retained revenues 
— for the people of Saskatchewan that we can build a better 
future here for our families and a better future here for our 
young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is an important debate 
we’re having in this legislature today. I look forward to the vote 
where we all can support it and then make that unanimous 
decision, that unanimous decision of this legislature, provide it 
to the national government, and I would argue, also to the 
members of parliament who represent our province in that 
national government. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s a pleasure to enter the debate especially after 
the very non-partisan conclusion of the Premier’s remarks just 
moments ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very fair to say, and the member for 
Silver Springs, the critic for Finance for the opposition, has 
done a good job of indicating the support of this caucus for this 
particular motion. And more to the point, this party has 
certainly been on record as offering to this Premier, to any 
minister of his government when they want to make the case, 
the case for a better equalization deal, a more fair deal for 
Saskatchewan in Ottawa, that we would co-operate in any way. 
 
We did meet jointly with the Premier, in this building, together 
with federal members of parliament and I believe there was a 
senator there. And we will continue to be there in the interests 
of the province of Saskatchewan and the deal that we seek in 
terms of a new equalization arrangement with Ottawa and with 
the other provinces. 
 
The Premier’s touched on a number of the, as has the member 
for Silver Springs touched on a number of the arguments that 
one could make in favour of this motion. They’re very 
compelling arguments, Mr. Speaker. Chief among them is the 
fairness argument, I would say. And the Premier touched on the 
historical precedent that was set in terms of fairness. And I’m 
glad to hear him talking about the treatment that Alberta 

received in the 1960s, because he wasn’t making that case 
earlier on. And I think it’s part . . . It may be the most powerful 
of all of the arguments for Saskatchewan to have exclusion of 
natural resource revenue from the formula in a 10-province 
standard. 
 
That was the de facto arrangement for the province of Alberta 
in the 1960s. The way the formula was structured at the time, 
Alberta did enjoy the benefit of that de facto exclusion, that 
they would be able to go ahead and develop that industry, that 
they would continue to receive some assistance through the 
equalization program. And so there is a historical precedent, 
never mind what’s happened in Atlantic Canada. More on that 
in just a few minutes maybe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what happened with respect to Alberta is something we 
should be pointing out to the federal government. And I think it 
was part of the rationale for the promise that they made in the 
last federal election campaign, a promise that we would like to 
see them keep as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other issue of fairness is the precedent situation that we saw 
with the Atlantic Accord for Newfoundland and Labrador and 
for Nova Scotia, where whose premiers were able to negotiate 
basically the exclusion, the equivalent of the exclusion of their 
resource revenue and hundreds of millions of extra dollars for 
their province in terms of a new equalization deal. 
 
So to be sure those are two excellent reasons for the federal 
government to keep its promise. And you don’t need to go 
much beyond that except I guess to say that if there needs to be 
more than the argument of fairness in this case, the argument 
can be made that Saskatchewan, were we to get this deal, would 
be able to contribute that much more to the Dominion of 
Canada than we already do because the inequity and the 
unfairness would have been addressed. 
 
I’ll take some exception, a little bit perhaps, with the conclusion 
of what the Premier’s remarks were. He seems to take issue 
with the fact that the member for Wood River characterized 
equalization as assistance, fiscal . . . I guess you could call it 
fiscal, federal, social assistance for provinces. It is a 
redistribution of wealth. That’s what it is. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think anyone on 
this side of the House is ashamed. I think we’re quite proud to 
stand up and say this province with all of its resources and with 
all of its wealth — with its human resource and with what we 
have in terms of natural resources — should expect to be a 
permanent member of the have province club, Mr. Speaker. We 
should be working for the day when we won’t have any part of 
any equalization assistance. We won’t need it. Other provinces 
in the country would be able to benefit, Mr. Speaker. And it 
would mean that we were finally reaching our full potential. 
 
That’s what informs the member for Wood River’s remarks in 
this Assembly. It’s what informs our economic plan for the 
province of Saskatchewan. We make no apologies for the fact 
that we don’t think this province should have been part of that 
have-not club for as many years as it has needed to be a part of 
that club, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Premier, the Premier on the other hand, calls 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

Saskatchewan a wee province. He came back from a 
federal-provincial meeting one time and said that Saskatchewan 
will always be in and out of equalization — in and out of 
equalization — in quotes in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. I 
read that and I couldn’t believe it. I thought there’s the Premier 
of the province, the leader of this province, the CEO [chief 
executive officer] saying, you know, lowering expectations on 
our newly acquired have province status by saying — what? — 
well we’ll always be in and out of equalization. 
 
[15:15] 
 
We don’t accept that on this side of the House. We would like 
to see, Mr. Speaker, inequity addressed, this unfairness 
addressed. We will stand with this motion. We will continue to 
reach out to the federal members of the parliament as we have. 
Every time we get a chance to meet with a cabinet minister or 
an MP or chat with the Prime Minister, we raise the issue of 
equalization. 
 
The chances of getting a deal doing that are much better than 
another phony-baloney ad campaign from the government 
members opposite, which is more about politics than about 
anything else. They can Raise a Flag for Fairness. They can ask 
people to Imagine, Mr. Speaker. But what they want to see is a 
government and a Premier that will show leadership that will 
get this job done. 
 
We’re going to continue to help in every way we can, Mr. 
Speaker, because frankly the people of the province tell us, they 
tell us that on the issue of equalization, on so many issues 
facing this province, that government needs all the help they 
can get. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Government Relations, the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the Minister of 
Finance, the member for Regina South: 
 

That this Assembly urge Prime Minister Harper to honour 
his commitment to remove non-renewable resource 
revenues from the equalization formula. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Call in the members for a 
standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:16 until 15:21.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Regina Douglas Park, the 
Minister of Government Relations, seconded by the member for 
Regina South, the Minister of Finance: 
 

That this Assembly urge Prime Minister Harper to honour 
his commitment to remove non-renewable resource 
revenues from the equalization formula. 

Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 49] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Sonntag Forbes 
Prebble Crofford Belanger 
Higgins Thomson Nilson 
Beatty Taylor Junor 
Harper Iwanchuk McCall 
Quennell Trew Yates 
Addley Morin Borgerson 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Bjornerud Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Kirsch Brkich 
Dearborn Merriman Morgan 
Duncan   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 49; those opposed, 0. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. The motion has 
been carried unanimously nemine contradicente. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to introduce a motion of transmittal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion, verbatim transcripts of the 
motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, the 
federal Minister of Finance, the federal Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, and all Saskatchewan members 
of parliament. 
 

I move, seconded by the government deputy House leader, the 
hon. member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Government House Leader, seconded by the 
deputy government house leader, the member for Regina 
Dewdney, by leave of the Assembly: 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 
the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 
federal Minister of Finance, the federal Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, and all Saskatchewan members 
of parliament. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

RESCIND TRANSFER TO MOTIONS 
FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to ask leave of the 
House that the order to convert question no. 23 to motion for 
return (debatable) be rescinded in order to provide the response 
to question no. 23. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I provide the response to 
question no. 23. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to question 24 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased today to rise in the Assembly and move second 
reading of this Bill to create The Fuel Tax Accountability Act. 
The recent Throne Speech committed us to developing a strong 
public infrastructure, an infrastructure which is built for the 21st 
century and will help deal with the growing needs of 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Some of the initiatives that we plan to support this goal include 
improvement to heavy-haul provincial roads, improved access 
to First Nations communities, as well as economic and social 
develop initiatives in the North. We’ve also made commitment 
and provided funding to improve interprovincial movement of 
trade and to provide for greater municipal support for an 
evolving transportation system. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government continues to listen to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan residents have told us that 
they want the government to dedicate the fuel tax revenues for 
the maintenance and construction of our highways and 
transportation system. Our government has responded and 
indicated in the Throne Speech that we would introduce The 
Fuel Tax Accountability Act and that this fuel tax Act would 
provide that revenue from fuel purchased for on-road purposes 
would be dedicated to funding our provincial highways and 
transportation network. This Bill does meet our commitment 
and I think meets the desire the Saskatchewan people have laid 
out. 
 
Beginning in the ’07-08 fiscal year, this Bill will require that 
the government report on these revenues and expenses in the 
Legislative Assembly and in the annual public accounts. As 
well, this Bill commits the government to preparing a plan for 
dealing with excess annual fuel tax revenues that may not have 
been spent on the provincial transportation system. This Bill is 
proof of our government’s commitment to the maintenance and 
construction of our provincial highways. It’s proof of our 
commitment to invest in a 21st century transportation system 
that meets the evolving needs of Saskatchewan families. It is 
proof that we remain committed to transparency and 
accountability within government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note that over the many years we have 
used the gas tax, as it’s known by people, we’ve used the gas 
tax to support our provincial highways and transportation 
networks as well as to support our municipalities. 
Municipalities will continue to draw upon this government’s 
support in forms of revenue sharing to support them on their 
road networks. We are setting a new base in this Bill by 
providing that the money that comes from the provincial gas tax 
is used on provincial highways and provincial transportation 
networks. Motorists should rest assured knowing that, as 
they’re at the pump, the 15 cents a litre they’re paying is going 
to go and help fix our highways. 
 
I would say this in closing, Mr. Speaker, that I think that this 
would be an important new initiative — not only in this 
province, but one that I would hope that our federal 
counterparts would undertake. They provided a little better than 
$30 million a year in support of our provincial highways while 
collecting over $200 million a year in taxes. We could have a 
much better transportation system if the federal government 
followed this provincial government’s lead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased to answer questions concerning 
this proposed new Act when discussing the Bill during the 
committee review process. As such, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 
to move second reading of The Fuel Tax Accountability Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 3, The Fuel Tax Accountability Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

enter the debate and discussion regarding this particular Bill. 
 
Earlier today we saw two situations in which both the 
opposition and government were able to work together and 
support a resolution. And with regard to this particular Act, I’m 
going to be speaking somewhat in favour of and commending 
the government for some of the issues that are in this particular 
piece of legislation. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to commend the NDP 
on is for taking yet another page out of the Saskatchewan Party 
playbook. This is something that has been Saskatchewan Party 
policy for some time. It has been in our 100 points and it has 
been passed at our . . . So one, I’d like to commend the NDP for 
reading our literature on our website and for probably having 
somebody at our convention, and we think that’s commendable 
that they’re doing that. It’s, you know, clearly something that 
they should do more of and I’d like to thank them for doing 
that, and we look forward to seeing even more Bills from them 
that will indicate that this is something that they do on an 
ongoing basis. Sooner or later the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will be able to deal directly 
through a Saskatchewan Party government instead of having to 
have the NDP come and borrow ideas from the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fuel tax accountability Bill is, in simple terms, 
a Bill that allows and authorizes the government to take a 
specific apportionment of the road tax on gasoline and apply it 
directly to roads and highways. It should be something that 
shouldn’t need to be legislated. It’s just common sense when 
you’ve got a tax of so many cents per litre you just decide, okay 
what portion of that tax should go to roads? And for every litre 
of gasoline that’s sold, you apply that to the formula and you 
just do that as part of the budget. 
 
This piece of legislation enshrines it in legislation and will 
ensure that it takes place. The unfortunate reality that brings this 
Bill into . . . the need for it, is the dismal condition of the roads. 
The fuel tax accountability Bill, Mr. Speaker, simply is going to 
ensure that there’s some catch-up on the highway repairs. 
 
We have highways in this province that have been referred to as 
goat trails and are highly dangerous. Last year in the legislature 
I raised . . . a family in Saskatoon, the Istace family, that hit a 
pothole that was so large, it actually triggered the airbags in 
their car and did several thousand dollars of damage. This is not 
something that any province should be proud of when roads 
have deteriorated to that point. 
 
We talk to tourists about the condition of the highways, and 
hopefully the fuel tax accountability Bill will do something to 
try and address the problems that there are with the highways in 
this province. 
 
We talk to businesses that are in the Humboldt area, where 
they’re trying to attract, retain, and grow their businesses. But 
they’re unable, because of the condition of the roads, to ship 
raw materials in and finished product out, because the roads 
have become so disastrous. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
referring to Highway No. 368 which was subject to a large 
number of signs and a lot of publicity during the last summer. 
 

Hopefully, the fuel tax accountability Bill will raise enough 
funds and will target enough funds that some of those specific 
issues can be addressed and we see an improvement in 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, highways in this province are something that 
we’ve had for a long time. We have to plan for the lifespan of 
highways. We know that we live in a cold climate where roads 
are subject to frost heaving and deteriorate earlier than they do 
in other jurisdictions in other parts of North America. But we 
have been in this business of providing roads for our citizens 
long enough that we should be able to estimate what the life 
expectancy of a road is. We should have a program of vigorous 
and aggressive maintenance every spring to try and target frost 
heaves and potholes, pavement breaks before they become 
worse, before they become a safety factor. 
 
We know that if we are going to have a province where people 
want to come . . . [inaudible] . . . we need to have good 
accountability. We know that we need to have everything take 
place so that we’re not in the position where we’re relying on 
the fuel tax accountability Bill just to simply address and to fix 
problems that are basic with our highways. 
 
Providing competent highways, providing health care, 
providing education are something that we should be able to 
look to every government to do. And we shouldn’t have to 
regard that as something that becomes part of political debate 
when we look at the need to make the most basic repairs to our 
highways rather than having a debate about how the highway 
repairs are going to be funded. This would be something that 
. . . basic bread and butter. We know, Mr. Speaker, that the fuel 
tax accountability Bill is something that is essential. It’s a step 
forward to ensure that there is a targeted portion of it. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party put that forward along with a great 
number of other initiatives that we’re pleased to see the NDP 
embracing. We’d be somewhat more pleased, Mr. Speaker, if 
they would just say, this is from the Saskatchewan Party 
platform, number such-and-such. It would make it a little easier 
for us to get our message out that they’re using our agenda. 
 
But anyway, it’s certainly a step in the right direction that they 
are recognizing the work done by the Saskatchewan Party, done 
by the Saskatchewan Party caucus, the research staff, and that 
we want to see more of them using the Saskatchewan Party 
initiatives. And it’s certainly . . . As they say, imitation is the 
most sincere form of flattery and we realize that this is going to 
be part of our platform going into the next election. And it’s 
going to certainly make it easier for us to say to the electorate, 
the fuel tax accountability Bill is the type of initiative the 
Saskatchewan Party put forward, the NDP embraced. You 
might as well go for the real thing, not somebody that copied 
the idea. Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 3 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 
Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 
my remarks I will be moving second reading of Bill No. 17, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
As you will be aware, Mr. Speaker, current legislation requires 
municipalities to levy, collect, and remit school property taxes. 
The government expects municipal councils and their officials 
to take these legal obligations seriously. However, Mr. Speaker, 
we have observed that this has not always been the case. The 
actions taken by some municipalities over the past number of 
years — most recently by some municipalities to withhold 
education property taxes — had a potential to undermine the 
legal and financial foundation of local government and in 
particular our education system. These actions are inappropriate 
and illegal. 
 
These actions taken by some municipalities had the potential to 
significantly impact the education of students. The cost of these 
actions is primarily borne by the school division through 
interest on financing to replace unremitted taxes and legal costs 
associated with collection. Mr. Speaker, this is a problem 
because school divisions may have to cut programs or increase 
mill rates to recover these costs, both of which impact all school 
division taxpayers, not only those in the municipalities that 
takes illegal actions. And they impact our students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these concerns led government to conduct 
significant consultations on the amendments proposed in this 
Bill. It was our belief that it was in the best interests of both the 
municipal and education sectors to work collaboratively with 
government on solutions. The amendments have been 
developed through the municipal forum and a subcommittee 
established by it. This committee provided an opportunity for 
representatives from the various stakeholder organizations 
along with Government Relations and Learning to engage in an 
open and frank discussion of the various issues and potential 
solutions to preclude future education property tax 
non-compliance. The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, and the Saskatchewan School Boards Association 
all participated in this process. 
 
The central focus of the committee was to consider how best to 
achieve mutual respect, transparency, and accountability among 
municipalities and school divisions and to ensure that local 
government authority was appropriately defined in order to 
achieve these objectives. Illegal actions and their consequences 
cannot be accepted even when intended as democratic protests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was our hope that as much as possible the 
committee would propose a package of amendments based on 
consensus and compromise among the participants. Both of 
these occurred within the committee. The results are reflected in 
the amendments to several Acts that are before you today. At 

the end of the process, the municipal and education sector 
association positions did differ on a few points. Some items that 
agreement could not be reached on have been omitted from the 
proposed changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government has a responsibility to the people of 
this province, to the education sector, and to our students to take 
steps to ensure that these sorts of illegal actions do not happen 
in the future. The Bill before the Assembly today contains 
legislative amendments that will constrain future education 
property tax non-compliance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I will take a moment to highlight the 
more significant changes that the Bill proposes. First, this Bill 
ensures that all municipalities are liable to pay interest charges 
if they fail to pass on taxes collected on behalf of another taxing 
authority or if they fail to pay a requisition authorized by 
statutes within the required time. 
 
Second, it will prescribe via the regulations to The 
Municipalities Act and The Northern Municipalities Act and as 
well the respective regulations, a set of uniform property tax 
discount and penalty rates for RMs [rural municipality], towns, 
villages, and northern municipalities. This is to achieve greater 
consistency and will preclude the adoption of policies that 
encourage the delay of education property tax payments by 
ratepayers. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will add provisions to each of the 
municipal Acts to require the written agreement of other taxing 
authorities if a municipal council proposes to cancel, reduce, 
defer, or refund taxes collected on a property on behalf of that 
other authority in more than one consecutive year. It also 
requires timely notice of any such action in all cases. 
 
Fourth, the Bill will require all municipalities to transmit a new 
monthly statement of account of school taxes collected and 
remit it to the school division. School divisions and Learning 
have identified a concern that current reporting by 
municipalities does not allow them to confirm that 
municipalities are collecting and remitting school taxes in 
accordance with the legislation. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the draft Bill will add provisions to The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Act and The Northern 
Municipalities Act to clarify the minister’s authority to 
withhold grant payments in a case of illegal acts and to set 
terms and conditions to be met before the withholding is 
discontinued. 
 
One final point, Mr. Speaker. Illegal actions have also created 
problems for our municipal hail insurance system. Hail 
insurance premiums are collected in the same manner and are 
subject to the same discounts and penalties as municipal taxes. 
However the discount structure adopted by some municipalities 
to protest school taxes has had an inverse impact on payment of 
these premiums and consequently created significant cash flow 
problems for the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance 
Association. The amendment proposed to The Municipal Hail 
Insurance Act will protect the hail insurance program. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, reflects our view that government 
cannot condone illegal actions or permit the costs and risks 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

resulting from the actions of a minority of municipalities to 
continue to impact school division and taxpayers’ finances and 
the education of our students. It is in the best interest of all 
citizens to ensure that the problem of property tax 
non-compliance does not continue into the future. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to show that they do not 
condone illegal actions and are willing to protect our education 
system. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 17, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection 
of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The question before 
the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Government 
Relations that Bill No. 17 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
I recognize the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a bit of a 
sad testimony on the relationship between the province and the 
municipalities when we’re actually contemplating introducing a 
piece of legislation that allows the government to claw back and 
fight with the municipalities because of the possibility of a tax 
revolt. What I don’t understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why 
this government doesn’t try and address the underlying issue of 
property tax and the cost of education as a portion of property 
tax. 
 
What instead they’re doing is introducing a Bill through the 
miscellaneous statutes amendment Act that deals with ways that 
they will claw it back, charge interest, and penalize the 
municipalities that participate in any kind of a tax revolt. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not in favour of anybody not 
complying with laws or breaking laws. But what this 
government should do instead of finding ways to pick fights, 
attack, and deal with municipalities in this type of fashion, what 
they really should be doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is addressing 
the issue and the problem of the high cost and the burden on 
taxpayers that the education component of property tax has 
become. They have not addressed that issue and it continues to 
be a huge problem. 
 
The province has off-loaded the cost of education onto 
municipalities and onto municipal ratepayers to the point where 
it is actually having an adverse effect on property values and is 
a disincentive for businesses to want to acquire property in this 
province. 
 
We right now have a regime in this province where the vast 
majority of the cost of education is paid for through property 
tax rather than out of general revenues. And what’s happening 
is that the school divisions in this province — because they’re 
reluctant to raise mill rates because they’re under pressure from 
their ratepayers as well — are often postponing and not doing 
things that are necessary to provide adequate education to the 
children of this province. 
 

We’re dealing with issues of classroom size, issues of special 
needs children, children that have autism, children that have a 
variety of other needs. We’re not able to reach out adequately to 
try and find and target the children that are in our province that 
have the most need. 
 
The miscellaneous statutes Act is just a tool to try and further 
beat up and force that unfairness to continue to exist. We have a 
province right now where, by the government’s own numbers, 
there’s approximately 1,000 school-age children in Saskatoon 
that are not participating in the education system, probably a 
similar number in Regina. And if you look at it on a 
province-wide basis, roughly 3,000 children, lost souls as a 
result of the NDP government’s neglect. They’re not 
participating in the education system in a meaningful way. 
 
What’s the likely outcome for those children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Likely those children will become at-risk adults and 
will likely be in all likelihood the next ones to come in 
permanent or long-term contact with the justice system. What 
those children should have is a future. They should have hope. 
They should be able to become meaningful, participating 
citizens in our province and have a chance to become taxpayers, 
to become educated, to become employed, and participate fully 
in the riches of this province. 
 
But what they are doing by not becoming educated — and this 
statute is not going to fully address their needs because all it 
does is just shuffle it around and continue to have their 
problems stay at that level — is those children are doomed. 
Those children are ignored by this government, and passing an 
Act that is really punitive towards the municipalities is going to 
be punitive because it is going to do nothing more than to force 
the ongoing, the status quo to stay the same way. 
 
What this government would be better to do would be to target 
and identify the needs of those people, first by trying to identify 
who those children are by developing a proper and meaningful 
database that would identify all of the school-age children in 
this province and find out which of those children are not in 
school. But no, that is not what this government has chosen to 
do. What they’re choosing to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is by 
introducing the miscellaneous statutes is . . . what they’re doing 
is they’re saying to the school divisions is, it’s your problem. 
You deal with it. You go after the ratepayers and leave it at that 
level. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they’re doing is a travesty and 
should not be allowed to continue to take place. There is a huge 
problem with property tax in this . . . [inaudible] . . . but that 
problem is only part of the larger problem of education in this 
. . . [inaudible] . . . and where it is, the ones that are the victims 
of this problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the students and the 
young people of this province. 
 
Another aspect of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have 
school divisions that are now postponing and deferring 
necessary capital expenditures. There are schools that should be 
built, schools that should be repaired, upgraded. We now have a 
litany of problems throughout our school divisions with regard 
to mould, with regard to air quality, with regard to 
student/teacher ratio, with regard to our computerization and 
upgrades. All of those things have been put off, deferred, and 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

we’re not adequately dealing with those things. And we’re 
playing the shell game with regard to how financing of repairs 
and additions are done. 
 
Thankfully in the last year or so we’ve seen some additions to 
and increases with regard to funding on schools in Saskatoon. 
And I’m pleased to see that that’s taken place. But all that is, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a small step in the right direction. 
 
The miscellaneous statutes Act does nothing to try and address 
the long-term problems. What it does effectively is says to the 
municipalities and to the school divisions is, we’re going to 
smack you down. You think about a tax revolt. You think about 
making a threat like that, and we’re going to claw back money 
from you. We’re going to charge you interest. We’re going to 
do everything we can to try and be punitive. 
 
What this government should have done is had some 
meaningful consultation with school divisions to try and work 
with them, to try and deal with this in a fair, reasonable, and 
equitable way so that education is funded appropriately, fairly, 
and without an ongoing burden, at the same level it is now to 
the ratepayers of this province. 
 
Right now, when you buy or sell a property in this province, 
one of the major impediments to buying or upgrading your 
property is what the cost of education tax is going to be because 
that is an ongoing burden in perpetuity to have larger or 
increasing property tax. It’s a disincentive to want to build a 
garage, to develop your rumpus room, because it raises the 
assessed value of your property. 
 
The mill rates in this province are high and increasing every 
year. We have some of the highest property tax in anywhere in 
Canada. And it’s an impediment to new businesses coming in 
because they pay property tax. 
 
But some of the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are the ones 
that are affected the most adversely on this type of situation are 
young families starting up because they’re reluctant to and 
afraid to buy a house because of the cost of property tax. And 
some of the ones that are most tragically affected are our 
seniors. The seniors in our province have owned their houses, 
have paid for their houses. They have paid for their dues over 
their lifetime, and now they’re faced with property taxes that 
they can ill afford. 
 
And instead of getting some relief or some measure of comfort 
from a government that’s had windfall revenues from oil and 
windfall revenues from various resource revenue through 
certainly nothing that the NDP government can claim any real 
credit for — that’s happened in spite of, not because of them — 
what they’re doing is those people are being punished. 
 
This government is saying, you’ll continue to pay those 
property taxes. Those property taxes will go up. The 
miscellaneous statutes Act is part of that heavy-handed 
remedial process where they are going to go after those people 
— those seniors, those young families that can ill afford it — 
and say, you’re going to pay those property taxes and if you 
don’t, we’re going to go after the municipality that you live in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act is heavy-handed. It’s onerous. 

And what it does is it shows that this government completely 
misses the issue that should be before them and completely 
shows that they’re utterly . . . [inaudible] . . . And that’s . . . and 
I hear the minister over there saying no problem, no problem. 
And that’s the attitude that’s going to . . . And I’d like them — 
when we go into the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I’d 
like to hear that minister over there, the Prince Albert member, 
I’d like to hear him go to his ratepayers, his constituents, and 
his electors and throw up his hands when they come to him with 
this issue and say, no problem, you’re going to continue to pay. 
I’d like to hear him put that . . . and see him put that in his ads, 
in his brochures, that that’s his attitude. No problem. No 
problem. 
 
Let him do it. Let him go to his ratepayers. Let him account to 
them for what he’s doing for the municipal property taxes 
because in his constituency and his area we’ve seen the P.A. 
pulp mill that’s paying huge amounts of money in taxes. 
There’s businesses up there that are struggling in northern 
Saskatchewan. There’s businesses that are struggling 
throughout the province because of high property tax. People 
don’t want to do expansion. So what are we going to do? We’re 
going to pass a municipal statutes amendment Act that is going 
to deal with adding powers so that this province can smack 
municipalities because of issues with whether they’re going to 
collect or pay this . . . [inaudible] . . . Well hopefully the taxes 
are going to get paid. 
 
But why doesn’t this government sit down; why don’t they take 
a long, close, careful look at what the needs are of the school 
divisions? Why are we looking at the miscellaneous statutes 
legislation in any fashion, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why aren’t we 
dealing with the underlying issue of the needs of our children, 
the important needs of our children, the future of our province? 
Why aren’t we looking at the needs of our seniors? Why aren’t 
we looking at ways to keep those people independent, to keep 
them in their homes rather than having financial issues like this 
that are going to force them out of their homes? Why aren’t we 
looking at businesses and the cost of running a business in this 
province and the high property taxes that are there? 
 
I have places in my constituency where there are homes that are 
paying $12,000 a year in property tax. Admittedly those are 
upscale homes, but what a disincentive to somebody to want to 
buy an upscale home whether the taxes are 2,000, 3,000, 5,000, 
or $10,000. Why aren’t we looking at a better way to fund 
education rather than smacking people with this type of 
legislation? 
 
I don’t know a lot of people that can afford to have a house that 
pays $12,000 a year in property tax but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’re not going to have wealthy people that want to come to 
this province, that want to start a business, that will want to 
build or do something if that’s what is happening with property 
tax in this province. 
 
This is going to be a huge issue as we go into the next election. 
We’ve got RMs that have got grave concerns with what they’re 
going to collect because the RMs are the ones that are obliged 
to collect the property tax on behalf of the school divisions. 
And in the RMs, when you talk to them, they say we’re just the 
messenger, why shoot the messenger. 
 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

But the reality of it is, most ratepayers look to the municipality 
as being the ones levying the tax while, in reality, it’s the school 
division. And I believe the school divisions are trying very hard 
to be frugal, careful stewards of our resources. 
 
But right now the ones that are caught in the middle on it are 
the municipalities because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the 
people that have to go out and collect the taxes. Those are the 
ones that mail out the tax assessments. Those are the ones that 
mail out the bills every year. And those are the ones that are 
obliged to take enforcement and collection proceedings against 
their ratepayers. 
 
When we looked at approximately 100 RMs, they were refusing 
to pass the property tax on to school boards. That’s a sign that 
there’s a significant problem. And we shouldn’t be having an 
interjurisdictional problem or a feud or multi-jurisdictional 
problem between the school boards, between the municipalities, 
and the province. What we really should be doing is saying, this 
is a time in our province’s history where we can do something 
for people that own property in this province. 
 
And right now that’s a government that sits over there, laughs, 
makes light of. They don’t care. I hear the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin sitting in his desk laughing about it. This 
is a big issue. He lives in a reasonably prosperous area of the 
city. He too should be somebody that has to go back to his 
ratepayers and say, I think this is a lark. I’m joking about this. I 
don’t care about it. 
 
He should be standing up saying to his government in cabinet 
and in his caucus saying, I have concerns about this. I have 
concerns about the cost of education. I have concerns about the 
method of enforcement between municipalities. I’m troubled by 
this type of legislation. Why don’t we address the fundamental 
underling issue? 
 
He has family. He should be someone that should understand 
the needs of families. He should understand the needs of 
education. He should understand the needs of teachers. He 
should understand the issues that school boards have and school 
divisions have, trying to deliver effective . . . He shouldn’t be 
part of this type of game that we’re playing with this type of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It has been moved by 
the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast that debate be 
adjourned on Bill No. 17. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Court Security Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to provide express 
authority for general courthouse security. This Bill allows for 
increased security concerns to be addressed within court 
facilities, while continuing to provide open access to court 
facilities and proceedings. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Members of the Assembly and members of the public will of 
course be aware of the recent incremental steps towards 
improved security that have occurred in a number of areas in 
our community, including airports and here in our own 
Legislative Building. 
 
This Bill will allow Saskatchewan to introduce perimeter or 
airport-style security at various courthouses across the province, 
as well as mobile security at those less frequented court 
facilities where a specific security risk may exist. Perimeter 
security is the least intrusive security measure which still 
supports and protects an open court principle. Perimeter 
security will strike a balance between accommodating access to 
a court facility and promoting the safety of court proceedings. 
 
In addition to providing express authority for general 
courthouse security and initializing perimeter security and 
screening measures, this Bill will also authorize court security 
staff to perform essential court security activities. Court security 
staff will be authorized to screen persons both upon and after 
entering the courthouses and court facilities across the province. 
 
Prescribed screening methods will include the use of metal 
detectors and entitling court security staff to require an 
individual to empty his or her pockets of any item in their 
position, including any briefcase or bag. 
 
In addition any weapons found in the possession of an 
individual who is either in or attempting to enter a court facility 
may be seized by court security staff. Further if the individual 
refuses to relinquish the weapon, he or she will be denied entry 
to the court facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will authorize court security staff to 
refuse entry to or eject an individual from the courthouse or 
court facility where there is reason to believe the individual 
may be a threat to or disrupt proceedings at the court facility. 
Where an individual refuses to be screened, that individual may 
be denied entry or evicted from the courthouse or court facility. 
Failure to comply with the direction of a sheriff pursuant to 
these provisions will constitute an offence under this Bill. 
 
It must be stressed that members of the public will continue to 
be able to attend upon a court facility as a matter of right. The 
Bill does not require members of the public to provide their 
name or any other personal information to court security staff. 
The Bill simply ensures that in exercising their right to access, 
no individual may endanger court staff or the general public by 
carrying weapons into a court facility or otherwise disrupting 
public proceedings occurring in a court facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s committed to the need for an 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

open court process as a cornerstone of a demonstrably 
transparent justice system. Saskatchewan citizens have a right 
to attend upon our courts and to continue to do so with full 
confidence in their own safety and that of court staff. This Bill 
will ensure a safe and secure environment for the conduct of 
court proceedings while continuing to maintain ready public 
access to our courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting Court 
Security. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The question before 
the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 
No. 18 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to get up and speak to this particular Bill. 
 
When we talk about safety of workers, I mean, that should be 
foremost in everybody’s mind. I think this Bill unfortunately 
maybe speaks to the sad state of affairs that is happening 
throughout the world and North America and hopefully does 
not come here to Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think we’ve all heard about the tragic shootings and 
incidents that have happened throughout North America when 
lawyers and court clerks and people that are working the court 
system have been threatened. And also some unfortunate 
instances have happened which have resulted in the death and 
kidnapping of different people that have been in court at that 
. . . So with this particular Bill, it addresses that. But it’s an 
unfortunate part of society that it comes to that because it is a 
right of citizens to go to court and observe the proceedings that 
are going on, at that end of it. 
 
When you talk about this particular Bill and about why it has to 
be brought in, you wonder about also the reasoning why. Is it 
because society itself is becoming more and more used to 
violence, at that end of it? More guns being carried, more 
knives being carried, more instances of violence. 
 
You wonder if in the past if maybe the sentencing of criminals 
has been light. I know that right now, at the federal end right 
now, that there at the federal end right now there’s a Bill that’s 
being debated that’s on the three-strike law dealing with violent 
crimes. And I know that right now that certain parties are 
holding it up. One of them is the NDP and the Liberals, and I’m 
not sure where the Bloc exactly stands on that particular Bill. 
 
But I think as we’ve been door knocking, talking to people, 
they’re worried about the increased violence. And I think they 
want criminals to be . . . to basically to, when it comes to 
violent crimes, to spend some time behind jail to answer for 
their crimes, at that end of it. 
 

And I know that in rural Saskatchewan and throughout the 
cities we’ve . . . I’ve been door knocking recently in Regina and 
that was a big issue — was crime. People are worried about 
crime. They’re worried about people carrying knives and guns. 
And as gangs, youth gangs are becoming more prominent here 
in Saskatchewan, that is a problem. And that needs to be 
addressed, at that end of it. 
 
This particular Bill, it’s dealing with court security. And it’s 
just not in the court. I mean, I was in certain legislators, 
legislations throughout North America that have brought in 
metal detectors at the entrances. And I know our particular 
legislature hasn’t done that yet, and I hope it never has to. But it 
may have to if there’s enough violent instances coming up in 
the future. 
 
And that just speaking to the changing in society and the 
protection of people that are working in this particular industry 
at that . . . when it comes to courts, I mean they are dealing with 
violent criminals, violent instances, you know. 
 
And I know here in Saskatchewan there hasn’t been too much 
of that going on but there has been throughout North America. 
And as we have the right as legislators — and I should say not 
even the right but it should be our duty — to protect workers 
the very best we can in any instances, wherever they’re working 
at. And if this particular . . . will help feel less threat and save 
lives, yes it’s a necessary thing that has to, I guess, has to come, 
at that end of it. 
 
I don’t like violence as nobody does here in this particular court 
doesn’t like it, but it seems to be unfortunately more of a fact of 
life throughout North America, at that end of it. You read more 
and more violent instances happening of people bringing guns, 
knives to different facilities. To court is one of them and the 
workers shouldn’t feel threatened, should be able to go to work 
and feel safe, at that end of it. And at that end of it, that’s their 
right and our right as legislators to make sure that they have that 
safety when they proceed to court, at the end of it. 
 
I would like to talk a little bit more about the NDP — federally 
and provincially — at making maybe stronger sentences for 
criminals. The three-strike law is becoming at the federal end, 
and I think that maybe that’s something that should be looking 
here. Somebody that’s dealing in . . . that has committed a 
violent crime with a gun or a knife should spend time, a 
reasonable time, behind bars, you know, at that end of it. And 
maybe that would act as a bit of a deterrent and maybe you 
wouldn’t see as many people carrying knives or guns. 
 
I hear some members calling over on the other side. I hope that 
they’re agreeing with that, and I think they would because I 
mean, we want this city to be safe. I think they want their 
constituents to be safe, at that end of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because I mean, that’s what anybody really wants. They want to 
feel safe, whether it’s in a small town, whether you’re in a 
village, whether you’re out in rural Saskatchewan at a farmyard 
or if you’re in a city. You have the right to be able to feel . . . 
You should have the right to feel safe in your home, in your 
community and you should also have the right to feel safe when 
you go to work, at that end of it. That should be a necessary . . . 
Just people that assume that it should be just a right, that they 
would assume that they would have the right to feel safe. 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

With this particular piece of legislation, I think it tries to deal 
with that, at the end of it, making people feel safe at work. I’m 
not sure about how many instances there have been in 
Saskatchewan. This is my critic portfolio. I know our critic will 
make some comments on it further on. But I would be 
interested to see if the levels of instances have been more in the 
last 10 or 15 years, at courts, that would bring this on — that 
the workers that are working there and the people that are 
dealing with the law have requested it. 
 
And I would hope that the NDP has consulted with them and 
talked to them and said, you know, this is something that we 
need, that the sheriffs need there, that we have the right to 
search people, at that end of it, and yet still provide that people 
still feel that they can go to court any day and watch the 
proceedings. Because that is still part of our fundamental 
constitution, our fundamental right, that our courts and laws 
should be open and accountable to people, as citizens, to go and 
view that court proceedings at any given time throughout the 
day or throughout the year, whatever, because some people 
have great . . . [inaudible] . . . this. 
 
Some of them have been victims. And maybe the person that’s 
violated them is in court that particular day, so they should be 
able to feel free to go there and not be intimidated, at that end of 
it. Yet still there’s that balance of being able, that they feel that 
they have the freedom to move in and out of that particular 
courthouse without being overly restricted, at that end of it. 
 
We can say it seems to be a trend throughout North America, 
Europe, and the world that we’re moving more into metal 
detectors, more security at public buildings throughout. And 
that’s not a good thing, at that end of it, but yet we have to be 
protected, at that end of it. 
 
I’m hoping that . . . And one of the things that has come in, like 
I said before, when I’ve been door knocking is safety of people, 
especially in Regina. We door knocked a lot of older people 
houses and, you know, security and fear of violence was a big 
part of it when they came there, at that end of it. They were very 
scared about home invasions. That’s been the scene like, 
unfortunately, the norm there, and they were asking for tougher 
sentences especially for repeat offenders, offenders that are 
carrying guns, carrying knives. We heard that a lot, that they 
should be stiffer sentences. 
 
A lot of them were supporting the three-strike law. A lot of 
people, when I talked to them, were in favour of the federal 
three-strike law that the federal NDP seems right now holding it 
up. And I’d wonder if this provincial NDP is in favour of that or 
if they’re in favour of Mr. Layton and his argument of why he’s 
holding that up. I’ll be kind of looking forward for their 
comments on that particular piece of legislation as many of the 
constituents and residents throughout Saskatchewan are because 
that is a huge safety. That was one of the reasons that Bill was 
brought forward by the Conservatives because of the door 
knocking . . . and the Conservatives, the federal ones ran on that 
ticket. The NDP didn’t. And there’s 12 of them elected and 
none NDP. 
 
So I would say that crime is a huge issue here in the cities. In 
Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, P.A., it is a huge issue at that 
end of it. Some of the members are saying, no that wasn’t the 

only reason. Well no it wasn’t the only reason. But it was one of 
the main reasons when they were door knocking was older 
people fear for their lives and their safety in their homes. And 
they should here. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will 
adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Arm River-Watrous has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 18. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 
Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 
2). Mr. Speaker, The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
contains a series of amendments that will further the 
implementation of the passport system of securities regulation 
and further the creation of a seamless, harmonized securities 
regime in Canada where market participants can access capital 
markets throughout Canada by dealing with one regulator and 
one set of laws. 
 
In addition this Bill contains additional investor protection and 
enforcement tools including a civil liability scheme for 
secondary markets, as well as provisions enabling 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission to make 
financial compensation orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bulk of these amendments constitute a further 
step in the creation of a passport system of securities regulation 
in Canada. 2004 provincial and territorial ministers responsible 
for securities regulation agreed to establish a passport system 
that will provide a single window of access for market 
participants across Canada. 
 
In addition the passport agreement calls for a highly 
harmonized, streamlined, and simplified securities law. It 
counselled ministers to facilitate change and ongoing 
co-operation and a commitment to explore options for further 
reform. Mr. Speaker, the passport system initially applied to 
areas where there was already a high degree of harmonization 
across jurisdictions. 
 
Phase 2 of the passport system includes a series of provisions 
that adopt uniform definitions and repeal administrator 
provisions related to registration, prospectus, continuous 
disclosure, insider reporting, and take over an issue or bids that 
will be replaced with uniform provisions in a series of 
regulations that will apply in all jurisdictions. 
 
[16:15] 
 
In addition these amendments expand upon provisions adopted 
in the spring of 2006 regarding the ability of a securities 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

regulator to delegate and accept delegation of authority from 
another jurisdiction. 
 
Specifically these amendments will enable the Saskatchewan 
Financial Services Commission to incorporate decisions of 
another regulator by operation of law. They also include a 
modified discretion mechanism that will allow a regulator to 
make a decision solely based on a similar decision by another 
regulator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments also contain significant 
protection for investors. Currently all provinces have legislation 
that provides for a statutory right of action against an issuer for 
fraud or misrepresentation in offering documents to investors 
who purchase securities in the primary capital market. The 
primary market is that part of the capital market that deals with 
the issuance of new securities. 
 
The proposed provisions give similar statutory rights of action 
to investors who trade in the secondary market, which is the 
financial market for trading of securities that have already been 
issued in an initial private or public offering. Under the new 
provisions, investors will have a right of action against issuer 
. . . or the issuer or someone acting on the issuer’s behalf makes 
a statement or releases a document that contains a 
misrepresentation or fails to give notice of a material change in 
their business. 
 
These amendments also include provisions which will give the 
Saskatchewan commission the power to make restitution orders. 
Under the new provisions, the commission will have the power 
to order that a person or company who has contravened 
Saskatchewan securities laws must repay financial losses to 
investors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further amendments will update the commission’s 
administrative and enforcement powers and make them 
consistent with similar provisions in other jurisdictions dealing 
with a wide range of issues including reviews of reporters; 
issuers’ continuous disclosure, prohibiting front running — and 
by front running, I’m referring to trading in securities with 
knowledge of a fund’s trading intentions — increasing 
maximum penalties on a conviction; and the power to make an 
order against someone convicted of a securities related criminal 
offence. 
 
In addition the proposed legislation includes several 
amendments not specifically related to the passport system. 
These include the repeal of the requirement for mineral release 
brokers to register under the Act. Saskatchewan is one of only 
two jurisdictions in Canada that regulates mineral release 
brokers in this fashion and the only jurisdiction to regulate such 
brokers under the securities legislation. The commission has 
now been receiving complaints regarding the industry, and the 
public interest no longer requires regulation of brokers in this 
manner. This change will lessen the administrative cost of 
carrying on business for mineral release brokers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition the repeal of these provisions anticipate the 
harmonization of registration categories that is occurring in the 
context of Canadian Securities Administrators, CSA. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation also includes a number of 
administrative and housekeeping amendments including 
amendments consequential to The Income Trust Liability Act, 
streamlining of the assignment of powers to self regulatory 
organizations, as well as enabling the commission to impose 
terms and conditions on decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments reflect Saskatchewan’s 
ongoing commitment to the passport system of securities 
regulation in Canada. The amendments seek to continue the 
harmonization of regulatory requirements and lessen 
compliance costs for Canadian businesses as well as increase 
protection for those who invest in them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2). 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The question before 
the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 
No. 19 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the hon. member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise today and speak briefly on the Act to 
amend The Securities Act, 1988 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the intent of this legislation is 
very important. Many, many people in our province indeed find 
that in order to advance their own financial well-being, it’s 
necessary for them to invest in businesses through the securities 
process. And it’s important that these people have a reasonable 
expectation that their investments are going to be safeguarded 
against improper and unconscionable practices by people that 
may represent their own interests instead of the investor’s 
interests. 
 
I’m pleased to hear in this legislation that it is building on a 
decision that it sounds like was negotiated by all of the 
provinces to create a single-desk window of regulatory kind of 
framework that would apply in all jurisdictions in Canada. I 
think this is an important step in the right direction. It troubles 
me that we do this on such a haphazard basis instead of as a 
matter of course. 
 
It always has bothered me to some extent that in the era and the 
spirit of free trade and global marketing that the world certainly 
is involved with, that very often our own provinces, our own 
provincial jurisdictions put more impediments and barriers to 
standardization and harmonization of rules and regulations than 
do other countries and other jurisdictions in the national and 
international markets. So any steps that can be taken in order to 
harmonize and to simplify and create a uniform set of rules 
across the country are important. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from time to time — and I have to admit 
that it is getting very much the exception instead of the rule — 
but there has been in the past from time to time, particularly 
elderly constituents who would be phoning the office and 
saying is such-and-such an offering that’s being proposed by 
some investment company or brokerage or whatever, 
investment dealers? Is it on the up and up? Is it legitimate? Is 
there, indeed, the proper scrutiny and safeguards that have been 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

conducted in order for us to know and to have some certainty 
about . . . will our investments, modest as they are, be put at 
risk? And certainly it was always difficult, in years gone by, to 
know for sure if this was indeed the case. 
 
But I have to say that there has been significant progress, in my 
mind, in that the necessity of going through the proper 
processes in order to put together proposals for investment 
consideration are certainly improving. And I think that the 
investing public can feel more and more satisfaction, more and 
more comfort in that their basic security is being respected and 
is being protected against unscrupulous operators. 
 
You know, I think that the people that are most vulnerable in 
this whole process are not the sophisticated investors. They’re 
not the people who understand how the stock markets work and 
the various markets in Canada and the speculative markets and 
the international markets. Quite often the people that are most 
vulnerable in this . . . [inaudible] . . . are our senior citizens, are 
the people who are very much counting on a positive return on 
their investments so that they can have a pension that will 
sustain them in their older years. And if anybody sort of needs 
the protection of oversight, it’s those vulnerable people. 
 
The sophisticated investors, I think, understand the ups and 
downs and understand how the market and the processes work 
well enough that they can safeguard in most instances their own 
security. But it’s the vulnerable people that are the most 
concerning. And I know, from time to time, that I feel that our 
seniors feel that they’re pretty vulnerable to some schemes, if 
you like, that are not necessarily in their best interests. They’re 
not only investment schemes, but people that come around 
trying to sell this or that service that is very problematic for 
them. 
 
I’m also very pleased to hear that this legislation is harmonizing 
and is in step with what is being proposed and changed in other 
jurisdictions across Canada. The explanatory notes that were 
included with the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 97 pages in 
volume, so that there is a great deal of detail in this legislation. 
The Bill itself is quite lengthy, 45 detailed pages of very, very 
technical information. And it probably is necessary. 
 
I also understand that the previous Bill that we had, the 
legislation that was introduced from 2005 just came into effect 
on June 1 of this year. So it seems as if there’s a lot of 
movement, that there’s a lot of discussion, a lot of negotiation 
occurring between provinces in order to implement this 
passport protocol that the minister referred to in terms of having 
a single window of investment, that they’re a single set of 
standards. And I think that that is very much worthy of 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order for us to review properly this very 
lengthy and weighty document, certainly we want to make sure 
that we go over it with the scrutiny that it deserves, and in order 
to facilitate that I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Melfort has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 19. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds 
Mandatory Reporting Act 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory 
Reporting Act. Mr. Speaker, this government has over the past 
several sessions demonstrated its commitment to using its civil 
jurisdiction to provide tools to our Saskatchewan police 
services to build safer communities in which Saskatchewan 
families can live, work, and build strong futures. 
 
Those tools help our police services to prevent crime by 
creating a hostile environment for organized crime. We have 
already introduced legislation such as The Safer Communities 
and Neighbourhoods Act, The Mandatory Testing and 
Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act, and The Seizure of 
Criminal Property Act that will make the jobs of police safer 
and more effective in dealing with challenges such as gang 
activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory 
Reporting Act, which I introduced today, reaffirms this 
commitment by establishing a new procedure for the 
compulsory reporting by hospitals of gunshots and stab wounds 
to local police services. The reporting end of this Bill will occur 
by telephone and will occur as soon as possible after the 
hospital has received a patient who has been a victim of a stab 
wound or a gunshot wound, as long as it does not interfere with 
that patient’s treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this reporting will be limited to the identification 
of the patient, the fact that they have suffered a stab wound or 
gunshot wound, and the location of the hospital facility where 
they have been treated. No further personal medical information 
will be disclosed through this process. The Bill addresses only 
the immediate information necessary for the police to 
commence an effective investigation. 
 
For example, the past medical history of an individual will not 
become subject to disclosure under this Bill. This strikes an 
appropriate balance between the important privacy rights of 
patients and the need for public safety, including the protection 
of both our citizens and our front-line medical service 
providers. This legislation was requested by the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiefs of Police as a tool that allows them to 
work with the front-line health service providers to improve 
public safety. 
 
In our discussions with representatives of the regional health 
authorities, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, it was recognized that in 
the extreme circumstances of a gunshot or stab wound it was 
appropriate that the police be notified. This limited disclosure 
of personal information will allow police services to learn of 
and investigate violent acts in our communities and to ensure 
that this community violence does not follow the patient into 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

that hospital during or after treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will be the second province in 
Canada to introduce this type of legislation and the first to apply 
it to stab wounds. Ongoing consultations with the police 
community and health care service providers will allow us to 
refine through regulation in what circumstances a stab wound 
will properly require reporting under this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government remains committed to promoting 
community safety, to combatting violence, and to striking an 
appropriate balance between disclosure of information in the 
public interest and the protection of privacy. Where there are 
violent acts in our communities, it is imperative that police 
services are informed of such activities and that they are able to 
commence an effective investigation. This Bill works with 
health service providers and our medical community to ensure 
that this will occur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Mandatory Reporting of Gunshot and Stab Wounds. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 20, The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory 
Reporting Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for 
Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and talk to this particular Bill. The Justice minister had 
mentioned that we’re the first in this. Well probably the reason 
we have to bring some of this because we also have the highest 
crime rate of the country. We have that in the Premier’s 
constituency. We have it in Regina Elphinstone, the highest 
crime rate, the most violent crimes. 
 
That’s one of the . . . Are they dealing with that particular 
issue? Are they dealing with the crime issue or the gang issue 
that’s constantly growing in this city? Are they? No they’re not. 
They’re putting their heads in their sand again at that end of it, 
putting emphasis on doctors and nurses just to report them. Are 
they actually addressing the root of the problem? 
 
I addressed this in my last speech at that. This government will 
not address the root of the problem, which is crime, which is 
growing in the Premier’s constituency, which is growing in a lot 
of the members in Regina’s constituency. Gang activity is 
growing in this province, and what is this government doing to 
address that particular problem? They’re not doing nothing. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I talked about the three-strike Bill. Maybe he would like to, the 
minister would like to bring something like that — bring what 
the people of this province actually want is tougher sentences 
on criminals, is what they want. So they put more emphasis on 
doctors and nurses who are already overworked. 
 
They mention hospitals. Well they’re closing hospitals 
throughout this. In rural Saskatchewan this piece of legislation 
under this particular government may be redundant if they keep 
closing hospitals. Out in my constituency right now we’re 
understaffed. Every hospital in my constituency as in every 

other constituency in rural Saskatchewan and in Regina and 
Saskatoon is understaffed at that end of it. So they’re putting 
more emphasis on them. 
 
Did they consult? Was there any consulting done? I remember 
an article about SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]. I don’t 
think SUN was . . . wanted some consulting. It sounded like 
they didn’t even hear about this particular Bill. 
 
We know the history when it comes to this particular 
government when it comes to consulting. One of them was 
today with the SaskPower retirees. Did they consult with them, 
Mr. Speaker? No, they did not consult with them. That’s what 
they were asking. I’ve got a constituent that deals with that. He 
says you know we weren’t even asked, he said. They didn’t sit 
down with us and talk about what. . . how we can work this out. 
This government just brings something in without consulting. 
 
Amalgamation was another one that they did, forced 
amalgamation. Did they consult with the RMs? No, they wanted 
to ram that through. Thank God that there was enough of a fight 
that stopped that. 
 
So that’s part of the biggest problem with this government is 
this old and tired government it just will not consult with the 
people out there when it passes legislation at that end of it. And 
right now there is some people that are worried about that. One 
of them is SUN and the nurses’ union and I think they have a 
right. I think this government should be able to sit down with 
them and work that out. But did they consult with them? No, 
they did not. They did not consult with them at that particular 
time. 
 
You talk about one of the issues that was raised to me by a 
nurse was, you know, she said, we deal with a lot of cuts. Some 
of the cuts dealing with in this particular piece of legislation is 
stabs. Well she says, how do I determine that? She said, I had a 
guy in there last week. He had cut himself because he had some 
frozen steaks. He was trying to break them apart with a sharp 
knife. He cut himself. She said, what do I do? Do I take his 
word? Mr. Speaker, do I take his word that that’s the way it 
happened or do I report that? Do I have to sit down and file a 
report? Do I have to do that at that particular end and file a 
report with the local police at that end of it? She said, that’s a 
concern to me. Now I’ve got to determine what constitutes a 
stab wound. 
 
And there’s lots of instances. I can go back over . . . She said I 
can probably, she said, my history as working as a nurse, she 
said, I could probably go back over 20 years of files, she said, 
and probably half of them were accidental cuts — guys. It just 
happens with women and men and kids — just accidents 
happen. And what constitutes a stab wound? And I heard 
somebody over there say well it’s got to be a stab wound. Well, 
she said, some of them were actually punctures — guys. Things 
happen. You know accidents happen. 
 
You know, maybe the members over there are perfect. Maybe 
they’ve never ever had a stitch in their life, never had an 
accident. And a lot of the wounds, she said, that were totally 
accidental were puncture wounds. She said, now what do I do 
with that? She says, first of all, she says, I’m overworked 
thanks to this NDP government. We’re run ragged at that end of 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

it. We’re working 12-hour shifts. We don’t have anybody to 
help us. And yet now I’ve got to make that particular decision 
with that. No, she wasn’t particularly happy with this particular 
legislation at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s just one of the things that this particular Bill can deal 
with because you know why? Because they did not consult with 
the unions that it’s going to be affecting it at that particular 
time. And this government has a history of not doing that. 
 
But what has . . . And especially what it has not history of, of 
dealing crime. This is what this particular Bill is dealing with, is 
dealing with increased crime that’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
A province like Saskatchewan, we shouldn’t have increased 
crime. Why are we having increased crime? Because this 
particular government refuses, refuses to deal with the issue of 
gangs, refuses to deal with the issues of violent crime, refuses to 
deal with the issues when it comes to weapons offences at that 
end of it. 
 
This government puts its head in the sand and says, oh maybe 
we support just them doing their sentence at home, putting a 
bracelet on. You know, as long as they can go to their TV and 
their fridge and that, that’s all right. Don’t leave the house. 
Maybe a two-year sentence. And I’ll tell you what. That could 
be the reason why we’re having to bring legislation like this 
forward in that end of it. And we shouldn’t have to. We should 
be dealing with the root of the problem. 
 
The root of the problem even starts in the Premier’s own 
constituency. I think as you well know and I well know, it is the 
highest crime statistic almost in Canada at that particular end. 
Why, in his own constituency, he has the highest crime rate — 
is he dealing with that particular issue? He never talks about 
that. I never heard him once talk about that particular issue in 
his constituency. I’ve heard some of the other members over 
there talk about the high crime rate that’s happened in their 
constituency. And maybe I can see why. They’re ashamed of it. 
And they should be. 
 
They should be addressing that particular problem when it 
comes to that because crime should be addressed at the root of 
the problem. And it’s not being done by this particular 
government. And that’s why we’re bringing forward particular 
pieces of legislation like this at that end of it. But it’s not 
dealing with the root of the problem, Mr. Speaker, at that end of 
it. 
 
Another issue of it out there is, like I said before, the front-line 
staff has to deal with this. They have to deal with this particular 
Bill, this legislation. More paperwork. She says, I need more 
workers. I’ve talked to some nurses, talked to some people 
there. She says, I need more workers. I don’t need more 
paperwork, more things at that particular end of it. She says, 
why isn’t this government addressing the waiting lists that 
we’re to here, the shortage of doctors, the shortage of nurses? 
She was telling me, why don’t we address that particular 
problem? This government is ignoring that particular problem 
like it’s been ignoring all the problems and that’s why it keeps 
getting deeper and deeper when it comes to crime and worse in 
this particular province at that end of it. 
 
And that’s why our waiting lists are growing at that end of it. In 

my constituency we’ve got Watrous has been waiting to build a 
hospital for a number of years, waiting I think 10 years. It’s had 
the money in place. Has this government addressed that 
particular problem, Mr. Speaker? No it hasn’t. It’s constantly 
refused to give Watrous a new Manitou lodge at that end of it. 
They closed a wing in Davidson. We had to argue and fight and 
finally got it opened at that end of it. So with that, Mr. Speaker, 
you know that’s part of the problem dealing with this particular 
legislation. There’s one nurse maybe on duty in that particular 
time. 
 
Another issue she talked about this particular Bill and some of 
the union did, talked about safety, you know, talks about safety. 
A guy’s coming in. He’s been hurt. He’s a gang member. He 
tells the nurse, he says, you report me, I’ll find out where you 
live or whatever. You know it talks about safety. That was an 
issue that they were worried about and I think some of the 
members should be addressing that. They should have talked to 
maybe the union of nurses about that because that was an issue 
that was raised to me by someone who works in the health care 
profession. She says, I’m a little nervous now, she said. I live in 
the city; it’s a small city. They can find out maybe where I live. 
If they find out I was the one that reported them on a gunshot 
wound, I was the one that got them in trouble . . . She said, this 
is a small city. They could find out where I live. And she was 
worried about that. 
 
Did you address that particular problem? That’s an issue that 
should be addressed at that particular issue, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that was a valid point on her part; is that worried about it 
she says. And then you get the smaller hospitals where there is 
only one or two staff members where the guy can say, you 
know, you report me, I’ll come back or maybe I’ll just take you 
hostage right now if you’re going to go and report me. 
 
So that safety issue I think is a huge issue and that should be 
something we should all be concerned about. And I am for the 
nurses and doctors and I hope the members opposite are 
concerned about it. I think they would be at that particular time 
and I think that’s something that they should address with the 
union at that particular issue. 
 
I think that’s an issue that has to be addressed with this Bill. 
And that’s why we’re having adjourned debate. That’s what it’s 
about, to bring forward some of this stuff at that particular end 
so that everybody . . . because right now the most concern is 
everybody wants to have a better life here, a better . . . Life 
should be better here. It should be safe and one of the things is 
with crime, it’s not in this particular province. 
 
The health professionals are working in this system. They 
should feel safe. They shouldn’t feel threatened. They shouldn’t 
feel pressure on them to actually have to report somebody that 
say might come back to haunt me in a number of times. 
 
Another issue was raised. Then she said, then do I have to 
spend like most of my time in court? If this particular offence 
goes to court, am I going to be called to court and maybe spend 
. . . take two, three days off. She said sometimes in a busy place 
in Regina we might handle in a week three, four offences. She 
said, I could be spending half my time in court. That’s another 
issue that wasn’t addressed in this Bill or I haven’t seen it. I 
didn’t see it in the summary notes that the minister sent over. I 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

haven’t seen it in the Bill. And maybe when it gets to 
committee and stuff later, we can ask some of the questions. 
Those are some of the things that should be addressed with this 
Bill and with this piece of legislation. 
 
Those are concerns. And it stems back from the fact that I don’t 
think this government sat down with the nurses’ union and 
maybe did some consulting and tried to work with them, work 
with some different people that are actually in the profession — 
deal with the health care professionals at that end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that I would . . . On this particular Bill, because I think it 
needs some more consulting, I would like to hear that they’ve 
actually . . . going to consult with that. These are some of the 
issues I think that need to be addressed at that particular time. 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 20 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 
2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006. This 
legislation addresses the problem faced by persons and 
organizations who would like to express regret, sympathy, or 
offer a sincere apology for the injuries suffered by another 
person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many cases people or institutions do not 
apologize because they have received legal advice that these 
statements could be used to establish liability in a future or 
ongoing lawsuit. 
 
It’s also the case that insurance policies frequently provide that 
insurance coverage may be void if the claimant has apologized. 
These policies are based on a concern that the apology will be 
admissible as evidence. Because of this fear, persons and 
institutions who may want to apologize frequently do not risk 
the consequences. They follow their legal advice, Mr. Speaker, 
and do not apologize. This is especially difficult for 
organizations and individuals who want to apologize and 
believe that an apology is an important step towards healing. 
 
An example is the churches that administered residential 
schools in Canada. These churches have offered formal 
apologies that some commentators have suggested do not 
constitute real apologies because they have been drafted to 
avoid legal liability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Evidence Act 
will allow people and organizations to make an apology without 
fearing legal liability in an existing or potential civil action. The 
amendment provides that an apology does not constitute an 

admission of fault and is not admissible as evidence in a court 
proceeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue becomes even more challenging when 
public authorities or officials are involved, as one of our 
consultees advised us. Public authorities such as the city and 
police exist to serve the community and depend upon the 
confidence of the public to fulfill their mandate. When these 
public authorities are involved in an incident where a member 
of the public has suffered harm, they currently face a conflict 
between the desire to account to the public and a fear of 
jeopardizing their legal interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the power of a real apology is currently being 
recognized in medical malpractice situations. In recent years, 
research from the United States has suggested that a significant 
portion of medical malpractice lawsuits would not have gone to 
court if the doctors had apologized to the plaintiffs. Our 
mediators who have experience with apologies in the context of 
mediation have told us that the biggest impact of this legislation 
will be felt shortly after the events giving rise to the injury if 
people feel free to say the right thing when it is most 
appropriate without fearing that it will haunt them later. Mr. 
Speaker, they have also told us that after hearing a long-overdue 
apology, participants in mediation often say that if they had 
heard it earlier, it would have saved them a lot of pain and they 
likely would not have pursued the matter. 
 
The law reform initiative in this Bill recognizes that our formal 
processes can get in the way of what people naturally want to 
do to begin the healing. The amendment allows people to offer 
an apology without having to be concerned that it will be used 
against them in a future lawsuit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Evidence Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 21, The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 
moment or two and just make some very brief comments on this 
particular Act, The Evidence Act. As the minister referred 
earlier, there is some real benefit in terms of apologizing in a 
certain situation. It’s all part of clearing the air. It’s part of kind 
of clearing the soul for moving ahead and getting on with life. 
 
Some of the situations that I could see this happening would be 
of benefit for those people that in fact did cause or . . . involved 
in an accident that the causal determination hasn’t been clear at 
this point but there needs to be some kind of an apology for the 
closure of any particular situation, or the situation where even 
though you’re involved you don’t want to admit that you’re at 
guilt but there needs to be some clearing of the air. I can see the 
advantage, I can see the advantage there. 
 
[16:45] 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

The situation that the government itself has found itself in over 
a period of time is it’s been very frustrating for the people in the 
province. The government itself and the various departments in 
government have obviously performed something that wasn’t 
fair for the outcome of justice and yet they refused to comment 
on the outcome. They refused to make an apology. I guess the 
assumption was that there would be guilt associated with that. 
 
I think it’s important not only for people but also for the 
government itself to move these things ahead and sort out the 
consequences of any particular act. When those things happen 
it’s certainly the feeling of the person that had some kind of 
action placed on them to feel that, unless there’s an apology, 
they would feel that they have really been outside the system, 
outside of any way of making this thing come together, making 
them feel better. And in this case I think if the government was 
to make an apology, or a department or a minister, without 
admitting that guilt, I think that would go a long ways to 
making people feel that the government as well as the people 
have to comply with the Act and there is right and wrongs in 
our system. 
 
I hope that the government will look at this apology, not use it 
for its own sake and say that, we’ve made an apology and there 
is no guilt left. I think that is up for the court. But nonetheless 
we have to move ahead. There is some consideration that this 
Act or the amendment to The Evidence Act has been . . . There 
has been some consultation. I think we want to give it a little 
more thought and we want to confer with some of the legal 
advice that would obviously come and associate with this. So at 
this point I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that the debate on second reading of Bill 21 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006. 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly today proposes two 
sets of amendments to The Legal Profession Act, 1990. The 
first set of amendments to the Act will allow for unclaimed 
funds from lawyers’ trust accounts to be paid to the Law 
Foundation. Presently, Mr. Speaker, these unclaimed trust funds 
are to be paid to the Minister of Finance. 
 
The purpose of the Law Foundation, as defined in the Act, is to 
establish and maintain a fund for the purpose of legal education, 
legal research, legal aid, law libraries, and law reform. The Law 
Foundation receives the majority of its funds from the interest 
generated on lawyers’ trust accounts. The inclusion of 
unclaimed funds from lawyers’ trust accounts will increase the 
funds available to the Law Foundation to carry out its statutory 
function. 
 

Mr. Speaker, unclaimed trust funds are directed to the 
respective law foundations in most other jurisdictions in 
Canada. Currently Saskatchewan is one of only three 
jurisdictions that directs unclaimed trust funds to the Crown. 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will make Saskatchewan 
consistent with the situation in most other provinces. 
Furthermore, this amendment was requested by the Law Society 
with the endorsement of the Law Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second set of amendments to the Act provide 
specific processes for the protection of solicitor-client privilege 
during an investigation of a complaint received by the Law 
Society. Mr. Speaker, these amendments are in response to a 
recent Court of Queen’s Bench decision that the Act did not 
contain adequate provisions to protect the confidentiality of 
records subject to solicitor-client privilege during the 
investigation process. 
 
Most other provincial jurisdictions have legislation dealing with 
this issue. It was noted by the court that such provisions were 
lacking in the Saskatchewan legislation. These amendments 
were requested by the Law Society to codify the common law 
rules that currently apply and that courts have relied on in the 
past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments clarify that members of the Law 
Society must provide information to the Law Society during an 
investigation even where this information is subject to 
solicitor-client privilege. In doing so, the amendments provide 
that solicitor-client privilege is not breached. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will allow the lawyer providing 
the records, any person claiming the solicitor-client privilege, or 
the court to require the proceedings dealing with the records be 
held in private and that the public or any other third party be 
denied access to the records. Further, Mr. Speaker, the 
amendments provide specific authority for benchers to make 
rules regarding the handling of information that is privileged or 
confidential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 22, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
able to add a few short thoughts with regards to the Act to 
amend The Legal Profession Act. 
 
I think the essence of our whole society, the essence of how the 
legal system works, depends upon that element of confidence 
and the confidence of all members within the society, all 
members that are involved in legal transactions to have the 
confidence that there is a system in place that is going to be 
certainly working on everybody’s behalf and still protecting the 
confidences and protecting the information that people will not 
necessarily want or should not be put into the public domain. 
 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

So in this case there is . . . these provisions I think are actually 
trying to accommodate something that will add to that level of 
confidence. And that confidence, as I said, is an important 
element in the relationship between a client, a lawyer, that 
person’s lawyer, and how it can be used from that point on. 
 
One of the points that is mentioned — and the minister did 
mention this — is the fact that they are now looking at a 
situation where a member can obtain credibility in two different 
jurisdictions. That’s certainly an issue that is coming to the 
forefront in my particular constituency where lawyers need to 
work on both sides of the border and need to be able to expand 
both their expertise and their . . . And the backing for their 
particular work has to be accredited on both sides of that 
border. And I think that’s an important part. 
 
And as the economy of Western Canada expands into a more 
interprovincial and even global environment, that 
interjurisdictional practice becomes even more and more 
important. And I would like to gain some more input from the 
lawyers that actually work in that environment, both that have 
been certified on both sides of the border and in fact do practise. 
And I think those are important issues that should be addressed, 
and I would like to get some further feedback. 
 
Again part of the confidence level in the Act, I think, needs to 
be followed when we look at who has access to the files on a 
particular issue, who has access to the correspondence or any of 
the solicitor-client privileged information. The minister referred 
to those situations where it can be certainly kept in confidence 
and situations where at times there can be a third party that is 
actually involved in that solicitor-client privilege can become 
involved. And this Act follows through. And I think that that 
needs to be expanded further with further advice. 
 
There is also an area where there is some leftover money in a 
particular client-solicitor reaction. And I note that there is now a 
recommendation in these amendments to have that money go 
into something called the Law Foundation account rather than 
going back to the provincial treasury. I think that’s an important 
part of the confidence level again because the Law Foundation 
account can direct that money after they have accounted for it. 
They can direct it to some probably better areas of investment 
or charities, whatever the case may be, than the government of 
the time. 
 
We need to spend a little more time working with the legal 
profession, certainly from this interprovincial jurisdiction point 
of view, and I would move adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill No. 22 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the time of day 
and to avoid a circumstance where the minister is caught with 
half of his Bill out and half not out before moving to the 

considered remarks by the opposition, I will move that this 
House do now recess. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now recess, although I . . . Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Be it now very close to 5 o’clock, this House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................327 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................327 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................327 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................328 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 University of Saskatchewan Huskies Win the Hardy Cup 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................328 
 2006 First Nations Achievement Awards 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 A Weekend of Football 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 Gala Centennial Event in Saskatoon 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 Taking a Stand Against Bullying 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 Davidson Branch of the Royal Canadian Legion Celebrates Anniversary 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................330 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Shortage of Health Professionals Impacts Rural Hospitals 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................330 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................330 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................331 
 Recruitment and Retention of Health Care Professionals 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................332 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................332 
 Departure of Labour Relations Board Official 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................333 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................333 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 16 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................335 
 Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................335 
 Bill No. 28 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................336 
 Bill No. 29 — The Labour Standards Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Labour Standards Amendments Act, 2006 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................336 
 Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................336 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................336 
 Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................337 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................337 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Removing Non-Renewable Resource Revenues from the Equalization Formula 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................337 



 

  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................339 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................341 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................342 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................344 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Hagel (transmittal motion).......................................................................................................................................................345 
RESCIND TRANSFER TO MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................346 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................346 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................346 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................348 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................349 
 Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................351 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................352 
 Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................353 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................354 
 Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................355 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................356 
 Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................358 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................358 
 Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................359 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................359 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


