
















































Hansard: December 04, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 23A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 651 
 December 4, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again to present a petition signed by the folks from the 
communities of Broadview and Whitewood. And this is in 
regards to dialysis and the cost that is incurred and faced by 
many people who have to travel for their dialysis services. And 
I read the prayer of the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
presenting a petition once again, this time on behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Moosomin, and individuals from 
the community of Wolseley. The issue is the government’s 
unwillingness to fund the cancer-fighting drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the lack of this government funding the drug Avastin. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Carievale, 
Carnduff, Oxbow, Carlyle, and Carnduff. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of a constituent from 
Carnduff. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the communities of Carnduff, 
Carievale, Oxbow, Estevan, Redvers, Wakaw, Bellegarde, the 
whole Southeast, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents also concerned about the government’s unwillingness 
to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today the petitioners all hail from either Regina or 
nearby Balgonie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise on behalf of 
people who are concerned about Highway No. 49. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Okla; 
Lintlaw; Preeceville; Russell, Manitoba; and Kelvington. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The communities involved with the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are 
Regina and Craven. 
 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Carnduff and Alida. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
several petitions of the citizens that are concerned about the 
safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, will come as no surprise. They 
are — it’s a fairly widely used corridor — they are from Prince 
Albert, Colonsay, Humboldt, Cudworth, Quill Lake, 
Broadview, St. Denis, St. Lenore, Quill Lake, Martensville, 
Archerwill, Wadena, Kelvington, Dana, Rose Valley, Muenster, 
Canora, Naicam, Saskatoon, Bruno, Buchanan, Battleford, and 
Provost, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the government’s reluctance to fund 
the cancer fighting drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 
Weyburn, Pilot Butte, Meath Park, and I’m pleased to present 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today with a petition from people who are very concerned about 
this government’s refusal to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Regina. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present a petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, Asquith, and 
Vanscoy. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise to present a petition today surrounding the truly tragic 
circumstances of the death of Doug Bonderud and the lack of 
acceptance of responsibility by this NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family 
for out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Today the petitioners come from the provincial constituencies 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs and Saskatoon Sutherland. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens who are very concerned about the NDP’s 
two tiered health system and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore you petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Alida, 
Carnduff, and Glen Ewen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



December 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s two-tier health system. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Grenfell and 
Cowessess. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition to urge tougher sentences for sexual offenders 
against children. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alert to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their communities as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this one is entirely signed by the good 
citizens of Cudworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
the people calling on the government to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan Highways 
employees would be affected by such possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound . . . 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Manitou Beach, and Dalmeny. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand in the 
Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned with the funding of cancer medication. 
The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this petition is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and they’ve left their street addresses 
for us to identify them. I’m proud to present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today 
to rise on a petition that this is the first time in the province’s 
history that the government has denied coverage of a cancer 
drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House to present a petition to reimburse the out-of-country 
medical costs of Doug Bonderud. Mr. Speaker, I will read the 
prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family 
for out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the city of 
Saskatoon. I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased today to rise in the Assembly to present a petition 
calling on the government to fund Avastin. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Martensville, Saskatoon, Aberdeen, and Camrose, Alberta. I so 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from Ituna, 
Regina, Southey, Lemberg, Assiniboia, Watrous, Churchbridge, 
Sovereign, Macrorie, Atwater, Riverhurst, Eyebrow, and Swift 
Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to present 
petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are very 
concerned about the future of the Canadian Wheat Board. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report these petitions come from 
Indian Head, Codette, Semans, Raymore, Herbert, and my birth 
town, Kyle. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
be able to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are concerned about the future of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. The petition signatures are from 
Wawota, Avonlea, Regina, Coderre, and Maymont, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly a group that is 
visiting our Legislative Assembly today. It’s a group of 26 very 
good looking grade 8 students from the Regina Christian School 
that are seated in your gallery. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Geoff Glasspell, and by Mrs. Merna Oppeboen. I look 
forward to meeting with this group after question period, and I 
would ask all members to join me in extending them a very 
warm welcome today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure as well to introduce a group of students, and we say 
welcome to the students from the Regina Christian School. 
 
But also we have a group of students who have travelled here 
from the Kahkewistahaw Community School north of 
Broadview. They’re here with their principal Don Thompson, 
nine grade 11 and 12 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome the students. I look forward 
to meeting them for a few minutes following question period, 
and I ask all the members of the Assembly to welcome the 
students to this here, their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this hon. 
Assembly, Ms. Lynne Bast seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
seated beside Lorne Ridgeway. Lynne is Lorne’s significant 
other and Lorne’s a great supporter and I believe that Lynne is 
too. And certainly the term better half never applied more than 
it does in Lynne’s case. I hope that all members will welcome 
Lynne Bast to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 



December 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

pleased to welcome to the legislature this afternoon, sitting in 
the west gallery, a woman whose headline this week says that 
she makes history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am very, very pleased to welcome to the Assembly Ms. Judy 
Kobsar who this weekend, one, was successful in winning 
against a slate of four candidates, the New Democratic Party 
nomination for Regina Rosemont. Mr. Speaker, I’d like you to 
welcome Judy and all members to welcome Judy to the gallery 
in anticipation of her taking a seat in the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to join with the Premier in recognizing my old friend 
and colleague Judy Kobsar and as well members of her 
campaign team. If they’d like to stand as their names are 
mentioned: Barb Dedi, campaign manager; we have Flor and 
Efren Linantud who are in the gallery with us; Carlos 
Petít-Homme; and Virginia Dela Cruz. And thank you very 
much for coming to the Assembly today, and I ask all members 
to join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Results of Leadership Conventions 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there were 
two leadership conventions held this past weekend. On behalf 
of the official opposition I want to congratulate both of the 
winners. 
 
The new leader of the Alberta Conservatives and therefore the 
new Premier of that province is Ed Stelmach. It was a bit of a 
bit of a surprise for political pundits. Mr. Stelmach came from 
third place to defeat two other very strong candidates in a hotly 
contested race. So we say congratulations to the Premier 
designate, and we look forward to working with him as Premier 
of Alberta in the new West. 
 
Also this weekend the federal Liberals held their leadership 
convention in Montreal, and the finish surprised perhaps a few 
with Stéphane Dion emerging as the new Liberal leader. We 
also want to congratulate him on his victory on the weekend. 
 
But I also would like to say this of the convention, Mr. Speaker: 
we are troubled. I am troubled by the disproportionate amount 
of focus there has been in recent weeks in our country for one 
region, for one province within Canada. First there was the 
debate federally over recognizing Quebec as a nation. And then 
watching the candidates’ speeches at the Liberal convention, 
you would hardly know that the West existed, Mr. Speaker. I 
saw an unofficial count that among the four leading candidates, 
they mentioned Quebec 121 times and mentioned our province 
or even the West just 12 times, Saskatchewan not mentioned 

hardly at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while Quebec is a very important part of Canada, 
so is the new West, so is the province of Saskatchewan. We 
want to remind that party and the other federal parties that we 
deserve a better equalization deal for our province, Mr. Speaker. 
I hope this is not lost on the new leader of the Liberal Party, nor 
the Government of Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Health Research Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this is Health Research Week in 
Saskatchewan. We have some of the best and the brightest in 
health research field right here in Saskatchewan. This week 
provides us the opportunity to acknowledge and celebrate their 
accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to building and 
sustaining a vibrant and growing research sector to address 
health care issues facing our province. Support for the 
Innovation and Science Fund and the Saskatchewan Health 
Research Foundation are part of that commitment. 
 
The Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation provides 
research funding on government’s behalf to agencies and 
individuals conducting health research in a variety of 
disciplines. The leadership and vision provided by the 
foundation has encouraged and facilitated a dynamic health 
research agenda for this province. We also support health 
research through funding to the province’s universities and to 
key infrastructure projects which are supporting the future 
growth of health research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week the Saskatchewan Health Research 
Foundation will hold its Santé! Awards dinner to present their 
prestigious top research awards. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these bright and innovative researchers in 
acknowledging the contributions of Saskatchewan’s health 
researchers. Their work benefits not only the area of health but 
the province as a whole, and we salute them. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Ambassadors for Community and Province 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
recognition of December 3 as International Day of Disabled 
Persons, I would like to present two Estevan stories. 
 
First, Albert Ribling was diagnosed with Down’s syndrome, 
and he has overcome many obstacles in his lifetime. He has 
demonstrated with a positive spirit so many things are 
attainable. Outgoing, friendly, considerate, constructive, and 
optimistic — Albert motivates us all. 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

Albert began his transition into employment with his work 
experience in high school. Today he is working as part of a 
team alongside a chef, assisting in the kitchen duties that are in 
high demand in that industry sector. The employer testimonial 
is how Albert could teach everyone a lesson as to how much 
attention and detail he displays in the workplace. His sister’s 
testimonial is about the impact he has had on his family and 
how they are very close because of the number of hurdles 
they’ve had to overcome. Albert’s testimonial is how he loves 
his job. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, is Stuart Minchin. Stuart is another young 
man diagnosed with Down’s syndrome at birth. And he has 
graduated from high school, overcoming many obstacles and 
tribulations. Shortly after graduation from high school, he 
registered and received his certificate in safe food handling 
from the local Southeast Regional College, a definite skill set 
needed to be a viable and competitive employee. His 
employer’s testimony is how dependable and meticulous he is, 
and Stuart’s testimony about himself is how he is proud of 
himself. 
 
And they are just wonderful ambassadors, Mr. Speaker, for that 
community and for the whole province and how they deserve 
the same rights and responsibilities as other citizens to be 
included and participate fully in society. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

International Day of Disabled Persons 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, 
December 3, was proclaimed International Day of Disabled 
Persons in Saskatchewan. Established by the United Nations in 
1982, this is a day dedicated to promoting, understanding, and 
support for disability issues. The goal is to help achieve full and 
equal enjoyment of human rights and participation in society by 
persons with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is echoed in the Saskatchewan council’s 
disability action plan and the province’s goal of full citizenship 
for people with disabilities. And we’ve made significant 
investments to provide the opportunity for people with 
disabilities to participate fully in the life of the province. 
 
This year’s report of the Multilateral Framework for Labour 
Market Agreements for Persons with Disabilities shows that 
employment rates for people with disabilities in Saskatchewan 
continues to climb and surpass the Canadian average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to making life better for today’s 
families and building a better future here for our youth. This is a 
commitment to all Saskatchewan people. This is a commitment 
to people with disabilities. This year, an additional $12.5 
million is being invested to improve the lives of those with 
disabilities. There is more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, but 
this government has a goal of full citizenship for people with 
disabilities. And we will continue our efforts to ensure people 
with disabilities are included in the social and economic life of 
our great province. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

A Shining Example of Persistence and Purpose 
 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
December 3 was first proclaimed by the United Nations as 
International Day of the Disabled Person in 1992. This day is 
recognized to promote understanding and awareness of 
disability issues and to mobilize support for the rights and 
well-being of people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize one individual from my 
constituency, Shannon Hoffmann. Diagnosed with conversion 
disorder, Shannon has persevered despite the obstacles she has 
faced while maintaining a busy household of her husband and 
her five growing children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shannon works as a contractual custodian. It’s 
work that she finds very rewarding. She loves her job. She finds 
it very challenging and is flourishing with the feedback of her 
employer. Mr. Speaker, her employer has noticed her work — 
the fact that she is taking pride in it — and feels that she’s a 
great asset to the team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shannon is a shining example of what one can 
overcome and achieve with persistence and purpose. She’s an 
example of self-determination, community inclusion, and full 
citizenship. Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Shannon for the 
example that she has set for her peers and to her children, for 
showing that with hard work, dedication, and perseverance 
much can be overcome. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

New Democratic Party Nomination for Regina Rosemont 
 

Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
big smile on my face will be explained during the statement. 
Last Thursday night was stormy and cold, and the wind was 
blowing. But despite the storm, Mr. Speaker, the wind blew 
hundreds of New Democrats together to share in the warmth of 
renewal and progress, and attend the nomination meeting to 
find my successor as the member from Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 200 voting delegates and over 100 guests and 
observers braved the weather to cast their vote. And in a 
decisive victory on the first ballet, the choice was made. Mr. 
Speaker, my successor in this Assembly will be Judy Kobsar, 
and she is an excellent choice. 
 
Judy has served several years on the board of the Regina & 
District Food Bank, on the board of directors of the Regina 
Police Race Relations Advisory Board. Judy is the president of 
Saskatchewan Caribbean-Canadian Association, former 
president of Immigrant Women of Saskatchewan, and has 
volunteered in church, human rights, and service organizations 
too numerous to mention. 



December 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

[14:00] 
 
She’ll bring a sense of hard work and dedication to serving the 
people of Regina Rosemont as their MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. And, Mr. Speaker, Judy has not only 
been a strong voice for promoting equity issues, she has a 
vision for making Regina Rosemont an even safer and more 
stable community with a zero tolerance approach to crime and 
the causes of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Judy on her victory and look 
forward to working with her to make life even better for the 
people of Rosemont and Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Support for Biofuel Production 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last year at 
this time, rural Saskatchewan was faced with a lot of negative 
news. Ag commodity prices were at or near their 25-year lows, 
Mr. Speaker. And the only bright spot on the horizon at that 
time was the perspective of the tremendous potential that 
biofuels had for our province and especially rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Both our provincial government and the federal government, 
and major political parties at the federal level, recognize the 
potential that biofuels could have and they supported it. In fact, 
they supported the producer involvement in this industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what has happened in the last 12 months, Mr. Speaker? 
Well a couple of things have happened. Private industry has 
moved forward and are building the biofuels industry. We’ve 
had the opening of the Husky ethanol plant, the announcement 
of the Belle Plaine plant, a mega plant in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what has happened to facilitate producer and community 
involvement in this industry? Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing has happened, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy Premier led a 
delegation to Ottawa recently and was told that the federal 
government wasn’t ready to make an announcement yet. We 
don’t know when that will happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what did we hear from that minister, Mr. Speaker? 
Ottawa, we’ve got a problem; you’ve got to fix it; and there’s 
nothing I can do with it. Well with a billion dollars squirreled 
away in an election surplus fund, that minister certainly can do 
something, Mr. Speaker. And it’s time he did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
 
 

Runaways from Red Willow Centre 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the Minister of Community Resources: why are so many 
children running away from the Red Willow Centre in 
Saskatoon, a government assessment centre for children age 16 
and under? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly agree 
that the numbers of young people that do run away from the 
Red Willow Centre is high. There is no question that we accept 
that this is a problem and that this is something that we are 
certainly tracking. And we are trying to understand why the 
children are running. We do know that the numbers, as I 
mentioned, are high and this is not acceptable certainly to our 
government. 
 
And what we are trying to do is work very closely with the 
facility to determine the trends, the patterns, the reasons why 
they’re running. As people know, sometimes children run away 
from problems; sometimes they run to options that sometimes 
aren’t very healthy. But I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that quite 
clearly the numbers are high. We are investigating. We are 
trying to determine what the causes are and there is a lot of 
work being done to assess that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again a 
pattern, Mr. Speaker — we ask the questions on it; now we’re 
going to look into it. This pattern’s been going on for three 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2006 up to November 17, 23 children have run away from 
the Red Willow. One was gone for over 52 days, another for 40, 
and another for 20 days. In 2005 more children ran away from 
the Red Willow. And in 2004, 29 had run away from this 
facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Red Willow accepts 50 children a year. Why are 
over half of them running away on multiple occasions? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we must never diminish 
the fact that children are running from facilities. We have to 
make sure that we make every effort to investigate some of 
these trends. 
 
I would point out that this is not a youth penitentiary. We don’t 
lock up these youth. These are places where we try to make the 
youth as comfortable as possible. Some children, Mr. Speaker, 
run away for as few as a couple of hours, for as short as a 
couple of hours. Others run, as mentioned, sometimes for days. 
We take the issue of children running away very seriously. We 
make sure that there are . . . the police are notified and that the 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

proper authorities are certainly contacted, and that the staff 
there make every effort to try and locate these children, and that 
there is a continual effort to find them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we mentioned, the numbers are high. We accept 
that. What is not acceptable is the fact that we want to see what 
causes them. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of good work is being 
undertaken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
facility is supposed to be a sanctuary for children. The numbers 
are staggering and depressing and a pattern of concern is going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I went on the website today. There are 16 children 
in that facility at any one time — eight young boys, eight young 
girls. They have a staff, sir, of 64 people. How can we possibly 
have these type of numbers of kids running away — 23 out of 
50 kids? Mr. Speaker, that’s a disgrace. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s important is that 
this is a very serious matter. And I should point out to that 
member, many of the children that do leave don’t actually take 
off from the facility. What happens is they go to school, they 
have outings, they visit malls, Mr. Speaker, and that’s when 
they make their effort to run away, Mr. Speaker — some for as 
short as a few hours, others for a number of days. And what I’ll 
point out, Mr. Speaker, is that we want to make sure that we do 
all we can to support these children. This is not a penitentiary 
for children. This is a youth service that we’re trying to work 
with these high-risk children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is important is that, if that opposition is not taking off 
in the middle of some very important committee work that talks 
about children being exploited in a political huff, or they’re not 
criticizing the civil service, or they’re not attacking some of the 
people who work with the youth, Mr. Speaker . . . They have 
done nothing positive, Mr. Speaker, to help with the children of 
this province. And this government and the people of 
Saskatchewan know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Centennial Plan at SaskTel 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of SaskTel. Can the minister provide 
the Assembly with details of the centennial plan that was 
implemented in March 2005? Can she tell us the purpose of this 
plan and the total cost? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize. I did not hear 
the plan that the member inquired about. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The plan was the 
centennial plan implemented in March 2005. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any details 
with me so I’ll take notice of the question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be more than 
willing to help the minister out. The centennial plan provided 
each SaskTel employee with a bonus equivalent to six days pay. 
Many people worked through the centennial and did not receive 
that kind of bonus. Public servants should be paid fairly for 
their work. Saskatchewan’s pay scale should be designed so 
that we can attract workers to jobs that are hard to fill. And no 
one would argue that bonuses should be tied to some kind of 
performance targets. Why on earth should you get a bonus for 
simply showing up for work during the centennial year? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when we look anywhere 
across society today, one of the hot topics is labour market, and 
shortages within the labour market. And if any of the members 
across the floor read Maclean’s magazine you will see that 
SaskTel has been named one of the top employers in Canada 
over the last five or six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a reason for that. SaskTel believes in 
treating its employees well. It has high productivity. It provides 
good service for the citizens of Saskatchewan, and part of that 
is providing good jobs for citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan and supporting other Saskatchewan businesses 
by buying their goods and services at home. It all adds together 
for a good package for Saskatchewan and a very good employer 
and business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Since the minister is so anxious to defend 
this for SaskTel and none of the other Crown corporations had 
this bonus, can she tell us the cost of this bonus to SaskTel and 
how many employees receive the bonus? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is another blatant 
example of how the opposition hops from one side of the issue 



December 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

to the other. Mr. Speaker, they will stand in the House and vote 
for a piece of legislation that protects the Crown corporations in 
Saskatchewan purely because they got their . . . they got kicked 
on it last, they got thumped on it last provincial election, Mr. 
Speaker. So now all of a sudden they’re onside with the 
Crowns. 
 
But they continually stand and criticize. They continually . . . 
And we have examples of members of the opposition travelling 
around the province criticizing the Crown corporations. Mr. 
Speaker, they should decide where they stand on this issue and 
for once they should stick to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the cost was $5 million, $5 
million for these employees just to show up to work just like all 
the other employees did during the province. Mr. Speaker, $5 
million is a lot of money any way you slice it. It’s enough to 
provide Terry Rak and other colorectal cancer patients with 
Avastin. It’s more than enough to compensate Crystal Bonderud 
for her trip to the Mayo clinic to try and save her husband’s life. 
It’s enough to provide some drought assistance to the producers 
in the Southwest. My colleagues tell me that $5 million would 
provide 10 new cell towers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would this government choose to spend this 
money on a bonus for SaskTel employees without any 
performance targets or other criteria to tie this bonus to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has any number of ways that they 
would like to see money spent — and the same dollars over and 
over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the priorities of this government is to 
maintain good employees and to maintain good services here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should understand 
that it’s all about choices. And this NDP government keeps 
making the wrong choices. They keep doing it again and again. 
There is no justification for spending 5 million to pay one group 
of employees a bonus for simply showing up for work during 
the centennial year. It’s not fair to the other members of the 
public service. It’s not fair to the other working men and 
women of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do some workers get a bonus for showing up 

for work in a province where we don’t have enough money for 
new cancer drugs and we have the longest waiting list in the 
country? It’s about choices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister Responsible 
for SaskTel and as a citizen of Saskatchewan, I take offence that 
the member opposite figures employees just show up. Like 
there has been constant disregard from that side of the House as 
to what these employees contribute to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we hear . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. The Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
we believe in public service and we believe in public employees 
and we believe in the good service that the employees and the 
Crown corporations provide to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see over and over that labour force attachment, 
recruitment and retention is huge, right across North America, 
not just in Saskatchewan, not just in Canada. They complain 
about the lack of work we’re doing for labour force and 
recruiting trained people. SaskTel is ahead of the game. They 
have a good employee base and will maintain it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Investment in Clinicare 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
the Minister of SaskTel has a favourite Crown compared to all 
the rest when it comes to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan. According to a Leader-Post article published on 
October 18, 2006, Clinicare was supposed to open an office in 
Saskatoon and have a minimum number of six people working 
by December 1 this year. Mr. Speaker, that December 1 
deadline has come and gone. Can the minister tell the Assembly 
today the status of the Clinicare office in Saskatoon and the 
number of its employees working in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out to the 
House that Investment Saskatchewan is an independent, 
arm’s-length board that was created by this government in order 
to depoliticize investment decisions. And I invite that member, 
Mr. Speaker, as I invited his colleague last day, to stand in this 
House and tell the House and tell the people whether they 
support the concept of the Investment Saskatchewan board and 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

Victoria Park Capital making these decisions, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of government. 
 
On this side of the House we do support that process, Mr. 
Speaker. And if the members opposite do not agree with that 
process, I invite them to say so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Investment 
Saskatchewan is so independent of this legislature that they 
have over $400 million of this province’s money to work with, 
Mr. Speaker, including $50 million to invest in the last year. 
Investment Saskatchewan put 3 million of those dollars of 
equity financing into Clinicare, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Investment 
Saskatchewan’s investment philosophy and guideline says 
business plans must be evaluated by, and I quote from their 
sheet, “. . . must result in job creation and increased economic 
activity in Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, it’s déjà vu of Pangaea 
all over again. Can the minister explain why Investment 
Saskatchewan put $3 million of taxpayers’ money into a 
Calgary corporation that is breaking Investment 
Saskatchewan’s own guidelines? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the 
House that the opposition has a practice of saying things in the 
House that are not quite accurate. And we will see what the 
facts are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say this. This is the same member, Mr. Speaker, 
who in the early 1990s advised this government to sell the 
shares of Cameco for $12 a share — that member, Mr. Speaker 
— when those shares were sold for $72 a share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the same member that told this House that the 
Government of Saskatchewan should sell its interest in the 
Husky upgrader for 7 cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker, 7 cents 
on the dollar. And what was recovered? 100 cents on the dollar, 
Mr. Speaker, 100 cents on the dollar. 
 
And now this member is going to lecture everybody about how 
to manage investment? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 
minister wants to fight the 1991 election all over again because 

they won that one. But they’re not going to win the next one, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Investment Saskatchewan 
should know quite a bit about Clinicare’s operations and why 
there is not an office open or employees in Saskatoon. 
 
The Leader-Post article goes on to say, and I quote, “. . . the 
company is giving up an equity stake and a seat on its 
five-member board as part of its agreement with Investment 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Investment Saskatchewan has a seat on the board. 
Then it should know why there is no office open in Saskatoon. 
Why did Investment Saskatchewan invest $3 million into a 
company it knew wasn’t going to fulfill its deal? Why are 
Saskatchewan families on the hook for another $3 million of 
Saskatchewan money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that member said in his last 
question that the assets of the people of Saskatchewan had been 
turned over to Investment Saskatchewan. I want to say to that 
member, to the House, Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. Those 
assets belong to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What has been turned over to Investment Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is the management of those investments and the ability 
to divest of investments and the ability to invest, Mr. Speaker. 
And Investment Saskatchewan has made that decision. 
Investment Saskatchewan will also defend that decision. And 
we will see what the facts are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No, I’m not interested, Mr. Speaker, in fighting the 1991 
election. But I am interested in pointing out that that member 
advised this government to sell the Cameco shares at $12. That 
member advised this government to sell the Lloydminster 
upgrader at 7 cents on the dollar. And the people need to know 
that’s the kind of advice you get from the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To quote from 
Investment Saskatchewan’s own investment philosophy and 
guidelines, one, “To enhance Saskatchewan’s long term 
economic growth and diversification through . . . investments.” 
And two, “must result in job creation and increased economic 
activity in Saskatchewan.” Not in Calgary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why has Investment Saskatchewan invested $3 million in 
Clinicare for jobs and economic development in Calgary when 
clearly the arrangement was to have it in Saskatoon? Where are 
the jobs in Saskatoon, and what is that board member doing? 



December 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

They should be informing the government why those jobs are 
not here and why that business isn’t open in Saskatchewan. 
What’s happening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the member 
says, where are the jobs in Saskatoon? I’ll tell the member 
where are the jobs in Saskatoon. According to the CJWW, it 
says the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce says it’s reached the 
8,000 new-jobs target it had been seeking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The chamber says 8,000 jobs per year is 
the number needed to keep young people in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The chamber says, “. . . the job creation is 
proof that with the right government policies in place, both the 
City and the province have an amazing potential.” That’s where 
the jobs in Saskatoon are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Funding for Synchrotron Research 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I’m glad the hon. minister quoted the entire 
transcript from the CJWW, Mr. Speaker, because the entire 
transcript quite rightly highlighted out what the proper 
government policies can do for this province’s policies in terms 
of business tax reform, which came from this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has been asking my 
colleague, the member for Cannington, what about the position 
of the Saskatchewan Party. Well our position with respect to 
taxpayers’ money is that it ought not to be used to pick winners 
and losers in mature industries, in companies. We ought to stop 
that investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rather, rather, Mr. Speaker, the government could be focusing 
on research and development. Last week Saskatchewan’s 
innovation sector got a healthy injection in federal research 
dollars from the Canada Foundation for Innovation — the three 
synchrotron projects awarded 25.8 million towards a total cost 
of 64.5 million. For these beams, for this activity there needs to 
be matching dollars. Is the government considering . . . Will the 
government match these dollars and leverage this important 
research and development and innovation at the synchrotron in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Advanced Ed and Employment. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well as the public will know, it was the NDP government that 
brought the synchrotron to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It is because of the support of the NDP 
government that a number of other beamlines have been built. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could assure the public and members of the 
House that it will be an NDP government that continues to grow 
research and development jobs in the city of Saskatoon. So we 
truly will reach the potential of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister. The 
government clearly has $3 million for a Calgary-based 
company that doesn’t look like it’s going to be investing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Will they be matching these dollars 
and leveraging important research and development and 
innovation at the University of Saskatchewan synchrotron in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Advanced Ed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Given that an NDP government 
brought the largest scientific project in the history of this 
country to Saskatchewan and given that we have continued to 
invest in additional medical beamlines, I can assure the House 
that we will continue to attract and recruit scientists to the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In an article from The 
StarPhoenix from Wednesday, November 29 regarding this 
funding resource coming to the synchrotron and the importance 
for matching dollars, here’s a quote from the article, and I am 
quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

While landing the CFI dollars is a big step, researchers 
must secure funds to cover the remaining 60 per cent cost 
of the new beams. In the past, the provincial government 
has pitched in for some University of Saskatchewan 
projects that garnered CFI funds. 
 
Advanced Education and Employment Minister Pat 
Atkinson said Tuesday four U of S teams who received 
CFI funds this year will have to apply for matching funds 
. . . [in next year’s] budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve got standing amounts of money — 25 
million a year for SPUDCOs [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company], for companies out of Calgary, for 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

investing in mature industries. But researchers, people who 
want to pursue an innovation agenda, they have to apply and 
hope for the benevolence of the government. When will it offer 
a true vision and a proactive plan for innovation in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know how the Leader of 
the Opposition likes to create his policy on the fly as he reads 
The StarPhoenix or the Regina Leader-Post. In fact I clearly 
remember that they have decided to get rid of tobacco money 
going into Sask Party coffers after he discovered that they had 
taken tobacco money from the industry in 2005. 
 
I want to assure the public that it is this government that 
brought the largest scientific project in this country to 
Saskatchewan. And it is this government that has significantly 
increased research money into our two universities. All you 
have to do is go to the U of R [University of Regina] and U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan], and see the construction and the 
equipment and the scientists. And I can assure the public that 
we will do everything to ensure that that continues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of the Environment. 
 

Electronic Waste Recycling Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to announce that, effective February 1, 2007, 
Saskatchewan will have a province-wide, industry-led 
electronic waste recycling program — the first program of its 
kind in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The term e-waste describes a wide variety 
of electronic products that have come to their end of life. This 
term, Mr. Speaker, applies to both consumer and business 
electronic equipment. 
 
Under normal usage, electronic equipment poses little or new 
hazard. However many electronic products do contain materials 
such as lead, cadmium, and mercury which, if not handled 
properly, could have environmental impacts and cause health 
and safety concerns. Mr. Speaker, Environment Canada 
estimates that up to 71,000 tonnes of electronic wastes were 
discarded by Canadians in 2005. Although some of 
Saskatchewan’s e-waste is being collected and reused by local 
recyclers, much of our e-waste ends up in our landfill. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Beginning February 1, 2007, Saskatchewan consumers will 
have the green option of taking their end-of-life materials to any 

one of the 71 SARCAN depots across the province. Mr. 
Speaker, this program will initially collect personal computers 
— both notebook and desktop — computer monitors, 
televisions, and desktop printers. Additional electronic 
materials will be added as the program develops. 
 
The Saskatchewan waste electronics equipment program — or 
SWEEP — board and the SARCAN have finalized their 
contract and are now in the process of completing final 
preparation for implementation of the e-waste collection and 
recycling program. Many electronics products contain valuable 
materials that can be recovered and reused in the manufacture 
of the next generation of electronics, helping to conserve natural 
resources such as copper and steel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new recycling program will also bring with it a 
direct increase in the opportunities for employment for those 
persons with disabilities, served through the SARCAN system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is another fine example of 
government, business, and community working together to 
build a bright, strong, green future for Saskatchewan families, 
making Saskatchewan the best place for young people to work, 
live, and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to thank the Minister of Environment for providing me with 
a copy of his remarks earlier today. It certainly is helpful when 
responding to his statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly, on this side of the House, have no 
problems with the program that the minister announced. It is a 
step in the right direction. We need to segregate these electronic 
computers and equipment, Mr. Speaker, and keep them from 
going into the landfill sites. As the minister said, there are 
compounds in those electronic devices that could have 
long-term effects to the environment. And if we have a program 
in place where we can recycle them and reuse them, Mr. 
Speaker, that is certainly a step in the right direction. 
 
The one concern that we would have, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
have is that what we are seeing from this government is a 
piecemeal approach to many of these issues when they said two 
years ago that they were going to have an overall master plan, 
and they called it the green strategy, Mr. Speaker. We see this 
government announce programs that deal specific issues within 
the environment and other areas, but we don’t see the master 
plan, Mr. Speaker. And there was considerable work done by 
the former minister and his officials where they consulted with 
various groups across this province, Mr. Speaker, and to this 
date we really haven’t seen any tangible results. I suspect that 
this may be a part of the overall results, but I think we need to 
see the overall plan before we . . . in conjunction with these 
specific programs, Mr. Speaker. But having said that, Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly feel that this is a step in the right 
direction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



December 4, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 

HealthLine Adds Mental Health Crisis Support 
to its Services 

 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many of us 
in this Assembly will be aware, Saskatchewan residents have 
benefited since 2004 from HealthLine, Saskatchewan’s 
confidential health advice telephone line, 1-877-800-0002. Mr. 
Speaker, this innovative service has been one of our province’s 
most effective and important means of improving access to 
health information and health services, making health advice 
from a qualified registered nurse just a phone call away. 
 
In the spring of 2005, Mr. Speaker, as part of the Premier’s 
Project Hope, HealthLine services were enhanced to provide 
support and information around the clock for individuals in a 
crisis situation related to substance abuse and addiction. This is 
a simple way for people in crisis to quickly find the help they 
need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased and proud today to speak of yet 
another important enhancement to HealthLine, an enhancement 
that demonstrates this government’s commitment to building a 
better future for all of our citizens. As of Friday, December 1, 
HealthLine now has mental health professionals available on a 
24-hour basis and trained to assist callers in crisis due to a 
mental health concern or illness. This is a tremendously 
important service, Mr. Speaker, for anyone in an urban or rural 
community who needs help coping with mental health or 
addictions concerns. Now when these individuals contact 
HealthLine, they can speak to a professional registered 
psychiatric nurse or social worker trained to handle crisis calls 
and provide referrals. 
 
This is not only an important and valuable addition to the 
services offered by HealthLine, Mr. Speaker, it also honours a 
commitment made by this government with other Canadian 
provinces and territories in 2004 to enhance community mental 
health crisis response. And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the 
first province in Canada to offer dedicated mental health crisis 
support through its telephone health advice line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I ask all members present to 
join me in congratulating HealthLine for its excellent work in 
facilitating this service enhancement and for its continued 
valuable service to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand and respond to the ministerial statement. I thank the 
minister for sending his remarks over in this bright pink folder. 
I couldn’t miss them. So thank you for that. 
 
It’s interesting that we’re talking about mental health today and 

the situation with this new mental health line that people can 
phone. As I was kind of surfing through some channels last 
night, I happened to go by a story that was on SCN 
[Saskatchewan Communications Network] regarding the mental 
health facility, Souris Valley in Weyburn, and it’s interesting 
because they were trying to figure out what to do with that 
building right now. But it talked about the history of Souris 
Valley and the issues around mental health. And, you know, as 
growing up fairly close to Weyburn, I kind of remember the 
facility, although I was interested in how it was starting to look 
at moving its patients out into the community, you know, 40 to 
50 years ago. 
 
But I was amazed and struck by the fact that there had been a 
population of over 2,000 people in that facility and hence that’s 
why the size of the facility. But how we’ve come a long ways 
from watching that show, and I was watching that show and 
just, you know, thinking of the impact that the changes in 
mental health and dealing with people so much better now than 
what we did 50 and 60 and 70 years ago. It’s just an amazing 
progression, you know, for the best for sure, as to how we are 
dealing with people with mental health issues. 
 
I know though, speaking to a number of people in this area, 
whether it’s psychiatrists or psych nurses, that many of them 
have a real concern that we just don’t have enough 
professionals. Whether it’s psychiatrists or any other of the 
professionals that deal with people with mental health issues, 
they feel that we are short-staffed in so many situations. 
 
Now this help line will move towards alleviating some of that, I 
guess, as people can phone from wherever they are in the 
province. But I really would stress to this government that it 
doesn’t take, it doesn’t take the place of or substitute for 
professionals in the field dealing with people that are having 
mental health issues. And so although this is a step and, as the 
minister said, falls in with some of the guidelines from 2004, 
there are many more steps that need to be taken. As I said, this 
is no substitute for having professionals, the proper complement 
of professionals, to deal with people dealing with mental health 
issues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to table 
the annual report for the Saskatchewan Legislative Library for 
the period ending March 31, 2006. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will table responses to written questions no. 204 through 221 
inclusive. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 204 to 221 inclusive 
have been submitted. The Chair recognizes the Government 
House Leader. 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of all four of the standing committees — the Standing 
Committee on the Economy, Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, Human Services, as well as the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies — I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:39.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................652 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................654 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................654 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................654 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................654 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................654 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................654 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................654 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................655 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Results of Leadership Conventions 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Health Research Week 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Ambassadors for Community and Province 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 International Day of Disabled Persons 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................656 
 A Shining Example of Persistence and Purpose 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................656 
 New Democratic Party Nomination for Regina Rosemont 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................656 
 Support for Biofuel Production 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................657 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Runaways from Red Willow Centre 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................657 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................657 
 Centennial Plan at SaskTel 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................658 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................658 
 Investment in Clinicare 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................659 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................659 
 Funding for Synchrotron Research 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................661 
 
 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Electronic Waste Recycling Program 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................662 
 HealthLine Adds Mental Health Crisis Support to its Services 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................663 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................663 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................663 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................663 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................663 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


