






























































Hansard: November 02, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 6A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 163 
 November 2, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to present some more petitions to this 
Assembly on behalf of constituents in the province of 
Saskatchewan and in this case regarding a dialysis unit in the 
Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks of Whitewood and Broadview. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
again today on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills 
concerning the highway condition in the area. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is signed by individuals from 
the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are very concerned about Highway No. 49. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Kelvington, Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Preeceville 
and Endeavour 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with the government not funding the drug Avastin. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Carnduff. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of funding 
for the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the city of Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
several pages of a petition from citizens that are concerned 
about the access road to Bruno which happens to be on the very 
narrow Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 
 

And the petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by citizens from Bruno, 
Humboldt, and Winnipeg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are very concerned about the Estevan 
Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from my constituency 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

in Estevan, and also by people from Carlyle and Kisbey. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens of Biggar: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar, Sonningdale, and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people across 
Saskatchewan who are concerned that Saskatchewan does not 
have a dedicated children’s hospital and increasingly they’re 
having to take their children to Alberta for the care they need. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a children’s hospital 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from the Willowgrove and Erindale 
areas of Saskatoon and the town of Vonda. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Grenfell 
and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition on 
the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade Highway 20 to 
primary weight status: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Liberty and Nokomis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to give a petition that the Saskatchewan government 
made a decision not to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
This is from the good people of Oxbow, Carnduff, 
Gainsborough, and Kisbey. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise again in 
the House today to present yet another petition regarding 
funding the drug Avastin. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens throughout 
Saskatchewan, and I am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m once again 
pleased to rise in the Assembly to present a petition on 
Highway 36. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so that it can return to being a 
safe and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by the people of 
Coronach. I so present. 
 
 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to Rule 15(7) are 
hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
how much money has Investment Saskatchewan given to 
Beauval Forest Industries or Northwest Communities 
Wood Products? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have another 
question. I give notice that I, day no. 11, ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Industry and Resources: 
to date how much money has the department given to 
Northwest Community Wood Products or Beauval Forest 
Industries? 

 
And I have similar questions for the Minister Responsible for 
Northern Affairs and the Minister Responsible for 
Environment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: in the 2005-2006 fiscal year, how many 
nominations were received for the Saskatchewan Youth 
Award? 

 
I also have a second question: 
 

In 2005-2006 fiscal year, how many Saskatchewan people 
received the Saskatchewan Youth Award? 
 

And I have similar questions for fiscal year 2006-2007. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what was the original 
completion date of the Finance headquarters on College 
Avenue and Albert Street in Regina, and what is the new 
projected completion date of the same building? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a second question. I give notice that on day 
no. 11 I’ll ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Finance: what are the cost overruns of 
the Finance headquarters on College Avenue and Albert 
Street in Regina? 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — For introduction of guests, members, it is my 
pleasure today to introduce to you Ms. Melissa Bennett who is 
here in this Chamber for her first time. Melissa was appointed 
Legislative Librarian by the Board of Internal Economy on July 
7, the year 2006. 
 
Melissa began her library career in 1991 at the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library and remained here for seven years before 
moving to the Provincial Library within Sask Learning, where 
her most recent position was director of library planning and 
administration. Ms. Bennett demonstrates a deep respect for the 
library as a knowledge institution that supports the 
parliamentary process. Melissa is looking forward to meeting 
with MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from both 
caucuses to discuss the vision for the library. 
 
With her today is her mother, Betty Bennett, and staff from the 
Legislative Library: Pat Kolesar, Leslie Polsom, Bette 
Desjarlais, Maria Swarbrick, and Kim Hagel. Members, would 
you please welcome Melissa Bennett to this Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
Celebrates 50th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, 50 years ago, a number of 
labour groups from across the province came together in the 
spirit of solidarity to represent the issues of the working people 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 50th 
anniversary of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
Men and women from provincial, national, and international 
trade unions, as well as district labour councils, banded together 
to achieve a common goal — social justice. Today the 
federation represents over 93,500 members from 35 national 
and international unions. Their affiliate membership belongs to 
over 700 locals throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
It is because of tireless work of groups like the SFL 
[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] that the voice of labour is 
strong in our province. As a result, incidents like the Mosaic 
mine fire near Esterhazy can end without injury to workers. 
Because of the partnership between labour, management, and 
this NDP [New Democratic Party] government, all 72 miners 
escaped unharmed. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what the fate of Saskatchewan’s 
workers would be under a government that didn’t respect their 
rights. For example, the Saskatchewan Party has referred to 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

occupational health and safety legislation as red tape and 
regulation. Perhaps they could explain to the federation what 
they would do for the labour climate in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join me in 
congratulating the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour for its 
first 50 years. May there be many more to come. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Order of Merit Recipients 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening I was pleased to join His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan and Her Honour, the Premier, 
Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, as well as numerous 
dignitaries and guests at the investiture of Saskatchewan’s 2006 
recipients Order of Merit ceremony. 
 
As many people are aware, the Saskatchewan Award of Merit 
was established in 1985 as the province’s highest distinction, 
and in 1988 the name was changed to Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Saskatchewan Order of Merit recognizes individual 
excellence and outstanding contributions to the social, cultural, 
and economic well-being of the province and its residents. The 
order highlights exceptional merit in such areas of endeavour as 
the arts, agriculture, business and industry, community 
leadership, occupations or professions, public service, research, 
sport and recreation, and community service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the numerous names presented to the awards 
advisory committee, five names were brought forward to 
receive the Saskatchewan Order last evening. They are Mr. 
Calvin D. Abrahamson, Mrs. Anna G. Ingham, Dr. David L. 
Kaplan, Mr. Lester D. Lafond, and Dr. William A. Waiser who 
has a special connection to this Assembly as he happens to be 
the father of our research staffer, Jessica Paul. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the five members who this year 
were awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Accomplishments of University of Saskatchewan Student 
 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to speak of the accomplishments of Kelly Paton, a 
young constituent of Saskatoon Sutherland currently attending 
the University of Saskatchewan. For the past three years Ms. 
Paton has been enrolled in the engineering physics program, a 
course of study in which students develop a thorough 
understanding of the fundamentals of physics and then apply 

the knowledge to practical problems. Ms. Paton is also earning 
a bachelor’s degree in math, volunteers for Engineers Without 
Borders, and Spectrum, the college’s tri-annual exhibition to 
promote science and technology to the community. 
 
For the last two summers, Ms. Paton has been awarded an 
undergraduate student research award from the Natural 
Sciences And Engineering Research Council and spent this past 
summer doing research at the prestigious Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology in Boston where she worked testing 
parts for a prototype particle detector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kelly Paton is an intelligent and gifted young 
woman. She’s excelling in her chosen field and is an excellent 
example for other young women with similar aspirations. But 
my favourite point about Ms. Paton is this, Mr. Speaker. When 
asked about what she’d do after graduation she said, and I 
quote, “I want to be able to help people; that’s my only 
criteria.” Clearly, Mr. Speaker, Kelly Paton is a fine 
representative of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

High-Speed Internet Access in Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP recently started to follow through on its laudable goal of 
bringing high-speed Internet to northern schools. Typically 
however this tired, old, NDP government once again failed to 
do its homework before acting. 
 
In May of this year, SaskTel was very proud to announce that a 
new wireless high-speed Internet tower had been constructed in 
Dore Lake. However someone failed to note that the school in 
Dore Lake had been closed in June 2005. 
 
This could be forgiven in thinking that even if there was no 
longer a school operating to access this wireless high-speed 
Internet, that at least — at the very least — the residents of the 
area would be able to access the service. Unfortunately that has 
not been the case, Mr. Speaker. As residents as close as 3 
kilometres from the tower have been unable to gain access. 
 
One can only hope that in the future this tired, old NDP 
government will pay a little more attention to the schools that 
it’s closing when it’s deciding which schools are in line to 
receive high-speed wireless Internet access. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

SaskEnergy Provides Natural Gas Commodity Services 
to Lloydminster 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday SaskEnergy 
started providing natural gas commodity service to residents 
and businesses on the Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster. Due 
to its continued public interest, SaskEnergy officials began 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

discussions with Lloydminster mayor, Ken Baker, and city 
manager, Roger Brekko, and other city officials in November 
last year regarding the possibility of service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy had been working since early spring 
of this year to make the project a reality. It was estimated at the 
time SaskEnergy would need at least 250 customers to be able 
to acquire gas in a practical and economically feasible manner 
for this market. Well, Mr. Speaker, over 500 people attended an 
open house held in Lloydminster June 6. And over 900 letters 
and contracts were sent out in August to residential and 
business customers who had expressed an interest in this 
service. 
 
As a result, as of October 26 there were 780 residents and 23 
businesses who have signed contracts, and they began being 
customers of SaskEnergy effective yesterday, November 1. 
That represents more than one-third of the potential customers 
in the city of Lloydminster. 
 
I want to particularly commend Mayor Ken Baker; Beechy 
product and now city manager, Roger Brekko; and his city 
officials and SaskEnergy officials for working together to make 
this a reality for the residents and businesses of Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Plans and Ideas for the Future 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday to a 
packed audience at the Regina Chamber of Commerce, the 
Leader of the Official Opposition unveiled the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan to address the NDP-created labour shortage crisis 
in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — It should not come as any surprise to the 
people of Saskatchewan that when it comes to new ideas, it is 
the Saskatchewan Party that is out in front, and that tired, 
worn-out NDP government is left trailing behind. By the 
Minister of Industry’s own admission, there are 10 to 15,000 
job vacancies in this province. Yet last year we lost over 4,500 
people. Imagine the potential boom in this province if we had a 
government with a plan to fill those vacancies. Imagine the 
number of happy families if Saskatchewan had a real plan to 
retain our young people and build a future for them here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan just don’t have 
to imagine any more. They can visit our website. Instead of 
more NDP studies and committees, the Saskatchewan Party 
plan is about action; tax incentives; more money to CBOs 
[community-based organization] and food banks; building a 
better future for First Nations people; long-term funding 
increases for post-secondary institutions; a plan to retain our 
youth and increase immigration; and finally, Mr. Speaker, a 
commitment by a Saskatchewan Party government to end 
mandatory retirement and allow people over 65 the right to 
work. 
 

But we know that every time the opposition puts forward new 
ideas, that tired, old, worn-out NDP government that ran out of 
ideas long time ago steals our ideas. Yesterday it didn’t take 
more than an hour that they were agreeing with us on 
mandatory retirement. Mr. Speaker, it just proves that there’s 
one party in this province with the ideas and the vision for the 
future, and it’s not the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Party’s Attitude 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
good news for Saskatchewan really is bad news for the 
Saskatchewan Party. That’s why they take every opportunity to 
run this province down. We read a list of good news headlines, 
and the next thing you know the masters of doom and gloom 
over there are up on their feet rattling off any and every 
negative news story they can find. The nattering nabobs of 
negativity is what they are and all they are, Mr. Speaker, but at 
least they’re consistent. 
 
When a young person writes a letter questioning whether or not 
to move here, the Leader of the Opposition tells them all the 
things he sees wrong with the province. To quote the member 
from Thunder Creek, “Saskatchewan is in a death spiral.” To 
quote the member from Silver Springs, “We are left in the dust 
by every jurisdiction.” This is what they broadcast to the people 
of Saskatchewan and beyond, Mr. Speaker, day in, day out — 
non-stop negativity. 
 
And they like to say that Saskatchewan needs a new brand, Mr. 
Speaker. Well I would ask members to remember what 
happened to Coca-Cola, one of the largest corporations in the 
world, when they decided to change brands, and they released a 
new brand, Mr. Speaker, the notion of New Coke. The new 
brand was rejected, Mr. Speaker. And why? For the same 
reason that the Sask Party will be rejected — because they’re 
just too bitter. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Minister’s Responsibility for Children At Risk 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning the Children’s Advocate appeared on radio. This 
independent officer of the legislature had this to say about the 
minister’s performance on the safe house file. And I quote: 
 

Why is he asking me to act as a substitute parent? Why 
doesn’t he exercise his responsibility as the parent? 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the minister has failed in his 
responsibility as a parent to these children. To the Premier: will 
he fire this incompetent minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have today in the 
province of Saskatchewan a minister of the Department of 
Community Resources who is deeply concerned about children 
in our province, deeply concerned particularly about the 
children who are being abused on our streets. Of that, Mr. 
Speaker, I am absolutely sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am equally sure that the minister has a focus. 
That focus is on those children and making life better for those 
children. That focus is to take the advice of the Children’s 
Advocate. That focus is to deal specifically with issues around 
Oyate. 
 
But number three, Mr. Speaker, that focus is to look at this issue 
in a broader context, to look at all that needs to be done to 
protect the children of Saskatchewan. This minister, Mr. 
Speaker, has a focus on making life better for those children 
because they too are part of today’s Saskatchewan family. And 
for that reason, I have no reason, no reason not to support the 
continued work of this minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly that 
the minister has a focus, and his focus is his own political 
agenda. 
 
The Children’s Advocate is also concerned that the minister is 
using the safe house report as a prop. He said the minister 
clearly doesn’t understand that report. And I quote: 
 

I’m concerned. It’s not only a misunderstanding. It’s a 
misrepresentation of the facts and a misrepresentation of 
my role. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government allowing a minister to 
misrepresent the facts on this file? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that I fully respect the role of 
the Children’s Advocate. It is our government that put the 
Office of the Children’s Advocate in place. And, Mr. Speaker, 
not only did the committee — which our members hold a 
majority on — agree to have the Children’s Advocate and the 
Provincial Auditor look at Oyate. Because that’s where the 
problems began when we started talking about Oyate is to make 
sure that people were aware what was going on and what the 
solutions were. We engaged the provincial advocate and the 
auditor. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the advocate didn’t only look at Oyate. He 
also looked at the department and the systemic challenges that 
our department had. And, Mr. Speaker, we fully accept that and, 
Mr. Speaker, again I’ll reiterate that we have recommendations 
that we intend to follow. We respect the office of the Children’s 

Advocate, and we fully intend to use some of his advice which I 
agree with. But ultimately I am responsible. We will make the 
correct choice. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not the 
Children’s Advocate’s responsibility. It’s that minister’s 
responsibility and it’s time he started doing it. Mr. Speaker, the 
Children’s Advocate is frustrated with this minister and so are 
the people of Saskatchewan. The minister is not giving answers. 
He’s not reading his own briefing notes. He’s ignoring his 
department’s own advice on the future of the safe house and 
he’s not explaining his bizarre decisions. The minister has 
failed utterly on this issue. He’s failed the most vulnerable 
children in our province. Mr. Speaker, when will the Premier 
fire this incompetent minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what I have in front of me 
as a minister — and I’ll point to that member once again — and 
this is a recommendation on page 37 of the provincial 
Children’s Advocate in which we’re talking about one of the 
points that he raised when he talked about, and I quote: 
 

Recommendation SYS.14(06) 
 
That the Department of Community Resources and Oyate 
establish a collaborative partnership process within 60 
days of the date of issue of this report, to develop a shared 
vision and common service delivery principles for Oyate. 
 

And for me it’s black and white. I think the advice that we said 
we were going to listen to was the Children’s Advocate. We 
were not going to listen to your advice. And all you’re doing is 
bringing as much politics as you can out here in your quest for 
power. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I remind the member to direct his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’ll point out, I’ll point out that this is an official document 
that the Assembly received from an independent officer, Mr. 
Speaker. And again the advice is clear. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He should also 
take the advice of his own department. The Children’s 
Advocate chose these words to describe the minister’s handling 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

of the safe house file: “total inconsistency.” 
 
This government has no problems rejecting all kind of 
recommendations before. Now the minister says he’s bound by 
this report. The Children’s Advocate says that’s not true, Mr. 
Speaker. Why does . . . the Premier explain this inconsistency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is really important is 
that this is the minister’s decision. I will decide if and when to 
shut down Oyate or to continue to move forward. My primary 
responsibility is the well-being of the children. And when we 
ask for advice from really solid organizations and offices, such 
as the Children’s Advocate’s office, we intend to heed that 
advice and listen to that advice. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out, thank goodness for many 
of the other folks that are supporting the minister in trying to 
care for some of these children, and many other children, 
because we have a great CBO sector. We have many groups 
that are really active in the community. We have the Office of 
the Children’s Advocate. We have our staff with the minister’s 
office. There’s a myriad of support mechanisms out there for 
families and for children. 
 
Thank goodness we have these processes in place, and that’s 
why I point out again, I respect the office of the Children’s 
Advocate. We will deal with the report, which is black and 
white; it says this is what we need to do to resolve some of the 
issues. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, he continued to use the report 
as a prop instead of doing his job and looking after the safety of 
these children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate says we don’t even know 
if these kids are safe. The Children’s Advocate says that. 
 
What we’ve seen this week is the height of hypocrisy. Here we 
have an NDP government that always claims to be defenders of 
the poor and the weak, and now we have the minister cutting 
these children loose without care. His behaviour flies in the face 
of what his party stands for. This minister stands for nothing 
beyond his own political survival. Mr. Speaker, how can the 
Premier continue to allow this to go on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the last lesson that I need 
of poverty is from that member, Mr. Speaker. I come from an 
area where I see poverty every day. And we start talking about 

hypocrisy, I’d say to the gentleman across the way, maybe he 
should get a big, fat mirror here and have a look at himself. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most important thing that I would 
point out is that we’re trying to find some solutions. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, what is really important is that we’re making 
good progress with this government. We’re the ones that set up 
the Office of the Children’s Advocate. We’re the ones that are 
going to respond to the recommendations of the all-party 
committee, and we’re the ones . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And the reason why, Mr. Speaker, I 
accuse the opposition of playing politics of this game because 
obviously we have said on many occasions that the children that 
were formerly at Oyate and those that may be sexually 
exploited, there is a support mechanism in place for them. They 
are at Ranch Ehrlo. We’ve said that many, many times. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to build on that success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Supply of Radiologists in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Dr. 
Ian Waddell was the last radiologist to leave the Prince Albert 
Victoria Hospital. In 2003, radiologist Dr. Holly Wells left 
Prince Albert. At that time Dr. Waddell made his concerns 
about staffing shortage public in a letter to the editor of the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald dated November 5, 2003. Mr. 
Speaker, I need to stress that date — November 5, 2003. That’s 
three years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This NDP government has sat back as radiologists were 
experiencing unpleasant working conditions and stressful 
schedules in the Prince Albert area. Three years ago this 
government knew of a shortage of radiologists in Prince Albert 
and did absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. And as a consequence, 
people in the Prince Albert area’s health has been jeopardized. 
When will he do his job and start attracting radiologists to the 
Prince Albert area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite indicated that the good doctor had left Prince 
Albert and I do not believe that was the case — another 
misrepresentation of the facts in the health system, Mr. Speaker. 
She has, I believe, left the hospital and gone to work in private 
practice. Mr. Speaker, she is still doing very good work for 
patients and people in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are stresses on the system throughout 
Saskatchewan, throughout Canada, and the regional health 
authorities — in which I have complete confidence, Mr. 
Speaker — are taking actions to provide services that will in 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

fact provide benefit to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are stresses in the Prince Albert system 
today. Interim measures have been put in place, Mr. Speaker, 
while recruiting efforts are continuing. Mr. Speaker, I have 
confidence that the interim measures will provide assistance . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday Prince 
Albert’s chief surgeon, Randy Friesen, said that this is 
unprecedented for a hospital this size in Canada. He went on to 
say that his patients’ safety was a concern to him, and I quote, 
“I’m not prepared to have my patients take these kind of 
chances.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, somebody’s lives are at risk because this 
government hasn’t acted in the last three years on the shortage 
of radiologists in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. When will this 
minister start recruiting radiologists to the Prince Albert area, 
but health care professionals throughout this province so we 
don’t see more people leaving the public system to operate in 
the private system, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One 
week ago this Chamber began its session, Mr. Speaker. And on 
the morning of Thursday one week ago, Mr. Speaker, we had a 
representation, the prorogation speech in which we took a look 
at what’s happening in this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year’s budget . . . or this year’s Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, back a year ago, announced a new recruitment agency 
for the province of Saskatchewan which we funded, 
implemented, and is now in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Throne Speech indicated greater support for 
health care in this province. And in the budget in March, Mr. 
Speaker, for this current year, we have record commitments to 
financial resources into the health care field. Mr. Speaker, it 
said we would concentrate on recruitment and retention and we 
put into place an extra $25 million this year for recruitment and 
retention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago we announced intentions and over the 
years . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
 

Fees for Cancer Patients 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to cancer 
treatment in Saskatchewan we know the NDP government has 
failed to fund Avastin, the standard of care for colorectal 
cancer. And while they haven’t done this, I’ll tell you what they 
have done. They’ve started nickel and diming cancer patients. 
It’s not enough that Terry Rak of Saskatoon has already spent 
$40,000 of his own money on Avastin. Now he’s being asked to 
jump through more administrative hoops to pay for copies of 
his own test results. 
 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency used to provide these free to 
cancer patients but now forms have to be filled out, fees paid 
out, other lineups gone through, and forms mailed out weeks 
later. Will the minister quit nickel and diming cancer patients 
and get rid of this offensive policy? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Names for Political Parties 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is, my question is for the Premier. We know things are 
going very badly for the governing party, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
known this for some time; the by-election in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy demonstrated it. But just how badly it’s going maybe is 
evidenced more today in the newspapers of the province 
because we find out that the NDP, Mr. Speaker, the New 
Democratic Party is considering — what now? — a name 
change, Mr. Speaker. They’re considering the prospect of 
changing their name. And you know who’s in favour of it? Why 
the Minister of Industry is in favour of it. The same minister 
that pulled muscles opposing our notion that the province needs 
a rebranding. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: is it that bad? Is their polling 
that bad? Are they that low in the polls and in public support 
that they’re now looking at changing their name, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, now this invites a variety 
of comment. But first of all let me tell you about some of the 
polls that I’m interested in. The poll that tells me there’s 
105,000 young people working in this province, the largest 
number that we’ve ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A poll that tells me the major financial 
predictors of this country, including the Toronto Dominion 
Bank and the Canadian Bank of Commerce and so on, saying 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

that our growth levels are going to set record highs. That’s the 
kind of information I’m interested in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for that leader to stand up and talk about a party name 
change, well if there was ever a pot calling a kettle black, this is 
it. I mean that’s the group of conservatives that had no 
alternative, no alternative but to change their name to hide from 
their record. That’s exactly what they did. Everybody knows 
that, everybody sees through it. They offered a few treats so the 
few Liberals would join them. The Liberals soon found out it’s 
a conservative party — no it’s a reformed conservative party 
and they had to get a new name to hide from their history, Mr. 
Speaker. You want to talk about names, I’ll talk about names. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — It would be a lot easier to take the Premier 
seriously if his own front bench cabinet minister wasn’t saying 
in today’s paper that they’re considering changing their name, 
Mr. Speaker. This is amazing. Mr. Speaker, we’re getting used 
to the NDP stealing stuff from the party. They steal our ideas 
and that’s fine. We’re here to offer them to the province. As late 
as yesterday they stole mandatory retirement from us when we 
raised it yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we hear the Minister of Industry say it’s not 
fair that we have Saskatchewan in our name. You know my 
daughter would say waah, waah, someone call the 
waah-ambulance, I think is what my daughter would say to that 
minister. 
 
So they want to steal our policies, they want to steal our name. 
Does the minister need some pens or some paper maybe we 
could send over, Mr. Speaker? The question to the Premier is 
this, why is he running from his record and does he honestly 
think, does he honestly think changing his name will help that 
moribund governing party opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is just too easy. He 
wants to talk about running from your record. I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, you can turn up any website around that has my 
biography on it and you will find out what I was doing in the 
1980s. I was a proud member of the New Democratic Party 
working in this legislature. That’s what I was doing in the 
1980s. I sat over there as a member of the opposition and I sat 
over here as part of the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I tell you, you just want to turn up the website of the 
Leader of the Opposition, check out what he was doing in the 
1980s. If you want to run from your record, there’s a great big 
gap — there’s a great big gap. He doesn’t want to talk about the 
fact that, when I and a number of the colleagues here came 
around as young members of this legislature, what did we find? 
Another young person running around this building at that time. 
I think his name was Mr. Brad Wall. That’s what I think his 
name was. He was working all over the building, Mr. Speaker. 

Now if you want to run from your record . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
stand on any platform in this province, in any forum of debate 
and stand firm on the record of this government under the 
leadership of the former premier and under my leadership on 
any platform . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I want to remind the Premier about . . . Order. 
On a point of order, I want to remind the Premier about the use 
of a member’s name. We are to refer to members in the 
Assembly by their title or by their constituency. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
believe that the NDP government is out of touch with youth, 
what with the leader of the party, the Premier, encouraging 
them to dial up their websites or to turn up the websites. We 
hear about it over and over again in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read through the Minister of Industry’s complete 
admission of failure in the paper today. Here’s what he said, 
here’s what the Minister of Industry said, he said, “I don’t think 
any political party should claim to represent all of 
Saskatchewan . . .” Oh is that right, Mr. Speaker — oh is that 
right? I wonder what parts of Saskatchewan they choose not to 
represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We work hard to represent the entire province, even though 
some don’t vote for us. So what parts of Saskatchewan does the 
Premier’s party not want to represent? Is it rural Saskatchewan? 
Is it cancer victims like Terry Rak? Mr. Speaker, is it vulnerable 
children who are supposed to be cared for by the most 
incompetent minister of Social Services this province has ever 
seen? Who is it in the province the Premier’s not interested in 
representing, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Very telling happening here. Yesterday, 
the Leader of the Opposition made some great fanfare about his 
plan to deal with labour market mobility. The very next day in 
the legislature, he doesn’t want to talk about that. No, he wants 
to talk about resolutions that are coming to the New Democratic 
Party convention, about name changes, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very interested to talk about a strategy for 
labour market development; to talk about a strategy that’s 
outlined in the Throne Speech to build the capacity of our 
young people for their future in this province. I’ll be very 
interested to debate in this Chamber making life better for 
today’s Saskatchewan families. That’s what we’re here to do. 
 
Because you see, Mr. Speaker, they’ll do anything to deflect 
from their record. They’ll do even more to deflect from their 
lack of policy and future planning for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Let’s debate some substantive issues in here. 
And let’s get a leader over there who for once would debate 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

some substantive issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we understand the NDP’s problem 
in terms of their name. They’re not new; they’re not very 
democratic; and based on the grim look from the member for 
Regina Dewdney, it’s not much of a party over there either, Mr. 
Speaker. So they need a new name. They need a new name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as always, the Saskatchewan Party is here to help 
the government. As always, we’re prepared to help them out in 
this quest for a new name. That’s why today we’re launching a 
new contest, Mr. Speaker. The contest is in order to help the 
NDP rename themselves. They just have to go to our website, 
our . . . they can tune in, dial up our website and they can find 
out a little bit about our name. 
 
We already have some submissions for their name because 
everywhere we go, Mr. Speaker, you’d be surprised how 
creative people are in terms of what they call that governing 
party opposite. There’s many new names. There’s the . . . 
We’ve seen it already with Highway 368, on signs; the no darn 
pavement, the new destruction party, new democratic potholes. 
There’s any number of suggestions out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier take this latest offer of help from 
the Sask Party? We’re prepared to help him rename his tired, 
old party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s great that we’re here in 
the legislature debating the names of our political parties 
because, I’m told, on the website of the Saskatchewan Party, it 
says, it says Saskatchewan’s conservative party. 
 
Now they’ve renamed themselves all right, but they can’t hide 
from that history. Now they even put it on their website. What 
we have in Saskatchewan today is the old, the old Conservative 
Party that we knew about in the 1980s. And now we have a 
party across the way that’s proving themselves, on a daily basis, 
to be nothing more than apologists for the federal Conservative 
Party. 
 
Every day we’re finding this group over here wanting to 
apologize for their friends in Ottawa as they destroy the 
Canadian Wheat Board, as they cut literacy, as they don’t stand 
with the softwood producers of Canada, and on and on it goes. 
 
So, you know, I prefer to debate policy and I prefer to debate 
philosophy, but today they want to debate the name of a party. 
Well their name is clear now. It’s the Saskatchewan 
conservative party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Industry says they 
need a new name. The Premier hasn’t denied it. He may think 
that party over there needs a new name. In about a year, in 
about a year from now they will have a new name, Mr. Speaker. 
They will be the official opposition party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Maybe, maybe, maybe. Either that or the third 
party. We’re not sure. The point is this, Mr. Speaker, the point 
is this. Today and for the last number of days, the member for 
Northwest has raised . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Please continue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, for the last number of 
days . . . Here’s why they’re searching. Here’s why they’re 
desperate. For the last number of days, the member from 
Northwest has raised and made a compelling case that that 
minister of DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment] has let down the most vulnerable children in our 
province. He doesn’t know his file. He’s not familiar with this 
most pressing issue before him. He doesn’t seem to have a clue, 
Mr. Speaker, and he’s more interested in politics, Mr. Speaker, 
than he is in the vulnerable children that are under his care. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why the NDP is desperate. That’s why . . . 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? They shouldn’t just be 
worried about politics. They ought to worry about the issues. So 
if the Premier is really serious about doing the right thing, why 
won’t he let this province have a say in who the governing party 
actually is? Why won’t he call an election in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this to you and 
to the people of Saskatchewan. This government, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Let me say this to you, Mr. Speaker, and 
through you to the people of Saskatchewan, through this 
Chamber to the people of Saskatchewan. This government is 
serious. This government is serious about making life better for 
Saskatchewan families. This government is serious about 
building a better future here for our young people. And this 
government and this minister particularly is extremely serious 
about making life better for the children of Saskatchewan, 
children some of whom are being exploited sexually on our 
streets. We are extremely serious about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition stood in his place and one 
more time he made a promise. He made that promise again — 
that come the next election, that we would be the official 
opposition. You know what, Mr. Speaker? I think I’ve heard 
that promise before five elections and just like every 
conservative, they don’t keep their promises. 
 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 

Changes to Taxes 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I am pleased to stand in the legislature again today to 
announce further changes to strengthen our economy and make 
this an even better place to live, to work, and to raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we are in a period of sustained economic 
growth and prosperity. Our economy has never been stronger. 
Our businesses, families, and communities are all benefiting 
from the changes and from the prosperity we’re seeing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is worth noting that under the leadership of this 
Premier, we’ve undertaken significant changes to simplify and 
reduce personal income taxes. We’ve reduced oil and gas 
royalties to stimulate investment. We’ve restructured potash 
and uranium royalties to stimulate production. We’ve cut the 
corporate income taxes and corporate capital taxes. We have cut 
farm property taxes, and we have cut the PST [provincial sales 
tax] to 5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we will do more. I want to advise the 
Assembly that on Tuesday, the cabinet approved a series of 
changes to make our business climate even more competitive. 
We will do this by introducing changes to the dividend tax 
credit and by reducing the small-business tax rate. 
 
It’s worth noting that when business income is distributed to 
shareholders in the form of dividends, this income is subject to 
both corporate tax and personal income tax. The dividend tax 
credit change will ensure that business income is not any longer 
subject to double taxation. It will also ensure that this income is 
taxed at rates similar to other forms of personal income. 
 
As such, I’m pleased to announce that we are establishing a 
new dividend tax credit rate of 11 per cent for dividends 
received from larger corporations. This change is effective for 
the 2006 taxation year. It means that Saskatchewan has now 
integrated the changes that were introduced by the federal 
government this spring. 
 
We are also decreasing the small-business dividend tax credit 
from 8 to 6 per cent to reflect reductions in the business 
corporate income tax rate introduced by our government. This 
change is effective for the 2007 taxation year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to announce that effective 
January 1, 2007, we are further reducing the corporate income 
tax rate for small businesses from five to four and a half per 
cent. By cutting small-business taxes, we are providing further 
incentive for people to invest and do business in our province. 
 
This change, in fact these changes build on the business tax cuts 
we’ve introduced in the 2006 budget and the 2 per cent PST cut 
we announced last week. By doing so, we are further 
strengthening our position as one of the most competitive 

business environments in Canada. 
 
It’s worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that since this Premier took 
office, we have made unprecedented strides in reducing tax 
levels in this province. Under his tenure, we have cut the 
small-business tax rate nearly in half, from eight per cent to 
four and a half per cent, which is what this announcement 
reflects today. 
 
It’s also worth noting that we’ve made changes to the 
small-business threshold, that I announced in the spring’s 
budget, to allow it to rise from $300,000 to $500,000 to 
recognize that small businesses are growing in this province. 
 
This is all good news, Mr. Speaker. It promotes equity in 
taxation, and it encourages investment here in Saskatchewan 
business. Mr. Speaker, together we are building a better future 
for Saskatchewan and in so doing, we are making life better for 
ordinary Saskatchewan families. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
respond to the minister’s statement. Three years ago when I first 
took my chair in this Legislative Assembly, we talked about the 
need for competitiveness in the Saskatchewan economy. Mr. 
Speaker, not only did we talk about it; we did something about 
it. 
 
Members on this side of the House, members across the 
province that belong to the Saskatchewan Party put a proposal 
together towards the Vicq commission. We talked about the 
need for competitiveness in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
need that small businesses, large businesses have articulated 
across this province. They want to be competitive. They want a 
government that gets out of the way and lets them do what they 
do best — create jobs and work on this economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased today to hear that the government is 
finally getting the message, that they’re working towards 
making this place a more competitive place to do business. It’s 
long overdue. A government that’s best before date has long 
expired, Mr. Speaker, I would say it’s about time that they’re 
doing this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m pleased to move Bill No. 2, The 
Provincial . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. Order 
please. We’ll just have to start over, here. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Finance. 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very happy to say this again and again and again. I’m very 
happy to move introduction of Bill No. 2, The Provincial Sales 
Tax Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 2, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 8, The Paramedics Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 8, The Paramedics Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, at the next sitting of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, 
The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 10, The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft 
Equipment Act/Loi sur les garanties internationales portant 

sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 11, The International Interests in Mobile 
Aircraft Equipment Act/Loi sur les garanties internationales 
portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 11, The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft 
Equipment Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to move first reading of The SaskEnergy 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 13, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[11:00] 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management 
and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 14, The Environmental Management 
and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Duncan.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment, the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue with 
my remarks and we have another day today of evidence of a 
opposition party suffering from post-Throne Speech traumatic 
stress syndrome. The first day that they heard the speech last 
week and then they started understanding what it meant as the 
days followed, we saw a lot of silence. But now things are 
starting to pop up all over the place and they’re looking at very 

many different things than what this Throne Speech is about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to talk yesterday for a little while 
about what it means to be a person who is concerned about the 
future and where that future is going to take us. Today all I 
want to do is quote one part from the Throne Speech and 
conclude with a poem written by our first Poet Laureate, Glen 
Sorestad, about the feeling and the emphasis that we, as the 
New Democrats, have for what it’s going to be for our children 
and our grandchildren and their children and their 
grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech we said that: 
 

All efforts in environmental protection will contribute to 
our goal of making life better for today’s families and help 
to build a better future here for our young people. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can do that in many ways that relates to 
the economy. It relates to how we protect the land that we have. 
It relates to how we build the agricultural economy. It relates to 
our education system and how we educate everybody to make 
sure that they’re ready for living here in this community and in 
our country. 
 
But I thought that it was appropriate to read one of Glen 
Sorestad’s poems which doesn’t talk about all that, but it gives 
an emphasis about what it means to have three generations 
working together. This is called “A Fishing Story” and it’s from 
his Leaving Holds Me Here, which was his book of poems that 
was put together the year that he was named the Poet Laureate. 
 

A Fishing Story 
 
We three stand side by side 
along the sandy shore of the river, 
fishing rods in hand — 
my eldest son, my grandson, 
not yet five, and me. 
We cast our lures into the water. 
Though the youngest has not 
yet mastered the casting skills 
he, too, is fisherman this day. 
 
His lack of skill does not matter 
because he is here with us and we 
are three generations of fishermen 
here on the pretext of fish. 
In truth we have come to share: 
this splendid water colour sunset, 
two grebes diving and resurfacing 
just beyond our casts, but most of all 
this time together, the three of us. 
 
And I wonder: will my grandson 
remember this, years from now when 
he has grandsons of his own? Will he 
recall with pleasure some moment past 
when he was one of three generations, 
three anglers in the fading light 
waiting for a fish to strike? 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s this kind of story that our artists, 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

our writers portray about what it means to live in Saskatchewan, 
which is really the impetus that leads this government to make 
plans not for 10 years or 20 years but for 50 years, and 
especially as we work as it relates to our green strategy and our 
green economy. It’s about these kinds of stories that we want to 
make sure that future generations can have the same 
opportunities, the same chance. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
work very hard to do that. And with that, I reiterate my resolve 
to vote in favour of the Throne Speech in support of the 
government agenda. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. And it’s a 
privilege to rise and speak on the debate arising from the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I was not able to be in the 
House for the first couple of days of this sitting. And so I’d like 
to take this opportunity to just mention my appreciation, as have 
many other members, for my friend and former colleague, the 
member for Martensville, Ben Heppner, who passed away just 
prior to the session. Ben Heppner was a true friend of mine. 
Ben Heppner was a man that I loved to work with; I loved to 
have conversation with. And I appreciated him for his many 
strengths and his resolve to make Saskatchewan a better 
province. And so along with Gail we do want to express our 
prayers and best wishes to Arlene and the children and the 
many people who loved our colleague, Ben Heppner. 
 
Also I want to take this opportunity on a more happy note to 
congratulate the new member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. Madam 
Speaker, an interesting thing happened during that by-election. 
For the first time in my life — and I have been involved in a lot 
of elections — I actually got to sit at a poll when the votes were 
counted. I had never, ever done that before. And I have to tell 
you I was sitting beside an older gentleman who was 
representing the NDP, quite an elderly gentleman, but he 
seemed to be fairly focused on his job as a scrutineer. And then 
a Liberal was sitting on the other side of me and the Liberal was 
quite chatty so we had a nice little visit. 
 
So I didn’t think too much about this NDP scrutineer that was 
scrutineering for my colleague, the winner in the Big Muddy 
by-election, until he got up to leave. And it blew me over 
because he reached down on the floor — and I had no idea — 
he reached down on the floor and he put on a cap, a farmer’s 
cap, to leave the hall. And his farmer’s cap said WIT, Weyburn 
Inland Terminal. 
 
And I thought, isn’t that funny. An NDP scrutineer 
scrutineering in Tommy Douglas’s riding and promoting the 
entity probably that most has called for dual marketing and 
changes to the Canadian Wheat Board. And I thought, well this 
is really in two ways showing the change of times here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s showing that the former seat of 
Tommy Douglas was overwhelmingly won by a Saskatchewan 
Party candidate where the NDP came in not second but third — 
and a distant third, Madam Speaker. 
 

So I want to congratulate the new member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy on an excellent campaign. It’s going to be a real 
privilege to work with him. I have already been impressed with 
his ability and I know that the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
will be served well by the member. 
 
And the third person I want to acknowledge today is the Clerk 
of the legislature who announced that she will be stepping down 
after 32 years of service to the legislature. I want to express my 
appreciation for the service to the province of Gwenn Ronyk. I 
saw her the other day and I said that she must have been too 
young to be working at the legislature 32 years ago. But she 
certainly has had an outstanding career and I want to express 
my personal thanks for her service to the province. 
 
Now getting to the Speech from the Throne, I have been here 
for much of the debate and I have actually been in the House 
and listening to much of the debate. And I was interested in a 
comment made by the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. She 
in her speech talked about the fact that she was discouraged by 
some of the . . . what she called personal attacks that were 
occurring in the legislature. And obviously we want to focus on 
ideas and issues and plans for the future of the province of 
Saskatchewan but I did note that that was her concern. That the 
debate was focused too much on personal attacks. 
 
And, lo and behold, I think either the second or third NDP 
speaker following the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow 
happened to be the member for P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote. 
So I expected well after the little sermon there by the member 
from Moose Jaw, the member from P.A. Northcote certainly 
wouldn’t launch into any personal attacks. But certainly, 
Madam Speaker, I was disappointed. He took no time at all in 
getting into the point of attacking the Leader of the Opposition 
because he worked in this legislature. He happened to be a 
young person who had acquired a job working for a member of 
this Assembly. And it just really struck me as astounding that of 
all members on the NDP side it would be the member for P.A 
Northcote who would somehow think that that was bad or 
wrong because I’m sure that that member has had young people 
working for him. 
 
Should this province hold it against the young people that have 
worked for the member for P.A. Northcote because for six years 
that member failed to act accurately and responsibly disclose 
what had happened with SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company]? Now, Madam Speaker, the 
member for P.A. Northcote, if he is judged by his own 
allegations, should be ashamed of the people that had to work 
for him. Madam Speaker, I was shocked. I was shocked. 
 
Now the member for P.A. Northcote somehow thought it was 
wrong if the Leader of the Official Opposition was undertaking 
the duties that were assigned to him when he had a job working 
in this legislature. I don’t know what all the member did. I have 
no idea all of the events that occurred back in this legislature at 
that time. The member, who I am sure is a teetotaller, indicate 
. . . you know seemed to say that he thought it was wrong that 
the member had gone and acquired under a minister’s direction 
some alcohol for a liquor cabinet. I don’t know whether that 
occurred or not but I’m sure the member for P.A. Northcote 
would never have directed any of his employees to do such a 
thing being the teetotaller that he is. 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

But, Madam Speaker, I’m thinking about all the young people 
in Saskatchewan who are leaving the province and we’ve heard 
of the thousands and thousands and thousands of young people 
who are leaving the province to get jobs somewhere else. And I 
thought, no wonder, given the attitude of the member of P.A. 
Northcote who would criticize a young man for seeking a job 
working here at the legislature. 
 
Madam Speaker, young people recognize the attitude of the 
NDP. They see that they say one thing and do another and, 
Madam Speaker, I think that is unconscionable. And I would 
ask the member for P.A. Northcote to be a little more thoughtful 
and think things through a little more clearly before he 
self-righteously gets up on his feet and would criticize falsely 
the Leader of the Opposition for doing his job and trying to 
make the province of Saskatchewan a better place, when he 
himself has one of the most detestable records of any minister 
in the NDP government over the last six years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Madam Speaker, that is a shame. It is 
wrong. And the minister should apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan and particularly to the young people of 
Saskatchewan whom he is helping drive from the province with 
a terrible attitude like the one he has expressed here in this 
House and around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Speaker, that is the minister who squandered over $30 
million of taxpayer money through SPUDCO. He knew the 
facts of the deal. He knew that the facts that he had claimed 
were untrue. We know that’s true because the minister actually 
had to get up in his seat — I was here in the House when it 
happened — he had to get up in his seat and he had to apologize 
to the people of Saskatchewan. He was removed from cabinet 
for a while. And then the Premier in desperation — in 
desperation — because he had no one else to fill the roles 
brought him back into cabinet and placed him in the position of 
Highways. 
 
Now of course, Madam Speaker, we know the minister still 
continues to distinguish himself when it comes to forestry 
affairs. I remember the NDP promise — 10,000 forestry jobs. 
We all remember that. That was part, I think, of their election 
campaign if I remember. But we’ve seen nothing but plant 
closures, and then we see the minister put in charge of trying to 
fix the problem. And of course we’ve seen no solutions even on 
the horizon as we experience the shortage of solutions, the lack 
of solutions. And we feel for the people whose economies have 
been devastated by the closure of the Weyerhaeuser mill in 
Prince Albert and other mills across northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So this is a minister who apparently doesn’t care if people get 
hurt. He didn’t care about the people surrounding the SPUDCO 
incident. And I know of people that went bankrupt. I know of 
creditors whose bills were never met. I know of families whose 
lives were ruined because of that minister and his action on the 
SPUDCO file. And he has the audacity to get up in this House 
and criticize a young man who is now the Leader of the 
Opposition because he had a job here in the legislature working 
for a politician. 
 
Madam Speaker, I appreciate the young people on both sides, 

on both sides of this House who feel in their bones that they 
want to work for an elected person. We need those kind of 
people to become involved. We need to encourage those kinds 
of people. We don’t need to throw stones at them as the 
minister has from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
I’m going to leave this issue. But I just want to close with one 
thought and say, even if the minister was right — and he was 
wrong — but even if he was right, he had no moral authority to 
make the statements that he made yesterday. And again I invite 
him in this House for the second time to apologize for the 
things that he said. 
 
Madam Speaker, I had hoped in this debate to talk a bit about 
agriculture. I thought perhaps I might touch a little bit on the 
Canadian Wheat Board, but I expect there’ll be other 
opportunities to do that in the future. 
 
So I want to talk a little bit more about the whole issue of jobs. 
We know right now, Madam Speaker, that there is a shortage of 
jobs right across Canada. In fact, there’s a shortage of jobs here 
in Saskatchewan. There’s more help wanted signs out than I’ve 
seen for quite some time. And that normally would be exciting. 
The problem is the NDP government have chased most of the 
people who could apply for those jobs out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Minister Responsible for Immigration was talking 
about the need for jobs and for people to take those jobs. And I 
think she actually skimmed through — and I use the word 
skimmed with purpose — skimmed through a speech that I 
made in response to the last budget where she seemed to 
indicate that she thought something was wrong with my 
concern that immigrants might be coming to Saskatchewan who 
would not have jobs and end up being unemployed. So because 
the minister from Nutana skimmed through that speech, I 
thought I’d read it in its entirety — or at least the two 
paragraphs that relate to this item in its entirety so that her 
misunderstanding could be corrected. So I quote from my 
speech in the legislature last April. I said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I thought it was rather humorous that the 
government made a commitment to immigration — which 
by the way I strongly support and would like to see more 
of — but their commitment was to bring 5,000 immigrants 
into Saskatchewan on an annual basis. And yet their own 
job projections in the budget only predicted that 3,200 jobs 
would be created in this province. 
 
In other words, they want to bring people into 
Saskatchewan to be unemployed because their 
wrong-headed policies are not creating the jobs that are 
required to employ people already in the province, let 
alone others who would come into the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Now, Madam Speaker, I will admit, I will say that there is more 
demand for jobs now than when the budget was brought down a 
year ago. But I was merely reflecting on the facts, or not the 
facts but the content of the NDP budget. The NDP budget said 
that they expected only to create 3,200 jobs. That was in the 
budget last year. They hoped to create 3,200 jobs. 
 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

The Deputy Premier seems to doubt that so he should grab the 
budget from last year and he can read the words for himself. It’s 
there in black and white presented by the Finance minister in 
the last budget. 
 
Obviously if the government expects to only create 3,200 jobs, 
that’s a real problem because other provinces — Alberta, 
British Columbia — are creating tens and tens and tens of 
thousands of jobs. Manitoba, I think, was creating in the 
neighbourhood of 20 or 30,000 jobs on an annual basis. And yet 
Saskatchewan, in the midst of a boom, with oil and gas prices at 
record highs, with uranium prices at record highs, couldn’t 
anticipate more than 3,200 jobs being created. 
 
Obviously that was because, as the Deputy Premier points out, 
the NDP were driving the private sector out of the province. 
They were driving youth out of the province. They were, 
through their policies, creating a climate where people didn’t 
seek jobs in Saskatchewan even though they were starting to 
become available and more are available now. NDP policies 
and attitude I might add — attitude like the minister from P.A. 
Northcote — have driven away the very people that could take 
the jobs that are available today. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, what we need in this province is a 
change of government. We need a government that knows how 
to create a climate where there are jobs, not 3,200 jobs, but 
where there are 32,000 jobs or more created on an annual basis. 
And then, Madam Speaker, maybe 5,000 immigrants coming to 
Saskatchewan looks like a modest number and could actually be 
increased, which is what I would like to see. Because heaven 
knows and the people of Saskatchewan certainly know that we 
need more people in this province. 
 
If we’re going to have a thriving economy and if we’re going to 
maintain the infrastructure that developed countries have, if 
we’re going to see a future for our children and our 
grandchildren, we’ve got to take action now and begin to grow 
the province. And I’ve watched over the last seven years that 
I’ve been in this legislature that NDP government do precious 
little to encourage growth in the province, and do a whole lot to 
discourage that growth here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I also want to just quickly touch on the 
Oyate affair, because as Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee we have dealt with this issue and will be dealing 
with the issue in the upcoming weeks because of an 
investigation done by the Provincial Auditor. But what I’ve 
noticed as Chair of Public Accounts is that there are certain 
departments of government that habitually fall short of the mark 
placed before them or the goals and measuring sticks placed 
before them by the Provincial Auditor. One of those 
departments has been DCRE, the department of resources and 
employment or Community Resources and Employment, and 
they consistently have fallen short of the auditor’s 
recommendations. 
 
And ministers and deputy ministers have appeared before 
various committees, deputy ministers and their officials before 
the Public Accounts Committee saying, we accept the auditor’s 
report. We’re going to get it right. We’re going to get it right. 
And, Madam Speaker, I won’t rehash all of what happened. But 
DCRE was one of the departments that always had to come 

before our committee and say, yes we’ve made mistakes in the 
past, but we see the error of our ways. And we’re going to get 
them right. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, now more and more evidence is coming 
to light as a result of a story broken by the CBC that in fact the 
NDP were playing games with the people of Saskatchewan. 
They were certainly playing games with those of us at Public 
Accounts. They had no intention, they had no desire to correct 
the failures in their department, the shortcomings in their 
department. 
 
And as a result it was bound to happen, and it had to happen 
sooner or later. And unfortunately it did happen in the case of 
the Oyate House where the administration fell apart, where 
guidelines were not adhered to. And the tragic part of this 
whole story is that children were the victims. Children were the 
victims. 
 
Now the Deputy Premier, the member for Yorkton, doesn’t care 
about children. He doesn’t think they can do any better. He 
doesn’t think that that matters a whole lot. He criticizes the 
opposition for raising this issue. He thinks we should keep those 
things secret and hidden from the people of Saskatchewan. He 
chirps in his seat about how terrible it is that we raised the issue 
of the Oyate House where children’s lives and well-being were 
put at risk. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, I make no apology for the work of the 
opposition, for the work of the Provincial Auditor, for the work 
of the CBC, and everyone who worked together to bring to light 
the abuse of children and the danger that children were 
subjected to because of the irresponsibility of the Minister 
Responsible for the Department of Community Resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Madam Speaker, some things you can let 
go by. Some things you can apologize and say, well 
government make mistakes from time to time. But when it 
comes to the well-being of children and when so many 
warnings have been forthcoming, that is beyond an apology. 
And there needs to be action. 
 
And if the Premier was worth his salt, if the Premier really was 
a leader, if the Premier wasn’t more concerned about protecting 
his inefficient and incapable cabinet ministers, he would fire the 
minister responsible. He would clean up the mess. He would 
allocate budget money to care for children who are at risk. And 
he would do it immediately. 
 
Now talking about doing things immediately, as I mentioned, 
Madam Speaker, I was away for a couple of weeks. It was a 
happy occasion. Gail and I were celebrating our 30th wedding 
anniversary and we were able to go on a little holiday. And so I 
turned the BlackBerry off and I didn’t answer the phone. And I 
came back to. . . I got actually to Toronto and I turned my 
BlackBerry on and I scanned the news. And I said to Gail, I 
said, the NDP have lowered the PST by two points. 
 
And my first thought, well are they calling an election this fall, 
because I know that every time they lower the PST it means an 
election. I mean we know that. And of course once the election 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

is over then they raise the PST back up again. That’s become 
such a habit nobody’s surprised at that any more. But I thought, 
no they’re not going to call an election this fall. 
 
And then the light came on and I realized the Premier is in 
trouble. As we know there was a little challenge within his 
caucus and there was some repercussions there and a bunch of 
members had to come suddenly suck up to the Premier and say 
that they were loyal after all. But we know that there’s trouble 
in the NDP house. We know that there’s some dissatisfaction 
with the Premier. And so he had to do something. Their 
convention is coming up. Their convention I believe is this 
November, and the Premier is under a lot of heat and a lot of 
scrutiny. And there are some unions that are pretty unhappy 
with the Premier because there are no jobs and there are no 
people to fill jobs. And they’re pretty unhappy with the way the 
Premier fired one of his members. 
 
So the Premier had to do something spectacular to kind of take 
the focus off him and his leadership. The fact that the NDP is 
29 points back in the polls. So what he did, he said, the way to 
take the heat off is I’ll lower the PST and I won’t do it by one 
point like I usually do; I’ll do it by two points, and I’m sure I 
can hang on to my leadership going into that November 
convention. And then we’ll have to think of some other strategy 
I guess when we do call the election. I don’t know what they’re 
going to do. Maybe they’ll do something with property taxes; I 
sure hope so. 
 
Anyways the people of Rosetown-Elrose — and I want to 
conclude with this — the people of Rosetown-Elrose want to 
thank the Premier for his desperation because they want to see 
lower PST. They’re tired of seeing Alberta consistently beat us 
out and seeing retailers suffer in Saskatchewan because of 
higher taxes, particularly higher, much higher PST here in 
Saskatchewan than to the west of us in Alberta. 
 
So because of the Premier’s insecurities, because of the 
Premier’s fear of losing his job, because of the Premier’s 
desperation over being 29 points behind in the polls, he lowered 
the PST. And the people of Rosetown-Elrose say hallelujah, 
thank you that the Premier’s in trouble. I hope he gets into more 
trouble because he might do more good things for the people of 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I see the Deputy Premier smiling. I 
think he knows I’ve hit more truth than he would care to admit. 
I know that the Deputy Premier is one of the close counsellors 
of the Premier, so perhaps maybe even it was the Deputy 
Premier’s idea. And he’s just maybe a little bit surprised that we 
figured it out so quickly and came so close to the truth. 
 
But nevertheless, nevertheless if we can bring this NDP into 
more discredit, if they hit rougher ground and start doing things 
like lowering taxes, that will be a step in the right direction. It’s 
not going to save their hides in the next election. They are going 
to, they’re going to lose anyways. 
 
And the reason I know that, by the way, is history has a way of 
repeating itself. Many members on the NDP side have correctly 
pointed out that I thought we would win the last election. We 
should have won the last election. And I’d be the first one to 
express my disappointment that we came so close without 

winning. 
 
But it’s very similar to what happened in British Columbia 
when Premier Glen Clark was supposed to lose, but he held on 
by a very thin margin. I would state some unethical politicking 
happened in BC [British Columbia] as happened here in 
Saskatchewan. Of course the result of the delay — and the 
inevitable — was that the NDP got wiped out in the subsequent 
election. I think they were lowered down to two members. 
Therefore, Madam Speaker, the NDP don’t have much good to 
look forward to. 
 
Given all of these facts, Madam Speaker, it’s very clear that I 
will support the amendment and not support the Speech from 
the Throne. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise in this Throne Speech debate and 
to add my voice to those who are supporting the Throne 
Speech. I’d like to start my remarks off, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, by first of all thanking our mover and seconder on this 
side — the member from Coronation Park and yourself, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — for making an excellent start on an excellent 
Throne Speech. Thank you for your insight and your 
intelligence that you brought to bear in this debate so far. I hope 
I live up to the standard you have set. 
 
I’d like to also start out my remarks by congratulating the new 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. I’m no longer the youngest 
in this legislature, Madam Deputy Speaker, but I’ll get by 
somehow, somehow. Though we come from different parties, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to say that I’ve had the chance 
to talk with the member opposite on a number of occasions, had 
the chance to meet him and his wife, Amanda, and I find him in 
person to be a very congenial, very thoughtful person. And I 
wish him congratulations in terms of the by-election, and I wish 
him the best of luck in terms of his career as a legislator. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve got some more to say about the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy and his intervention in the 
Throne Speech debate. Obviously I disagree with his 
amendment, but I’m sure he’ll get over that somehow, 
somehow. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I do want to say that one more 
thing about the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy is he’s a 
congenial person, but he’s also a hockey player. He’s not scared 
of the corners but neither, Madam Deputy Speaker, am I. So 
we’ll see him in the corners for sure. 
 
I’d also like to say we share a history professor. The member 
opposite received education at the University of Regina, and 
one of the first sort of intelligence reports I received about the 
member opposite was from a former history professor of ours, 
who said that he’s a pretty thoughtful young fellow. 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

And it’s also very interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 
that history prof we shared in common wrote a book called 
Privatizing a Province which was dedicated to Tommy 
Douglas. And I can’t help but wonder if the member opposite 
has ignored reading it because it tells quite the story about what 
happened in this province in the 1980s and the importance of 
history. I know the member opposite is a student of history, and 
I’ll have a bit more to say about that in my remarks. 
 
I’d like to thank, Madam Deputy Speaker, my family, my wife, 
Kelly, my parents who have supported me throughout, right 
down the line in terms of working in this busy life that is 
elected life. I couldn’t do it without them and for their support, I 
am hugely, hugely thankful. 
 
I’d like to thank my constituency assistant. Right now it’s a 
woman by the name of Anna-Marie Kowalsky who is filling in 
on a mat leave. She’s doing a fine job, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
And I’d like to thank Colleen Smith who does a great job and 
will be back start of the year and congratulate her on the birth of 
her brand new baby daughter. 
 
I’d like to thank the residents and the voters of Regina 
Elphinstone Centre for their support in the by-election of 
February 2001 — by-elections are heady times for sure — and 
for their continued support in November 2003. 
 
Regina Elphinstone Centre, it’s a very diverse place, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — people from all different walks of life, a 
large and vibrant Aboriginal population, lots of young people, 
lots of older people. We’ve got the downtown and all the 
thriving activity there. We’ve got the old warehouse district. 
We’ve got part of the Cathedral village which has their thriving 
arts festival and many, many people involved in the arts in that 
community. We’ve got part of the core which is part of the 
historic German town in Regina — one of Regina’s very 
interesting communities — and we’ve got part of Regent Park. 
And the largest neighbourhood in Regina Elphinstone Centre, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is north central which is my stomping 
grounds where I was born and raised and where I proudly live 
to this day. 
 
There have been a lot of things happening in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. Just to name a few, very recently we had 
the renaming of the Treaty Four Education Centre in honour of 
Richard Ostrosser. 
 
Richard was a dedicated educator, a bridge builder, somebody 
who wasn’t Aboriginal but worked with Aboriginal people, 
with First Nations people in such a thoughtful and committed 
way. Saw a lot of people go through the Treaty Four Education 
Centre. Helped them to get their adult grade 12. And he died 
very tragically, Madam Deputy Speaker, this spring of a brain 
aneurysm, and he is sorely missed. But his spirit lives on with 
the renaming of the Treaty Four Education Centre in his 
honour, and the work that carries on there, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I know will be affected in large part by the legacy that 
he leaves us to live up to. 
 
Downtown Regina we’ve seen the opening of Century Plaza. 
We’ve seen the reclamation of what used to be the Derrick 
Building. It sat vacant for many years, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
so that people had taken to calling it the derelict building. It’s 

been reclaimed and opened up as the Renaissance Retirement 
Building, and it’s a great addition to a very vibrant downtown. 
 
This Saturday, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ll be participating in 
Ehrlo Community Services annual Dress a Champion event and 
the great work they do with the outdoor hockey league in 
ensuring that all kids have the chance to play hockey and to 
have that great physical exercise and to not just have dreams 
about playing hockey but actually live them out. 
 
Tonight, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a gala celebrating the 
80th anniversary of the Royal Canadian Legion’s branch 1, 
which is located of course right in downtown Regina, and it’s 
going to be one heck of a night. The Chair of the gala is 
85-year-old Harold Hague who I had the pleasure of speaking 
about certain of Mr. Hague’s accomplishments in World War II 
in the last year about this time. And certainly he and the 
committee for the gala are putting together a tremendous event 
— an event that will showcase not just the past of the Legion 
but a bright future that the Legion and people in a group called 
ArtsAction are working towards in terms of ensuring that this 
wonderful monument, this wonderful touchstone of downtown 
Regina continues on in a very vibrant way. 
 
I’d also like to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that it’s been 
great. The school year’s started back up. Enrolments are up 
throughout north central and throughout Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, and they’re particularly up at Scott 
Collegiate where I had the pleasure of going to grade 9. 
Enrolment there is 450 this year, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
for the past three years, they’ve had graduating classes, the 
largest they’ve had since the early ’80s. And I think that’s 
hugely encouraging, hugely inspiring, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s signal to the good work and that revitalization that’s 
going on in our inner city. 
 
And it’s also important to point out, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that whereas those classes in the early ’80s were maybe 80, 85 
per cent non-Aboriginal and you’d have only a few Aboriginal 
people in those graduating classes, these graduating classes, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, are on the order of 85, 90 per cent 
Aboriginal people graduating. First Nations and Métis people 
getting their grade 12, getting that key to a brighter future to 
move forward and make a better life for themselves and their 
families. And I think that’s hugely encouraging, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot going on in housing. There’s a lot going on in 
crime prevention. There’s a lot going on in terms of community 
economic development. There’s a great program, the north 
central inner city youth employment program, and we’ll be 
visited by them in about a week’s time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. They were here last year and, you know, these are 
young people, 18 to 30, that are getting another chance to get 
their lives back together, to do some work in terms of life skills, 
in terms of getting employment skills, and to get stabilized and 
then to move out into that labour force and to take their rightful 
place in society and the economy. And it’s very encouraging, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to touch upon, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I’ve 
recently been entrusted with the portfolio of Corrections and 
Public Safety. I want to thank the Premier for placing that trust 



November 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

in me, and I want to state for the House that I will work very 
hard to live up to that charge, to that responsibility. And I want 
to work on the good work of those who preceded, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — the member from Greystone and certainly 
from the member of Regina Dewdney. I want to build on their 
good work, but I also want to thank very much the Premier for 
placing that trust in me. 
 
I recently attended the sod turning at the . . . for the replacement 
section of the 1913 portion of the Regina Correctional Centre, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And it was striking, you know, just 
how far that is coming. We’ve got a ways to go yet, but it’s 
good progress. And it brings to mind the fact that keeping 
Saskatchewan communities safe does require a balance of 
corrections approaches, the necessary supervision and controls, 
but effective interventions that help reintegrate people safely 
back into the community. So I look very much forward to doing 
that work, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now on Monday in his reply to the Throne Speech, the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy said that young people don’t care 
about the past 15 years. They don’t care about the past 15 years; 
they just care about the next five. And while I partly agree with 
him, young people do very much care about the next five years, 
I think it’s a little different. I think young people do care about 
the past 15 years. And as another young person, younger person 
in this House — admittedly I’m getting older — but as a 
younger person in this House, 1991 was the first time I had a 
chance to vote in an election in this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And of course I cast my vote for the NDP. And it was 
such an honour to see some of those people that fought the good 
fight in terms of the situation they inherited and the hard 
decisions and the hard work they did with the people of 
Saskatchewan to put this province aright. 
 
And I guess it’s like this, Madam Deputy Speaker. As a history 
student . . . And I’m sure the member opposite is quite familiar 
with this quote and it was touched upon by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. George Santayana said, “Those who can not 
remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” 
 
And I guess it’s like this, Madam Deputy Speaker. There are 
some people in this Chamber that would be very anxious to 
have us repeat that past. And they’ve been part of the Devine 
administration, they’re proud to be part of the Devine 
administration, and they support that vision of Saskatchewan. 
For example, the member from Arm River-Watrous who of 
course was entering into the debate just a couple days ago, he 
said this and I quote — and this is from Hansard, March 26, 
2004 — “You look at the Devine government. It did a lot of 
good things . . . ” 
 
It did a lot of good things. And you know it’s always good to 
keep your remarks general like that, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
because in some I couldn’t disagree with him more. And you 
know, well I’ll get to some of the information in terms of the 
financial situation of the province when the people took power 
in 1991. But a lot of good things — and I guess I’d be interested 
to hear precisely what. 
 
And we know very well, Madam Deputy Speaker, that there’s a 
close interaction between the conservatives opposite and the 
Conservatives in Ottawa and the Conservatives of past in this 

province. Some went over to the Liberals briefly, but they very 
enthusiastically joined in with the conservatives of present day 
in this province. 
 
And we know that, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I guess what 
we’re tired of, what we’re tired of in this House and what’s 
getting old in this House, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the fact 
that they just won’t admit it. You know, just own up to who you 
are. We know who you are. You’re not fooling anybody. 
 
And as if to prove my argument, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
we’ve got the member from Wood River talking about 
communists from his chair and we know who engages in that 
kind of red-baiting in the history of this province — it’s the 
members opposite. And anybody to the left of Attila the Hun 
gets included in that. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, while they’re bellowing and 
yelling from their chairs, we’re going to keep on working. 
That’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to keep on building 
and we’re not going to worry about the people who’ve been 
yelling and bellowing for decades now. And it’s getting old and 
tired for sure, Madam Deputy Speaker. But we know they’re 
Tories, we know they’re conservatives, we just wish they’d own 
up to it. 
 
And I guess it’s interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker. We’re 
joined by the member from Canora-Pelly, and oftentimes he 
likes to protest that he’s not a conservative. What are you 
talking about you’re not a conservative? I’m not a conservative, 
that’s what he likes to say in this House oftentimes. And you 
know for one it’s the exception that proves the rule, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. But I’d also like to say that when he was 
seeking the leadership of the Saskatchewan Party, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, he said in the Leader-Post, August 12, 1997, 
he said he welcomes the endorsements of people like former 
premier, Grant Devine. 
 
You know I guess if I was a pure laine Liberal like the member 
opposite purports to be, I’d be kind of leery about welcoming 
the endorsements of people like Grant Devine. But apparently 
that’s fine with him then; maybe it was some kind of situational 
thing in terms of a leadership contest. But there it is, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Fifteen years ago when this government took over from that 
Devine government, the province was near bankruptcy. The 
Leader of the Opposition as well as many members was part of 
the government whose irresponsibility and recklessness in 
decision making left this province with a huge financial burden. 
 
To quote from the Gass Commission, the Saskatchewan 
Financial Management Review Commission, the public debt as 
of October 31 — 15 years ago, Madam Deputy Speaker — was 
$12.704 billion. Further in the Gass Commission report in the 
financial position of the province, summary and conclusions: 
 

The province’s October 31, 1991, financial statements 
indicate that the Government of Saskatchewan has a very 
large accumulated deficit which has affected its ability to 
borrow sufficient funds to meet its on-going financial 
requirements and to maintain its programming at current 
levels of service. 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2006 

The province was in a ruin, Madam Deputy Speaker, and you 
know very well because you were one of those people that came 
in to clean up the mess left to us by the people opposite. 
 
Now something that the members opposite like to talk about 
again and again is that somehow, you know the ’80s, that was 
an aberration, it wasn’t really the situation. And even if it was, 
that was somehow the responsibility of Allan Blakeney and that 
the situation left to the province of Saskatchewan was terrible in 
terms of Allan Blakeney. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And I just want to point out that in 1981-82, the debt-to-GDP 
[gross domestic product] ratio of this province was 22.9 per 
cent, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 1985-86, a mere four years 
later, Madam Deputy Speaker, it was 46.5 per cent. In terms of 
the situation when the Devine Tories left office, it was 61.7 per 
cent in terms of debt-to-GDP ratio. It was a basket case and the 
sooner the members opposite own up to it, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I think the better off we’ll all be in terms of having an 
honest debate in this House. 
 
I note the time in terms of the agreed-upon hour of adjournment 
and at this point I will move that this debate do now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — . . .debate do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this House do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House does now stand 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. Enjoy your constituencies 
this weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:46.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................164 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................165 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................165 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................165 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................165 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................165 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Federation of Labour Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Order of Merit Recipients 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 Accomplishments of University of Saskatchewan Student 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 High-Speed Internet Access in Northern Saskatchewan 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 SaskEnergy Provides Natural Gas Commodity Services to Lloydminster 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 Plans and Ideas for the Future 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................167 
 Saskatchewan Party’s Attitude 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................167 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Minister’s Responsibility for Children At Risk 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................167 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................168 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................168 
 Supply of Radiologists in Prince Albert 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................169 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................169 
 Fees for Cancer Patients 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................170 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................170 
 Names for Political Parties 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................170 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................170 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Changes to Taxes 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................173 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................173 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................173 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................174 
 



 

 Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................174 
 Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act 
 Loi sur les garanties internationales portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................174 
 Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................174 
 Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................175 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................176 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................179 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


