






















































Hansard: March 22, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 25A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 22, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 723 
 March 22, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Page 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before routine proceedings I wish 
to inform the Assembly that Mandy Selzer has returned from 
Korea victorious and will be joining us as a Page for the 
session. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I also wish to advise members that I have 
received from the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 
Commissioner a report on The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act dated March 22, 2006, which I now table. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One more time I 
stand to present a petition on behalf of constituents that live 
along Highway 32 between the communities of Leader and 
Cabri. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the three pages of petitions I have today are signed 
by individuals from the communities of Mendham and Leader. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about Highway No. 310. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Wynyard, Yorkton, Bjorkdale, Margo, Kuroki, Ottman Beach, 
Wadena, and Invermay. I so present. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
several pages of a petition of citizens concerned of safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Fulda, 
LeRoy, Bruno, Lake Lenore, Saskatoon, and Swift Current. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 
present a petition from constituents who are opposed to possible 
health care service cuts in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health care 
centre and special care home maintain at the very least 
their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Landis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of concerned parents in 
the constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much 
needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Wright Crescent, Peters Cove, and 
Kenderdine Road. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2006 

Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Watrous. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present another 
petition regarding the widening of Highway 5. As indicated 
earlier, this is a highway which travels right through my 
constituency. I will read the prayer for relief. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Humboldt, 
Lake Lenore, LeRoy, Lanigan, and St. Gregor. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to sessional papers 5, 7, 8, 64, and 
65. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 30 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: please 
indicate the total expenses incurred and revenues 
generated by the tour of Scotty, Saskatchewan’s T.rex, to 
the cities of Tokyo, Nagoya, and Osaka in Japan; and also 
indicate to which department, agency, or institution any 
revenues generated by the tour were allocated. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 25 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Property 
Management: what is the sale price of the Echo Valley 
Conference Centre in the option to purchase that Sask 
Property Management has awarded to the town of Fort 
Qu’Appelle? 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 
today I have a group of good-looking young people from grade 
6 to 8 from Ranch Ehrlo in Regina, and they’re accompanied by 
Hope Hamerston, Tina Deis, and Tara Hack. 
 
And you’ll be interested to know, Mr. Speaker, that we were in 
the lobby taking pictures of that Speaker’s model there that has 
your hat and your ears but no face in the middle. 
 
And I want to say that there were some pretty good-looking 
young people there. And I convinced them that there is 
opportunities in politics both on First Nations communities as 
well as in the province and hopefully they’ll be thinking that 
over while they’re on their tour today. We had a good visit. 
 
I want the Assembly to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What a perfect segue, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 
agree with the hon. member that there are opportunities for 
young people in politics. And that’s why it’s a pleasure for me 
to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly a future 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], the Saskatchewan 
Party nominated candidate for the constituency of 
Lloydminster. Tim McMillan and his wife Allie have joined us 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Tim and his wife are ranchers, they’re producers, 
and they also have a small business. Most importantly, they 
have a one-year-old daughter, Rielly, who enjoyed the 
nomination meeting last Monday in Lloydminster. 
 
And you’ll notice this, Mr. Speaker. You’ll notice the 
similarities between the future MLA for Lloyd and the current 
excellent MLA for Lloydminster. They’re both tall gentlemen. 
They’re both dedicated and energetic. And in fact if they stood 
side by side it would be hard to tell which one was the former 
and which one would be the new member here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we do want to welcome them here to this Legislative 
Assembly. And we look forward to the day when he’s actually 
on the floor of the House and, more specifically, on that side of 
the floor of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
privilege and a pleasure for me to introduce to you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly some of the members of 



March 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative Steering Committee 
that were here this morning for the release of the 2005 report, 
stayed to do a lot of work over the lunch hour, and now are 
here. And I’d like to recognize them for their strong 
commitment to the voluntary sector this afternoon. 
 
If they could stand and wave as I introduce them, I would start 
with the Co-Chair of the Voluntary Sector Initiative, Tracy 
Mann from United Way Regina; Dastageer Sakhizai from the 
Saskatoon voluntary sector; Sheri Benson from United Way 
Saskatoon; Sonja Jahn from the P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland 
Health Authority; and Nancy Gardner, a representative from the 
Department of Agriculture and Food to the steering committee. 
 
I’d ask all members to give them a warm welcome and in that, I 
believe, also recognize the work that they do to improve the 
quality of life and strengthen the social fabric of all 
communities in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member in welcoming all of these volunteers here 
today. It’s people like you that make our province a very special 
place, and the kinds of effort and volunteerism that you exhibit 
are the kind of role models that all of our citizens would do well 
to copy and emulate. Thank you very much for being here today 
and we hope you enjoy the proceedings in your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students of Holy Cross 
High School in my Saskatoon Eastview constituency have 
launched a Lent fundraising effort to raise money for the 
reconstruction of a secondary school destroyed by civil war . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. We’re still on introduction of 
guests. I’m afraid I gave the member the wrong signal. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a couple of 
guests seated up in your gallery: Mr. Garth Macfarlane from 
Glen Ewen — and Garth is close enough to the US [United 
States] border he can almost throw a rock from his house to it 
— and his grandson, Jordan Brians, who attends Winston Knoll 
here in Regina and have come to see the proceedings today of 
the legislature. And I ask everyone to welcome them in here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Access to Water and Sanitation 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
1993 World Water Day has been observed each March 22. 2006 
marks the second year of the decade of action, 2005 to 2015. 
 
According to the IRC, International Water and Sanitation 
Centre, the first decade from 1981 to 1990 brought water to 
over 1 billion people and sanitation to almost 77 million. But 
the job is only half done. There are still almost 1.1 billion 
people without adequate access to water and 2.4 billion without 
adequate sanitation. 
 
Even in our own province we have witnessed first-hand the 
vital importance of access to clean drinking water and sanitation 
services. There is no higher priority than safe drinking water. 
Unfortunately as we saw in North Battleford, this NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government failed to take the steps necessary 
to deliver on that promise to the people of Saskatchewan. Next 
month marks the fifth anniversary of the North Battleford water 
contamination which left 7,000 people ill after consuming water 
from the community. 
 
Today according to the government’s own website, there are 
currently 66 precautionary drinking water advisories and 14 
emergency boil-water advisories. Many of these advisories go 
back several years, four to five years in some cases. 
 
While the people of urban Saskatchewan are fortunate to have 
access to clean, safe water on a daily basis, too many people in 
the province, in rural Saskatchewan and amongst our First 
Nations, have been left behind by this government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Chair of the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative, I would like to report to 
this Assembly that the voluntary sector initiatives 2005 update 
report was released this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province has the nation’s highest rate of 
volunteerism. Our voluntary sector is an incredibly important 
and vibrant part of the Saskatchewan way of life. There are 
12,000 volunteer groups and 5,000 incorporated charities across 
the province contributing to the quality of life of hundreds of 
thousands of Saskatchewan people. The voluntary sector also 
contributes over $1 billion annually to the provincial economy 
and has spinoff benefits that touch nearly every economic and 
social sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative is in its 
third year. The result has been a strengthened relationship, a 
better understanding, and greater collaboration between the 
province and the voluntary sector. The Premier this morning 
has challenged us to look to develop a structural legacy to the 
initiative while adopting the consultant’s recommendations and 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2006 

improving the go-forward work plan contained within the 
updated report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge all those who have 
contributed to the success of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative, in particular the members of the steering committee, 
the volunteers, and the government employees who worked so 
tirelessly and co-operatively and collaboratively to achieve their 
goals. And I want to thank them for setting a positive direction 
for the future of our great province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Principal Appreciation Award Winner 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The principal of 
Melfort’s Broadway School recently received the Saskatchewan 
Association of School Councils’ Principal Appreciation Award. 
 
Dr. Stephen Kemp, during two years as principal of Broadway 
School, forged a co-operative education team. Together they 
accomplished many improvements for the students. They 
implemented programs discouraging bullying, started student 
after-school activities, worked closely with human service 
agencies, and created a bridging generations project. This 
project created an opportunity for the students to share 
celebrations at the senior citizen centres and brought the seniors 
to the school to share their knowledge and experience. 
 
Mr. Kemp’s response to his students upon learning about the 
award was that he was privileged to be a part of their lives. He 
said, and I quote, “Nothing I have ever achieved or been 
recognized for comes anywhere close [to this].” 
 
The only achievement Stephen rates higher than the privilege to 
influence the students’ lives is being a good dad to his own 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to ask the members of the 
legislature to join me in recognizing a very deserving recipient 
of this award, Dr. Stephen Kemp. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And now the Chair recognizes the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon Students Raise Money for Sudan School 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try this again. 
Students of Holy Cross High School in my Saskatoon Eastview 
constituency have launched a Lent fundraising effort to raise 
money for the reconstruction of a secondary school destroyed 
by civil war in the town of Loa, Sudan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Holy Cross fundraiser has been largely 
initiated and organized by students and will involve six other 
elementary schools in the division. Their goal during the Lenten 
season is to raise $4,000 to build a classroom at the school, but 
the students also plan on continuing the initiative later into the 

year in the hopes of exceeding that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Loa is a Sudanese town that was once known as 
school town because children travelled from across the region 
to attend classes there. The plight of Loa has recently come to 
light because of the work of a couple originally from Sudan 
who now live in Saskatoon. Vicky Angua and her husband, 
Anthony Angu, fled Sudan and eventually their native Africa 
because of civil unrest. Both are now students at the University 
of Saskatchewan, and they have founded the Friends of Loa, a 
humanitarian agency based in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have recently been to Africa and have seen 
first-hand the challenges that many African people face. I 
sincerely want to commend Vicky and Anthony for their desire 
to help the people of their homeland, and I want to congratulate 
the students of Holy Cross High School and the other schools in 
their division for their efforts to assist their fellow students in 
the town of Loa. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Centennial Grant 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
disappointment in the NDP government that I rise to address the 
House today. 
 
In a letter from Tourism Saskatchewan dated March 7 to the 
Davidson homecoming committee who did such a great job 
hosting their centennial event last summer, was informed that 
they must pay back over $1,300 of the $1,875 centennial grant 
they rightfully received for their event. 
 
The letter goes on to mention or states that: “The majority of 
the mail costs you provided occurred before the program date 
and accordingly are not eligible for reimbursement.” So it 
appears that those communities who want to plan ahead are 
now being penalized for doing just that. These expenses are 
legitimate and documented and should be paid for in the spirit 
that the centennial is all about. But this government takes every 
opportunity to remove anything that might help a rural 
community, even removing their ability to celebrate our 
centennial in 2005. 
 
In my constituency alone, in Davidson I’ve lost a SaskPower 
office, a wing of my hospital has been closed, the agrologist, 
the rural service centre has been removed, SaskTel service 
depot has been removed, and now they’ve shut down Highway 
20. They also want to shut down a highway section shop in 
Watrous. They’ve also tried unsuccessfully to shut down my 
office in Davidson but failed miserably twice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they want to claw back centennial grants from 
events, they should claw back the event they gave to sponsor 
the phony-baloney Tommy Douglas movie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



March 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

World Day for Water 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1993 the United Nations General Assembly declared today, 
March 22, as World Day for Water. Each year a different UN 
[United Nations] agency is selected to coordinate events 
surrounding World Water Day and this year UNESCO [United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] 
chose Water and Culture for their theme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water is vital to human life, but the Water and 
Culture theme illustrates how various cultural traditions around 
the world have different ways of using, viewing, and 
celebrating water. Water is sacred in many religions and is used 
in various rites and ceremonies. It is essential to many scientific 
endeavours, and water has also been represented in art for 
centuries in music, painting, writing, and cinema. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cultural traditions, indigenous practices, and 
societal values all determine how people perceive and value 
water around the world. Unfortunately, social and industrial 
change is driving an increase in water usage worldwide. 
Globally, water usage doubled between 1940 and 1980 and 
doubled again between 1980 and 2000, and is predicted to 
double yet again by 2010. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water is not just precious, but priceless, and our 
government will continue to work to ensure that Saskatchewan 
people continue to enjoy the benefits of having good supplies of 
quality water throughout the province, as well as strategies to 
manage water in times of flood or drought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can all make a difference in protecting and 
conserving our water resources. Taking an active and conscious 
role every day is truly the best way to celebrate World Water 
Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Financial Accountability 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday was not a good day for that NDP government. After 
years of covering up dozens of instances of fraud within their 
government, pressure from the Saskatchewan Party forced the 
NDP to admit publicly something they’ve been keeping to 
themselves for a long time: that more than $2 million which 
belongs to the public has gone missing under their watch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap with that NDP government. They 
talk about transparency and accountability, but when it comes 
down to it, they have to be backed into a corner or have one of 
their cover-ups exposed by the opposition before they will act. 
In one of the province’s newspapers today, a columnist sums up 
the government’s reluctance to come clean on the fraud scandal 
by saying, and I quote, “The problem appears to be an NDP 
government that, until now, was more interested in avoiding 
political embarrassment than in being transparent.” 

Mr. Speaker, after Channel Lake, after SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], fraud 
case after fraud case, the public has lost trust in this NDP 
government. Forget about spin, forget about excuses — why 
won’t that NDP government for once do the right thing and 
come clean with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Financial Accountability 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we now know what transparent and accountable means in 
NDP-speak: don’t tell until you get caught. As one columnist 
put it this morning: 
 

The problem appears to be an NDP government that, until 
now, was more interested in avoiding political 
embarrassment than in being transparent. 

 
The fact that it took 500 written questions from the official 
opposition Saskatchewan Party before the government came 
clean about 42 fraud cases in government is a perfect example 
of that. 
 
So was SPUDCO, where the NDP government mislead the 
people of Saskatchewan for six years until they got caught. 
After SPUDCO, the Premier promised a new era of 
accountability and transparency. If he is committed to that 
promise today, as he was when he made it, will he commit 
today to a full accounting of all incidents of fraud in his 
government since he took over as Premier in 2001? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say that when it comes to this issue, it is very clear that 
the members opposite have no credibility. I want to read into 
the record from Provincial Auditor’s report. The auditor says: 
 

The Liquor Board . . . 
 
I’m quoting from page 20 of a report from 1992: 
 

The Liquor Board did not have adequate systems and 
procedures to safeguard its assets. The Liquor Board 
reported approximately $19,285 of liquor was supplied to 
ministers’ offices. The Liquor Board had no written 
requests from the ministers or their assistants for this 
liquor . . . The Liquor Board does not have policies that 
authorize ministers and officials to take liquor for their 
own use. Accordingly, there was a loss to the Crown . . . of 
$19,285. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that one of the ministerial 
assistants at that time was in fact the Leader of the Opposition. I 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2006 

would like to know, in the 15 years that he’s had to come clean, 
when is he going to come clean about what it is he knew about 
this $19,000 loss? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, despite the NDPs go-forward commitment to 
transparency and financial accountability, the NDP is still 
refusing to release information about fraud instances going back 
to when the Premier took office. 
 
Yesterday’s announcement about a case of fraud at SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] in 2003 totalling 
$100,000, that was never made public, causes us great concern. 
If the NDP didn’t tell us about something that significant in 
2003, what are we to think about the times since the Premier 
took office up until 2003? 
 
Mr. Speaker, from a Throne Speech of the NDP government, 
and I quote: 
 

Citizens have the right to know more of what their 
government is trying to accomplish. 
 
To that end my government will begin to implement a 
comprehensive government accountability project. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that Throne Speech is dated December 6, 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of that, will the Premier commit today to 
deliver a full accounting of all fraud incidents in government 
since he took over as Premier in 2001? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this government since it 
was elected in 1991 has been improving the financial 
management and transparency processes of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I ask again, to the Leader of the 
Opposition who has had some 15 years to think about what 
happened in the office of John Gerich that he worked in . . . I 
want to read into the record a memo from December 18, 1990, 
when that member, the Leader of the Sask Party, was working 
for John Gerich. This memo says: 
 

Please arrange to have delivered by 1:30 p.m. tomorrow 
the following to . . . Hon. John Gerich . . . 1 Beer Tub, 150 
Beer Cups, 100 Wine Cups . . . 
 

Sixty pounds of ice, a number of bottles of liquor, 12 bottles 
of wine . . . My question is, at what point did that member go 
to the press with this clearly not authorized expenditure? 
When did he put out the press release? When did he go to the 
press? Did he put out a press release? Did he at least put out 

invitations to invite others to this party? What was it that he 
knew? When did he come clean? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
years 2003 to 2005, we asked each department and Crown 
corporation if they were aware of any allegations of fraud or 
other illegal activity within that department or Crown 
corporation. The answer we received from SGI was rather 
disturbing. And I quote, “There is no central department which 
tracks each and every allegation of this nature.” “Therefore this 
information is not available.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, you would think that a Crown corporation would 
want to keep track of these types of allegations and incidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of SGI: why 
doesn’t the Crown corporation keep track of these events, and 
why isn’t there any information available? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When we took office in 1991, the 
Crown corporations didn’t even provide regular financial 
statements to this Assembly. That was an improvement that this 
government has made, and we will continue to improve the 
accountability. 
 
One of the Crown corporations that I thought was very 
interesting when we came into office that was not very 
accountable was the Liquor Board. Now my question is to the 
senior assistant to the former minister, John Gerich . . . 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In the 15 years that the Leader of the 
Sask Party has had to think about this, that he’s had an 
opportunity to come clean and to apologize for his role of that 
$19,285 that went missing, I’d like to know when did he make 
people aware? Was it after he got the beer tub delivered to his 
office? Was it after the 60 pounds of ice showed up? Was it 
after the full case of those decorative . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Members will 
come to order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the members opposite are 
laughing quite a bit. I mean there’s no doubt by what I read, it 
must have been quite a party. There is no doubt about that. 
 
Well if it wasn’t on that date, my question is, was it on April 8? 
They have a memo here — April 8, 1991. It seems to me the 
Leader of the Sask Party was still . . . 
 



March 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Timing of Prosecutions 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as we learned yesterday, this 
government doesn’t come clean unless they’re forced to. Many 
of the 42 instances of fraud would not have come to light but 
for our persistent questioning. 
 
And the pattern continues, Mr. Speaker. This morning I learned 
from the media that an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] commercial crime investigation regarding Community 
Resources into losses in excess of $1 million is all but 
completed. The file has been with the Department of Justice 
since December. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the police being forced to wait for a 
decision on whether charges will be laid in this matter? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it is not appropriate — as 
a matter of fact is exceedingly wrong — for the Minister of 
Justice and the Attorney General of the province of 
Saskatchewan to decide who will be prosecuted and when they 
will be prosecuted. I appreciate, I appreciate the members 
opposite do not understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the past the member from Saskatoon Southeast has 
demanded that certain members of the public be removed, have 
their causes of action taken from them. He had a list, Mr. 
Speaker; he had a list. 
 
Now first we have, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition abandons 
their questions about the economy two days in, Mr. Speaker, 
and we move on to demands for government censorship, Mr. 
Speaker. And now, Mr. Speaker, we have demands for political 
prosecutions, Mr. Speaker. And this is not the first time. The 
member for Martensville called out for the prosecution of David 
Karwacki, the Leader of the Liberal Party. Prosecutions cannot 
be based upon when the members want to make a headline, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that is not an acceptable answer. 
That is not an answer at all. The police are waiting for a 
decision. They’ve all but completed a lengthy and complex 
investigation in record time. Now they sit and wait; the public 
sits and waits. This fraud went on for more than a decade. It 
involved the theft of money earmarked for the poorest of the 
poor. Will the government commit to a timely decision on this 
matter, or is this just another example of them not coming clean 
until they are absolutely forced to do so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Is the opposition asking us to direct 
public prosecution, who to prosecute and when to prosecute? 
That’s my question, Mr. Speaker. If the member, if the member 
has any evidence that the police asked my office or the 
prosecutors for a decision, I have not received it. He should 
table that evidence. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
waiting. Well I don’t know if they are waiting, Mr. Speaker. I 
haven’t heard from the police. I’ve heard the member call, I’ve 
heard the member call for prosecutions on their time schedule 
when they want them, who they want them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know when the member for Kindersley counselled 
shooting the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I don’t remember the 
member opposite getting up and saying, when’s he going to be 
prosecuted, Mr. Speaker? Who’s on their list, Mr. Speaker? I 
know David Karwacki is and I know civil servants are. Who 
else is, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that member knows full well 
that there is a difference between prosecutorial discretion and 
operating his department in a timely and competent fashion. 
There appears to be no rhyme or reason when it comes to laying 
charges. Sometime these matters go to municipal police forces, 
sometimes the RCMP, sometimes nowhere at all. There’s no 
logic; there’s no protocol. 
 
In Northern Affairs all we get are sketchy details about the 
inappropriate use of a vehicle. The matter is not referred to the 
police. Some . . . [inaudible] . . . uses a debit card to drain the 
bank account of a Casino Regina customer to the tune of over 
$3,000. The matter is not referred to the police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is making the decision about when matters 
are referred to the police and what criteria are being used? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, under this government, 
the police decide what they investigate. Under this government, 
professional Crown prosecutors decide who to prosecute, how 
to prosecute, and when to prosecute, Mr. Speaker. The position 
of the opposition clearly is, it clearly is that politicians should 
decide. Not only are they not credible on this issue, but the 
prospect of the members opposite filling the Attorney General’s 
position is scary, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, basic competence indicates that 
you run your department in a timely and competent fashion. Mr. 
Speaker, let me read from today’s StarPhoenix editorial: 
 

. . . the consequences for criminal level dishonesty don’t 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2006 

involve a criminal record . . . 
 
In some cases, the lack of punishment beyond dismissal is 
puzzling and sets a dangerous precedence . . . 
 
. . . [the] lack of prosecution suggests that the government 
doesn’t put a high value on integrity . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, when will this government begin establishing a 
plan to assure criminal activity results in a police investigation? 
When will this minister take control of his department and 
assure that things happen when they are supposed to, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the position of the 
government now is that every theft over $200 will be reported 
to the police, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question as to how decisions are made about prosecutions, 
Mr. Speaker . . . is it the position, is it the position of the 
opposition that our Crown prosecutors in this province are 
acting inappropriately? Is it the position of the opposition that 
our Crown prosecutors are not professionals? Is it the position 
of the opposition that our Crown prosecutors are making 
political decisions — decisions based upon politics about when 
and who should be prosecuted, Mr. Speaker? Because it’s 
clearly the position of the opposition that politicians should be 
making those decisions, Mr. Speaker, a position this 
government does not agree with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Minister of Health’s Meeting with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning the highly anticipated meeting took place between the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and this health care minister. 
And after the meeting SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 
put out a news release, and the title on the news release says, 
“Meeting with health minister ‘extremely disappointing.’” 
They’re no further ahead today than they were yesterday before 
this meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week the minister stood in this House, and he said that he 
would provide SUN with answers to the questions that they’ve 
asked this government on five previous occasions about 
vacancies, about retirements, and about retention issues, Mr. 
Speaker. According to SUN, none of this information was 
provided in their meeting today. 
 
Can the minister tell this House why he misled this House and 
told us that he’d provide that information in this upcoming 
meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously I can’t speak for SUN — they speak for themselves 
— or about what the expectations were going into the meeting 
this morning. The members opposite will know this is the first 
time I’ve had the opportunity as Minister of Health to meet with 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And, Mr. Speaker, from my 
perspective I can indicate I thought it was a very productive 
meeting. I felt that the information that was provided on both 
sides of the table, Mr. Speaker, are taking us forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have agreed to sit down on a regular basis 
with SUN to discuss not only this information but other 
information, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of the day, at the end 
of the year, this government will work on common goals with 
SUN to ensure the workplace is a better workplace, and the 
numbers of nurses in this province, Mr. Speaker, are increased. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what 
SUN’s vice-president, Marlene Brown, had to say about the 
meeting. The minister doesn’t want to quote, but I will quote 
what Marlene Brown had to say. And this is what she said: 
 

The meeting was extremely disappointing. The Minister is 
refusing to share with us or the public the factual data that 
SUN has requested concerning the nursing shortage. The 
public has a right to know since the shortage affects their 
care and affects access to . . . [the health care system]. 
 

She went on to say: 
 

This government has no plan to fill the vacancies, no 
target for retaining or recruiting nurses, and refuses to 
make a commitment to solve the nursing shortage. 
Frankly, we’re shocked by the obvious lack of concern 
about patient safety and access to services [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

That’s what the vice-president of SUN had to say after leaving a 
meeting with this minister. He should be ashamed of himself. 
When will the minister live up to the commitment he made in 
this House and give them factual information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, during the meeting I 
committed not only my officials but myself to continue to meet 
with SUN to resolve some of the issues that are in front of us. 
Mr. Speaker, the officials met on Monday and provided 
information to SUN. SUN indicated that that was not adequate 
information, and we have committed to receiving additional 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan in place. It was put in place in 
December. We are implementing a number of strategies. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, tomorrow I will be in the city 
of Lloydminster to unveil and open the new CT [computerized 
tomography] scanner. Mr. Speaker, new nurses, new 



March 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

technologists, new equipment operating in the city of 
Lloydminster . . . The candidate from Lloydminster for the 
Saskatchewan Party is in the gallery today. He is committed to 
two-tier health care, Mr. Speaker. I ask the member opposite to 
tell us indeed what’s the position of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday the 
Agriculture minister had the opportunity to meet with the fed 
Agriculture minister and his provincial counterparts, and one of 
the things I understand he was asking for was a $200 million 
cash injection. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s less than the last payment of the 
grains and oil seeds payment that just happens to be coming out 
right now to farmers and isn’t going very far. Now our party 
believes that we would need approximately a $500 million 
injection from the federal government to make any significant 
difference. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, does the Agriculture 
minister have anything optimistic to tell the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I find it a little odd that we’re this far into the session — 
priorities were the economy and agriculture — and here’s our 
first question on agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that we have projections, 
national projections that there will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — All members, all members please come to 
order. All members. The Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have all seen the analysis, the federal statistics that there is a 
realized negative net-farm-income projection of $200 million. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is after the grains and oil seeds payments of 
290 million flow. It’s after the 53 million that our government 
is putting in with the education tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can say clearly that I am disappointed by 
the reaction that we got from the federal minister that there was 
no indication of any ad hoc payments coming. And when we 
asked about the 500 million that they had promised, Mr. 
Speaker, we were told he doesn’t have the authority to 
administer that. He can’t tell us anything about that today. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Speaker, if there is any hope, that hope is that they 
will make some adjustments with the 500 million that they said 
they would add to the agriculture budget and that they will get 
that to flow quickly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — To respond to a question for which notice was 
taken, the Chair recognizes the Minister for SaskTel. 
 

SaskTel International’s Project in 
Trinidad and Tobago 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on Friday of last week I took notice of a question that 
was asked by the member from Humboldt. 
 
In July 2005, SaskTel was awarded a management contract to 
assist LaqTel in the creation of a mobile network in 
Trinidad-Tobago. SaskTel was a contractor of LaqTel’s and not 
a partner. SaskTel did terminate its contract due to non-payment 
by LaqTel on March 9 of this year. The member from 
Humboldt asked how much the Saskatchewan taxpayer would 
lose as a result of SaskTel exiting this agreement with LaqTel. 
 
First off, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel does not use tax dollars for any 
of its investments or operations. In fact over the past 16 years, 
SaskTel has declared and paid substantial dividends in the 
millions of dollars to CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] which are ultimately used for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. As indicated, the outstanding payment 
from LaqTel is approximately 250 to $300,000 but we will be 
seeking . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we agree with the provincial Agriculture minister that 
we are also disappointed in what he found out on Monday, but 
we don’t believe that we should let that file sit. We should 
continue to lobby the federal government for help for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
But again, having said that, there are things that this provincial 
government could do to help Saskatchewan farmers, and one of 
them would be to reinstate spot loss hail. At SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 
they were asked to do that. Mr. Speaker, we are asking that 
minister to reinstate spot loss hail; do one thing that would help 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I said to the members at SARM that clearly spot loss hail has 
been an issue in the province. Private brokers really wanted to 
be able to cover the hail issue. The RMs [rural municipalities] 
themselves own Municipal Hail, Mr. Speaker, and do provide 
coverage. 
 
But we also recognize that there are efficiencies in the 
provincial government and the Crop Insurance Corporation 
providing spot loss hail, and so to that end I have asked the 
Crop Insurance Corporation to investigate — there’s no time 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2006 

this year to reinstate — but to investigate with the potential of 
reinstating next year. That, Mr. Speaker, is what they are doing. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
what farmers want to know is what that minister and that 
government’s intentions are to help them out to get this crop in 
this spring and help them get from now till next fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, in the 2004 budget, some 
more cuts that this NDP government made to agriculture was 
the elimination of the farm fuel tax rebate on gasoline and 
propane bought at retail outlets. That’s another thing that they 
could change and reinstate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also had a 20 per cent rebate on farm fuel 
purchases. If he wanted to do something constructive that they 
cut in the last few years, he could do things like that — reinstate 
them. They have a mountain of money. They have an oil and 
gas revenue building up there. Let’s do something constructive 
with it and maybe help farm families in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate that the opposition is finally 
raising some ag issues. I know that there is much concern in the 
province about what can be done to help farmers through this 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have done I think a good job in terms of 
providing PST [provincial sales tax] free inputs for farmers. We 
have provided tax-free diesel fuel for farmers which is the 
primary engine that they use and, Mr. Speaker, except for 
private use, the opportunity for tax-free gasoline, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that what we are committed to 
doing is to try and get that new federal Conservative 
government to stick to their campaign commitments. We want 
$500 million. We want it moving. We want it moving fast, Mr. 
Speaker. We want this opposition related to that federal 
government to do what they can to pry loose that money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we want them to work to try and get the 
trade injury that was talked about during that campaign too. 
This is significant. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes . . . 
Order please. The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’m tabling responses to questions no. 582 to 594 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 582 to 594 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 42, The Respiratory 
Therapists Act. Mr. Speaker, in developing this legislation, the 
government has consulted closely with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Respiratory Therapists. 
 
Brent Kitchen, Chair of the self-regulation task force for the 
Saskatchewan Association of Respiratory Therapists, has done 
a tremendous job in this regard, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to 
thank him and his colleagues for all the hard work that they’ve 
done in bringing forward this Act today. 
 
I also would like to acknowledge the vital role that respiratory 
therapists play in our health system and in serving the health 
needs of Saskatchewan people. As health professionals 
experienced in caring for people with breathing disorders, 
respiratory therapists have a variety of skills essential to 
building the kind of health system that we want in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill I bring before the House today proposes 
establishing a college of respiratory therapists responsible for 
regulating respiratory therapists. At the same time it proposes to 
delegate this privilege of self-regulation to the Saskatchewan 
association of regulatory therapists. 
 
The Bill will include new provisions clarifying that the duty of 
the regulatory body is to serve and protect the interests of the 
public and not the interests of its members. In essence then, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Respiratory Therapists will 
establish a self-regulatory college, while conferring its current 
professional advocacy role to a separate professional 
association. 
 
This Bill will also appoint three public representatives on the 
council of the Saskatchewan Association of Respiratory 
Therapists. Doing so will give the public a greater voice in the 
regulation of respiratory therapists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsible health service for the people 
of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring forward 
this legislation to the House today. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 



March 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

move second reading of The Respiratory Therapists Act. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 42, The Respiratory Therapists Act be now read a 
second time. The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to this Act respecting respiratory therapists. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting to note that this is going to be a self-regulating 
body. But it’s interesting also to know that it’s taken 11 years to 
get this in place, and one wonders what has been taking so long 
for this government to really get its act together and bring this 
Act in and create an association for the respiratory therapists. 
 
In today’s world of increasing pollution it’s also very 
noteworthy to ask some questions concerning this profession, 
this new body that is being set up and how that relates to the 
patients that these therapists look after, and also what new areas 
are coming on stream as far as the therapists that are doing very 
good work need to look at in the future. We certainly will be 
speaking to the respiratory therapists and all other stakeholders 
who want to make . . . have an opinion on setting up this new 
association and the college that the minister spoke of. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Biggar that debate on second reading of Bill No. 42 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation 
Technologists Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Medical Radiation 
Technologists Act, 2006. In developing the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, the government has consulted closely with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Medical Radiation Technologists. 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the president of the 
association, Stella Juma-Anderson, for the work that the 
organization — the association — has done, both to her and to 
her colleagues for the dedicated hard work that they’ve done in 
updating the Act and this new Bill. 
 
I also want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the important role 
medical radiation technologists play in our health system and in 
serving the health needs of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 
as specialists in the use of radiation to image the human body, 
MRTs [medical radiation technologist] have a variety of skills 
and experiences essential to building the kind of health system 
that we want in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of Medical 
Radiation Technologists has asked for a number of legislative 
changes to the Act. Specifically, the Bill will appoint three 
public representatives to the council of the association and in 

doing so will give the public a greater voice in the regulation of 
MRTs. The Bill will also reserve professional titles to members 
of the Saskatchewan Association of Medical Radiation 
Technologists. These titles include medical radiation 
technologist, medical radiological technologist, medical 
radiation therapist, nuclear medicine technologist, and magnetic 
resonance technologist. In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will 
allow the association to establish a clearer and more effective 
disciplinary process for its members. 
 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, along with others concerning 
minor administrative details, are proposed to make the Act 
consistent with other Saskatchewan health profession 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to accessible, 
quality health care. We will provide leadership in making the 
changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system for the 
future. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, we believe it is important 
to bring this Bill to the House today. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 43, The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak on the Act respecting medical radiation technologists. 
The minister has outlined the various aspects of the Bill, and we 
certainly will look into this and speak to the association and get 
a better handle on what all the different changes mean in respect 
to not only the practitioners but also to the general public. 
 
We certainly agree with the minister that health care 
professionals are very valuable and we certainly appreciate the 
work that they do for the citizens of Saskatchewan. And we also 
will continue to ask questions in the legislature and in 
committee concerning this particular self-regulating body that is 
being set up, Mr. Speaker. And so at this time, I’d like to move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill 43 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of the policy field committees on the Economy as well as 
on Crown and Central Agencies, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Page 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................723 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................723 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................724 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant ..........................................................................................................................................................................724 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................724 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................725 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................725 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Access to Water and Sanitation 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................725 
 Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................725 
 Principal Appreciation Award Winner 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................726 
 Saskatoon Students Raise Money for Sudan School 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................726 
 Centennial Grant 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................726 
 World Day for Water 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................727 
 Financial Accountability 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................727 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Financial Accountability 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................727 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................727 
 Timing of Prosecutions 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................729 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................729 
 Minister of Health’s Meeting with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................730 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................730 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................731 
 SaskTel International’s Project in Trinidad and Tobago 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................731 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................732 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................732 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Respiratory Therapists Act 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................732 



 

  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Bill No. 43 — The Medical Radiation Technologists Act, 2006 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................733 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................733 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


