






















































Hansard: March 15, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 20A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 15, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 585 
 March 15, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions on behalf of communities along Highway 32 
from Cabri through to Leader. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s three pages of petitions are from the 
communities of Leader, Eatonia, Prelate, Liebenthal, Burstall, 
Sceptre, and Estuary. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise again today 
on behalf of people from my constituency and beyond who are 
concerned about Highway No. 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Foam Lake, 
Kuroki, Margo, and Fishing Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to improve Highway 310. The signatures on this 
petition believe that a dependable highway system is vital to 
both public safety and economic development in any given 
area. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and facilitate economic growth and tourism in the Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Tuffnell, Foam Lake, Kuroki, Kelvington, and 
Wadena. And I’m pleased to present this petition on their 

behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the safety on Highway No. 5. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Pilger, Humboldt, 
Bruno, Jansen, Lake Lenore, St. Gregor, Naicam, Watson, 
Muenster, Nokomis, and Annaheim. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from constituents opposed to possible reductions of 
health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least the current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Handel, Sonningdale, Biggar, 
and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from parents in the constituency 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Budz Crescent, Peters Cove, and 
Kenderdine Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens calling the government to upgrade Highway 20 to 
primary weight status. 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Guernsey, Humboldt, Burr, 
and Lanigan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding the widening of Highway No. 5. I will read from the 
prayer for relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Humboldt and Colonsay, St. Brieux, and Muenster. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previous tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 2, 7, 8, 12, 18, and 27. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: to date 
for the current fiscal year, how many accidents have there 
been involving snowplows and on which highway did they 
occur? 
 

And I have the same question for the year 2004-2005 and also 
2003-2004. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 25 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: for the 
fiscal year 2004 and ’05, did the Government of 
Saskatchewan Crown Investments Corporation or any 
other Crown corporation or any other government agency, 
board, or commission invest money into the Saskatchewan 
rail car coalition? If so, how much? 

I also have a similar question for the fiscal year of 2005-2006. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: did the White Track ski 
hill near Moose Jaw receive any monies in the form of a 
grant or loan from the department for the years 
2002-2003? If so, what was that amount and what is the 
state of these loans or grants? 
 

I have the same question for that department for 2003-04, 
’04-05, and ’05-06. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I also have questions for the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. It’s the same 
question. 
 

Did the White Track ski hill near Moose Jaw receive any 
monies in the form of grant or loan from the department 
for the years 2002-2003? If so, what was the amount and 
what is the state of these loans or grants? 

 
I have these same questions dating from 2002-2003 to ’05-06. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a notice 
of motion for first reading of a Bill. I give notice that I shall on 
Friday next move first reading of a Bill entitled The 
Recognition of Telemiracle Week Act. I so give notice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, although March 8 is specifically 
designated as International Women’s Day here in 
Saskatchewan, we celebrate it throughout the entire month. 
There are so many different groups who want to mark the 
occasion that one day — or even one week — just isn’t enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a time for women throughout the world to 
celebrate women’s achievements towards equality and justice, 
to recognize women’s contributions to modern-day society, and 
to reflect on the challenges that today’s women still face. 
 
In Saskatchewan women are working together to improve the 
quality of life for all people. 
 
This year the Status of Women office helped approximately 100 
non-profit women’s groups with their plans for International 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

Women’s Day events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, women from a variety of backgrounds — rural 
women, First Nations and Métis women, women with 
disabilities, immigrant and visible minority women, business 
women, and many others — continue to raise awareness of their 
issues. And this government has an ongoing commitment to 
working with them to identify what is needed to improve the 
lives of women and families living in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day is an annual 
opportunity to reflect on what has been done and what needs to 
be done to improve the status of women living in this province. 
 
I ask that all members of this House and the people of this great 
province join me in paying tribute to the many women who 
have contributed to making Saskatchewan such a wonderful 
place to live and work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Bladworth Community Rink Roof Collapse 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
about my home community of Bladworth. Last week our 
community rink collapsed under the weight of the heavy 
snowfall we had received. This rink was built in 1960 and was 
still being used for recreational skating and hockey. Fortunately 
there was no skating events being held the night it collapsed. 
 
Like all rinks in small town Saskatchewan, our rink was the 
centre of community activities. Like all these rinks, they were 
run by volunteers such as my father, Joe Brkich, who helped 
build the rink. He also coached senior hockey there through the 
’60s. The rink was home to many hockey tournaments, figure 
skating, and winter carnival events. As a boy I spent a lot of 
time at the rink. 
 
This rink was also unique in its history as it also hosted two 
major sporting trophies. In 1966, Bladworth area residents, 
Wayne Shaw and Cliff Shaw, displayed the Grey Cup they’d 
helped win as players on the Saskatchewan Roughriders 
football team. More recently in 2004, the NHL [National 
Hockey League] Stanley Cup was brought home to the 
Bladworth rink by Tampa Bay Lightning player, Cory Sarich. 
Cory spent many years playing hockey in the Bladworth rink as 
the farm he grew up was just outside of Bladworth. Cory’s 
father, Peter Sarich, whose own father helped build the 
Bladworth rink, said in every community it’s a source of pride, 
your little rink — and now we’re feeling like we’ve lost 
something that’s always been there. 
 
Mayor Ron Bessey indicated that there are no plans 
unfortunately to rebuild the rink. Local resident Doug Ames, 
who first noticed the fallen rink that night, expressed his 
sadness at seeing this historic building now gone. We’re such a 
small community, when you lose something like that it’s like 
saying goodbye to an old friend. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in saluting the community 

spirit of Bladworth in keeping the rink open until it was finally 
taken by mother nature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Bernice Sayese Centre 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in this House today and inform 
you and the members of this House of an important event that 
took place in Prince Albert on Wednesday, March 8. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert lost a great citizen some time ago 
but her actions continue to live long beyond her years. And I 
speak of Bernice Sayese or Mama Bear as she was known in 
our community by so many of us. She was known as someone 
who tackled many issues both as an employee of the city and as 
a volunteer in our community. And I would say that there are 
few people in this world that have given of their time as 
selflessly as she had. 
 
And it’s with great pleasure that I’m able to inform the 
Assembly that the West Flat Community Center has been 
renamed the Bernice Sayese Centre. This is a positive step for 
Prince Albert as it not only provides some well-deserved 
recognition to an individual who worked tirelessly on programs 
such as Voices of the North, but it’s also an opportunity for 
Aboriginal youth to gain inspiration and pride as they see the 
name of another Aboriginal person being recognized by the city 
of Prince Albert. 
 
As the Aboriginal population continues to grow, it’s vital that 
we continue to work together as a community and recognize the 
unique contributions of each individual and of each culture. 
 
I believe that Bernice Sayese Centre is a wonderful action taken 
by our community that will add to a healthier community and 
continue to play a very, very important role in the West Flats. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Carbon Dioxide Plant Under Construction Near Consul 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Something new and 
exciting is occurring in the southwest corner of Saskatchewan 
and I want to share that with the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Construction is now under way on a $12 million carbon dioxide 
plant that is the first of its kind, I’m told, not only in 
Saskatchewan but in all of Canada. Located approximately 8 
kilometres southeast of Consul, the plant is expected to produce 
up to 500 cubic metres of liquid CO2 daily at full capacity. The 
pilot plant now that’s in place has a capacity of 150 cubic 
metres of liquid CO2 daily from just one operating well. 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

Now liquid CO2 is used primarily in the oil and gas service 
industry for well stimulation. High pressure gaseous CO2 is 
taken from a nearby well, the plant removes impurities and 
moisture, and then produces a liquid product that is ready to 
ship by tanker truck. The liquid form CO2 is much easier to 
store and ship than the solid CO2 that we know as dry ice. 
 
As one of the largest natural domes of concentrated CO2 in 
Canada, the find near Consul is a treasure of resources. This 
plant is a long-term project which will offer full-time 
employment to between two and six employees. And the 
construction company that is building it, Millennia Engineering, 
has tried to use as much local labour as possible. 
 
This project has already made a strong impact on the 
employment and economic opportunities for the people of 
southwest Saskatchewan. And I ask now that you join me in 
celebrating this venture as another positive contribution by the 
Cypress Hills region to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Prairie Giant: The Tommy Douglas Story 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true that the world can use a 
little more Saskatchewan, a little more of the Saskatchewan 
spirit of co-operation, and a little more of our spirit of 
innovation. Earlier this week CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] viewers across the country had the opportunity to 
not only get a little more Saskatchewan but to get a good look at 
the compelling story of a tremendous individual that embodied 
the attitudes, ideas, and values that make Saskatchewan great. I 
am of course speaking about Prairie Giant: The Tommy 
Douglas Story, the miniseries produced right here in 
Saskatchewan by Minds Eye Entertainment. It tells the story of 
Premier Douglas and in so doing tells something of the story of 
Saskatchewan itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the film showed that Thomas Clement Douglas 
was a man of passion and integrity, a fighter for justice and for 
the little guy, a tireless leader and innovator who inspired a 
province and indeed an entire nation. The story reminds us of 
Saskatchewan history and circumstances and why, some 60 
years ago, the people of this great province embraced Tommy 
Douglas and followed his lead to becoming the Canadian 
birthplace of an extraordinary number of groundbreaking 
policies, chief of which was medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tommy Douglas story is also very much the 
Saskatchewan story and it is a story of which Saskatchewan 
people have every right to be very proud. I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating those who made possible Prairie 
Giant: The Tommy Douglas Story. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Canadian Chamber of Commerce Appointment 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure to rise today to commend Russel 
Marcoux, CEO [chief executive officer] of the Yanke Group of 
Companies in Saskatoon, on his appointment as volunteer Chair 
of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce. Yanke Group of 
Companies offers top-notch transport services. Russel and his 
brothers, Joe and John, have grown the fleet of trucks from two 
vehicles to over 400. In 1986, 33 people were employed by 
Yanke and now there are more than 700. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Russel Marcoux knows a thing or two about 
growing and operating a successful business in our province. 
Russel has been a member of the Canadian Chamber of 
Commerce Board of Directors since 2000. His experience and 
understanding of the need for business-friendly government 
policies will serve him well in his new role. I know he will be a 
strong advocate with the Canadian chamber for businesses and 
their employees. 
 
Businesses of all sizes from every sector of the economy in 
every region of the country are represented by the chamber. 
Russel will bring Saskatchewan ingenuity and energy to the 
table in helping entrepreneurs to influence government on 
issues of critical and economic importance. 
 
Russel has been an integral member of the Greater Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce for many years. He has been involved 
in a wide variety of charitable organizations such as the St. 
Paul’s Hospital Foundation, Junior Achievement, the diabetes 
association, United Way, and the Children’s Health Foundation. 
 
It has been my privilege, Mr. Speaker, to know Russel over the 
past decade or so. He is a generous, hard-working, and true 
visionary. He is very deserving of this position with the 
Canadian Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Speaker, I ask you and 
all my colleagues to join me in congratulating Russel Marcoux. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Jobs and the Economy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the Premier couldn’t explain away his abysmal record, his 
NDP’s [New Democratic Party] abysmal record, with respect to 
the economy, with respect to job creation in the province. He 
couldn’t explain away the fact that Stats Canada reported on 
Friday that, in the middle of a boom, this province lost 4,400 
jobs. 
 
The NDP record gets worse, Mr. Speaker. Over the past year, 
there are actually 8,500 fewer jobs for people between the ages 
of 15 and 44 — 8,500. Mr. Speaker, 8,500 fewer jobs for young 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. A young person who’s 
just finished their nursing program at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] or a trade program at SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology], maybe it affects 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

a young family who had to pack their children and leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how will he explain to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan that his NDP policies have not 
only resulted in 4,400 fewer overall jobs for the province, but 
almost 9,000 fewer jobs for young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
somewhat amusing the listen to the Leader of the Opposition 
because in one breath he says to the people of the province that 
we’re in a boom. In the next breath he says that the NDP 
government can’t manage the economy. Well you can’t have it 
both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is the Leader of the Opposition is correct about one 
thing. We are in a boom. The economy’s on a roll, and I want 
the Leader of the Opposition to know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
number of people employed in the province of Saskatchewan in 
February was the second highest in the history of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want that leader of the conservative 
Saskatchewan Party to know, Mr. Speaker, that there are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members when they are referring 
to parties to use the appropriate title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to those 
small “c” conservatives over there, Mr. Speaker, that the fact of 
the matter is there are 6,000 more young people working in the 
province today than there were 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker. We 
are going in the right direction. 
 
And I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker, the highest rate of out-migration 
of youth was not under the New Democratic Party government. 
It was under the Devine government in the late 1980s when tens 
of thousands of people were leaving this province every year, a 
government supported by that member, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say this to the leader opposite as well. There are 6,700 
job vacancies posted in the province of Saskatchewan. He says 
there are no jobs. It’s not credible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister asks the question 
— how can you talk about a boom and job loss at the same 
time? — it underscores the fact that maybe he’s in the wrong 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker, because of course what’s booming in 
the province is the government’s oil and gas revenues. This 
NDP government is doing a lot better than it ever has. It has $1 
billion more because of a war far, far away — $1 billion more 
than it budgeted for. 
 

What about the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? What 
about the people of Saskatchewan — 4,400 fewer jobs, 2,356 
people who have left the province, Mr. Speaker? Who do you 
want to believe? Someone like Doug Elliott the very 
well-known economics statistician from our province Sask 
Trends Monitor or that minister who commented on the job 
numbers a week ago, it’s not that bleak? That’s what the 
minister said about his own performance; it’s not that bleak. 
 
Here’s what Doug Elliott has to say. “We’ve got to do 
something differently,” he told the Leader Post columnist. 
That’s what Elliott said with respect to our economic policies. 
Here’s what he says. He says, “I’m on the Saskatchewan 
Party’s side . . . ” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s what Doug Elliott said in the sense that we 
have got to do something to grow; we’ve got to do something 
different. The difference is a brand new government. In the 
meantime, what does this government have planned for its 
economic policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he says that there is no 
economic growth, yet every commentator says we have one of 
the highest rates of economic growth in the country. He says 
there’s no investment growth, yet we see private investment 
growth growing faster in Saskatchewan than elsewhere in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. He says there’s no jobs, but we have the 
second highest number of people working in the history of the 
province. That’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. And I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that what the Leader of the Opposition says therefore is not 
credible. And the people know it’s not credible. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. The latest manpower 
survey in Regina and Saskatoon asked employers whether they 
were going to hire staff, reduce staff, or leave it the same. None 
were going to reduce staff, Mr. Speaker. Zero per cent. Half 
were going to increase their staff, and half were going to keep 
the staff they had. So it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that in 
painting this picture of gloom and doom, there is no credibility 
over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know who has credibility on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker? Who has credibility are families that are saying 
goodbye to young people leaving the province with the 
potential, the limitless potential of ours, Mr. Speaker —. 8,800 
people in their 20s this NDP government has driven out in the 
last number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not GDP [gross domestic product] that is 
packing up Cavaliers and leaving this province for other places. 
It’s not some percentage measure of capital investment that 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

can’t find a job even though it should, given the economics of 
this province right now — a job perhaps in the professional 
sector after they’ve graduated university. It’s not a statistic. It’s 
not a percentage or a pie chart that’s getting into their vehicles 
and leaving this province behind. It’s Saskatchewan people. It’s 
young people who are questioning this government, questioning 
anyone that will listen: how could this happen in our province? 
Given the fundamentals now, how could we be losing jobs and 
people in a boom, in a revenue boom, in an oil and gas 
commodity price boom? 
 
Will the minister simply answer that question: how could they 
have screwed things up this badly, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well sometimes, Mr. Speaker, he says that 
economic growth isn’t high enough. When it’s high, he says 
economic growth and GDP don’t matter. That’s what he says 
today. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, he says that there’s no labour 
shortage. He wants to quote Doug Elliott which he did in his 
last question. Doug Elliott is on record, and it’s been well 
reported that what we have in Saskatchewan is not a lack of 
jobs. It is a labour shortage. That’s what he says. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is very 
selective. But the Leader of the Opposition says, what is our 
plan? Our plans are well-known. We’re building the oil and gas 
sector. We’re building the mining sector. We’ve reformed 
income taxes and the economy of Saskatchewan is growing 
under this government. And I say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 
this province, what is their plan? And, Mr. Speaker, they have 
no plan. Their plan is low wages, gut occupational health and 
safety regulations, no minimum wage, and they think somehow 
that will attract workers to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised in 2001, 
shortly after he became Premier . . . And I hope he gets up and 
answers one of these questions, Mr. Speaker. I hope he’ll stand 
and answer a question as to why it is that his government is 
chasing young people away from this province and is actually 
shedding jobs when even Manitoba, when even Manitoba is 
growing, adding population and jobs. But in 2001, the Premier 
of the province — this Premier — promised the Saskatchewan 
people net youth in-migration by 2005. 
 
Well by 2005 he had managed to drive 8,800 young people 
away, almost the population size of the city of Weyburn, all 
young people who have left, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier 
answer this basic question: why has he broken his promise to 
have an economy where we would be attracting young people 
instead of driving them to Alberta and even Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I don’t know how well the Leader of 
the Opposition gets along with people from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. I can’t comment on that and apparently neither can 
anyone else dare to comment on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want the Leader of the Opposition to know that in 1990 
interprovincial net out-migration of youth peaked at 6,000. And 
last year, Mr. Speaker, as of June 30, it was 1,892. And don’t 
misunderstand me, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want youth 
out-migration. But what I’m saying is it has vastly improved 
under the tenure of this government over when those people 
were in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 2000, Mr. Speaker, youth employment in Saskatchewan 
has increased by 2,500, Mr. Speaker. So where are we going? 
We’re going in the right direction because we have a plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll ask again, what is their plan, Mr. Speaker? Low wages, 
no occupational health and safety regulations, no minimum 
wage and they think that will attract young people? Well it 
won’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is concerned. This NDP 
government is refusing to address the chronic nursing shortage 
this province is experiencing. According to SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], 600 nursing positions are 
needed to meet the current and future demands in the hospitals 
throughout this province. 
 
SUN is more than willing to sit down with this government and 
talk about a strategy for recruiting and retaining nurses, but they 
need more information. They have repeatedly asked this 
government for information on how many eligible nurses have 
retired or will be retiring. They’ve asked this government on 
how many vacancies have not been filled in this province. But 
the government refuses to answer their questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government refusing to work with 
stakeholders in the health care business to ensure a sustainable 
health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the opportunity to answer the question put forward 
by the member opposite. 
 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

I think the member opposite is aware, because I’ve heard him 
talk about it in the past, about the challenges facing the health 
care system and the competition that exists for professionals 
right across North America. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member asks if we’re prepared to sit 
down and talk about this important issue with representatives of 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and in fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
answer is yes. I’ll be doing so before the end of the month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when I heard this new 
minister talk about challenges, it just made me think; it may be 
a new singer, but it’s the same old song, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP keeps talking about that no one is left behind. But let 
me tell you about in the nursing profession, one out of every 
three nursing graduates leaves this province. That’s young men 
and women leaving our province after graduating to find 
greener pastures somewhere else. And the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses can back that up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta, they are looking at increasing their 
working force in the nursing sector by over 20 per cent in the 
next few years. Our fear is most of those nurses will be going to 
Alberta, right here, from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is doing an absolutely great job by curing 
the nursing shortage in every other province in Canada. When 
will it start addressing the nursing shortage here in our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Indeed there is a need to identify and agree upon numbers. The 
member opposite has just proven that in fact numbers that he’s 
bringing forward are not credible in the circumstances that we 
find today. 
 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has indeed quoted numbers 
from the year 2000. The member will recognize that in the year 
2001 this government put forward an action plan on health care 
in this province. And since 2002 when that action plan started 
to take place — Mr. Speaker, just listen to these numbers — we 
have had since 2002, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had an increase in the 
number of all nurses practicing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The number of registered nurses per 100,000 in 
Saskatchewan is greater than in any other province in Western 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, we have the highest number of 
registered nurses working full time than any of the other 
provinces in Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, these are very good 
news numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it will be interesting when this 
minister, if he ever does sit down with the union of nurses, then 
negotiate the numbers that they are giving. These are 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ numbers. They are not our 
numbers. They are the union’s numbers that they have been 
tracking over the last number of years. 
 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has looked at other 
provinces and what is being done in other provinces. In 
Manitoba for example, the Manitoba union of nurses works 
with the regional health authority and the government. They 
work hand in hand to recruit and retain nurses. In the last six 
years they’ve increased their nursing numbers by 6 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. They’ve reduced the number of vacancies by 352. 
The Manitoba system that is in place matches nursing graduates 
with positions throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. It matches 
the graduates with the vacant positions. 
 
Unfortunately in our province we have no such system. Will the 
province at least look at Manitoba and see what they’re doing to 
address their nursing shortage because they’re miles ahead of 
where we are here in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
province of Saskatchewan is constantly relating to the work 
that’s going on in other provinces. We believe very, very, very 
seriously that the work that’s being done in other provinces can 
benefit the people in Saskatchewan just as the work that the 
people of Saskatchewan are doing will indeed benefit the 
citizens of other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada earlier this 
month rated Saskatchewan’s health care system as the third best 
in Canada. Mr. Speaker, we’re very pleased with that record in 
that report, and we’ll be building on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a reality. The reality is 
Saskatchewan’s nursing population is decreasing. We have a 
huge number of nurses that are on the verge of retiring and 
looking at retirement, Mr. Speaker, and this province doesn’t 
have any human resources plan to deal with that. 
 
We have the worst nursing retention record in all of Canada. 
We have no specific targets or recruitment plans to retain our 
nurses. Patients’ safety is being compromised. Nurses’ safety is 
being compromised. Look at the WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] claims and how they’ve increased over 
the last number of years. Look at the amount of overtime that’s 
being paid out by this government because they’re not filling 
the vacant positions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party will be calling for an emergency 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

debate to support SUN’s request to dedicate funding for 600 
more nurses. Will the government commit today to funding the 
positions that are required to keep our health care system from 
collapsing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
can’t always take what the members of the opposition say at 
face value. The member opposite says the government has no 
plan, Mr. Speaker. Nothing could be less credible than that. In 
December — just a couple of months ago, Mr. Speaker, in 
December — the government released the Health Workforce 
Action Plan. Mr. Speaker, right in the very beginning of the 
report, the message from the Premier and the previous minister 
of Health: 
 

We are fortunate in Saskatchewan to have highly skilled 
health care professionals who are committed to providing 
the best possible care to their patients. However, like many 
other jurisdictions across Canada and around the world, 
Saskatchewan has experienced shortages in some health 
professions. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the plan that will address recruitment and 
retention, and it has been built in conjunction with the nursing 
professions and the physicians, technologists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Safety Concerns for Residents of Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday in this Assembly I asked when the Department of 
Community Resources suspended referrals to the Oyate Safe 
House in Regina. I also asked when the department resumed 
these referrals. The Minister for Community Resources took 
those questions as notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister prepared to answer those questions 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yes, I am prepared to give the answer today and I thank the 
member for his patience. 
 
For a period of a week in May 2004, we did not place any 
children at the safe shelter nor did we take any children that 
were already there. Mr. Speaker, that was for one week in May 
2004. We worked very closely with the board and staff during 
this time to address the quality of care issues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I want to point out that 
this work is two if not two and a half years in the making. And 
it is not fair; it is not accurate for the member yesterday to tell 

the media, and I quote from the press release: “Merriman said 
the safe house has been open almost three years but the changes 
were not made until recently.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the furthest thing from the truth, and that’s 
why that party has no credibility on some of these issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
his comments outside the Assembly yesterday the minister said 
and I quote, “We have no evidence there are any problems. We 
have no evidence that they did not respond to the issues.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister table any evidence showing 
problems at the Oyate Safe House have been addressed? Can he 
table any evidence showing the problems identified in the 
documents obtained under the freedom of information Act were 
taken seriously and acted upon by his department? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated 
yesterday and will continue indicating that this is certainly a 
challenge for all of the people of Saskatchewan to have us meet, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will point out that there is no off-the-shelf approach for some 
of the challenges we are facing with children involved with the 
sex trade. We are going to reach out, as I mentioned time and 
time again, to as many groups, including Aboriginal groups, to 
try and see if we can develop a capacity that both parties — 
both parties — agreed to undertake, Mr. Speaker. We are on our 
way to solving some of the challenges associated with this 
problem. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, in this whole capacity 
building phase, there are going to be challenges. We don’t go to 
a shelf or to a library and say here is a solution for this 
challenge, Mr. Speaker. That’s not how the approach is. We 
will continue working with different groups and will continue 
building capacity. And we anticipate challenges, but good 
progress has been made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll repeat the 
question. Mr. Speaker, the minister said yesterday that I 
misquoted. I have asked the minister to provide evidence of any 
problems he has and respond to the issues. 
 
Will he table these documents in this House, or do we have to 
go again under the freedom of information Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, in assessing the Oyate 
Safe House, we understood that there’s high staff turnover. We 
understood that there was certainly challenges in setting up the 
service. And we understood that there’s a lot of challenges 
dealing with some of these high-risk children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that . . . there’s no question in our 
mind that there’s been a lot of good progress made since 2004 
to try and respond to some of the challenges identified and 
discussed through the media and certainly with the Oyate Safe 
House board of directors. There’s been a new executive director 
established. There’s a new location and new building inside the 
city. It has strengthened and re-strengthened the training of 
staff. And the board has been really good progress made, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’d point out that we’re also very susceptible to some of 
the challenges as we have identified to some of the criticism 
coming from various groups, Mr. Speaker. But these are 
high-risk children that we’re dealing with. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I’d point out that we welcome 
the investigation and the participation of the Children’s 
Advocate and also the Provincial Auditor. We want as many 
people providing solutions to this challenge as possible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
these are not criticisms. These are direct questions in response 
to the safety of children in the care of this government. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister is ultimately responsible for the safety of 
children in his care. And he has an obligation to the people of 
Saskatchewan to answer these questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we proposed specific questions yesterday that 
should garner specific answers. Yet the minister seems to want 
to sweep these questions under the carpet. Mr. Speaker, why is 
the minister refusing to answer these direct questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we work together in an 
all-party committee in full co-operation with the opposition and 
many other different groups throughout the province. We 
wanted to make sure that there’s no politics attached to this 
process and that this was going to be a truly positive 
Saskatchewan step, politics aside, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The safe house is established. We are going to have 40 beds 
throughout the province to help the children and the youth get 
off the street and get out of the sex trade, Mr. Speaker. That is 
something that we have to do as a Saskatchewan people. 

And I think it’s very important to note that there’s been good 
progress made with Oyate Safe House. And today I’m going to 
say that we’re going to continue funding the Oyate Safe House 
because of the progress they’ve made to identify some of the 
challenges and the deficiencies that they encountered, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would point out as well that it’s important that this safe 
house be safe — safe and secure — and that it provides as many 
good services as possible, Mr. Speaker. And I would point out, I 
would point out that it should be safe from petty politics as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would ask leave of 
the Assembly to make a statement of congratulations. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Congratulations on the 100th Anniversary 
of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta 

 
The Speaker: — Members, today in Alberta, a province with 
whom we share our western border and with whom we share 
the city of Lloydminster — and because we were both founded 
in 1905, a province with whom we share a birthday — in 
Alberta today the legislature of Alberta is holding a special 
commemorative day to celebrate their 100th anniversary on the 
first sitting of their legislature. 
 
Therefore on behalf of all MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and staff from the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, I am pleased to convey to Speaker Kowalski, all 
the Alberta MLAs present and past, all the Legislative 
Assembly Service of Alberta, a hardy congratulations on this 
their 100th anniversary. 
 
And because our own Saskatchewan legislature’s 100th 
anniversary commemorations are on March 29, at this time we 
from Saskatchewan wish to express our shared desire for 
success, prosperity, freedom, and democracy in the coming 
century and look forward to continuing being good neighbours 
in the next 100 years. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
several motions changing membership on legislative 
committees. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitutions on Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the legislature of 
Saskatchewan may be celebrating their 100th anniversary ahead 
of us but we’re changing committee membership ahead of 
them. That’s our job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the Assembly: 

 
That the name of Peter Prebble be substituted for the name 
of Glenn Hagel on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 

The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, it has been moved 
by the Government House Leader, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That the name of Peter Prebble is substituted for the name 
of Glenn Hagel on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government Whip, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the name of Sandra Morin be substituted for the name 
of Andy Iwanchuk . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this is obviously a very, very 
positive and popular move. And in addition, I move: 
 

That the name of Kevin Yates be substituted for the name 
of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Government House Leader, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview, Government Whip: 
 

That the name of Sandra Morin be substituted for the name 
of Andy Iwanchuk and the name of Kevin Yates be 
substituted for the name of Warren McCall on the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again by leave of the 
Assembly and I move, seconded by the Government Whip: 
 

That the name of Warren McCall be substituted for the 
name of Kevin Yates on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That the name of Warren McCall be substituted for the 
name of Kevin Yates on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, once again by leave of the 
Assembly and I move, seconded by the Government Whip: 
 

That the name of Andy Iwanchuk be substituted for the 
name of Sandra Morin on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip: 
 

That the name of Andy Iwanchuk be substituted for the 
name of Sandra Morin on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again by leave of the 
Assembly and again seconded by the Government Whip, I 
move: 
 

That the name of Andy Iwanchuk be substituted for the 
name of Len Taylor on the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the Government Whip: 
 

That the name of Andy Iwanchuk be substituted for the 
name of Len Taylor on the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again by leave of the 
Assembly and again seconded by the Government Whip, I 
move: 
 

That the name of Judy Junor be substituted for the name of 
Kevin Yates on the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That the name of Judy Junor be substituted for the name of 
Kevin Yates on the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, once again I move by leave 
of the Assembly and seconded by the Government Whip: 
 

That the name of Joanne Crofford be substituted for the 
name of Glenn Hagel and the name of Andy Iwanchuk be 
substituted for the name of Kevin Yates on the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That the name of Joanne Crofford be substituted for the 
name of Glenn Hagel and the name of Andy Iwanchuk be 
substituted for the name of Kevin Yates on the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I hereby table two letters from the 
office of the Lieutenant Governor informing the Assembly of 
the membership changes on the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
And why is the Opposition House Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave I’d 
like to move motions of substitution on standing committees. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. The Chair recognizes the 

Opposition House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitutions on Committees 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Estevan: 
 

That the name of Allan Kerpan be substituted for the name 
of Jason Dearborn on the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort, seconded by the member for Estevan: 
 

That the name of Allan Kerpan be substituted for the name 
of Jason Dearborn on the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Estevan: 
 

That the name of Lyle Stewart be substituted for the name 
of Brenda Bakken on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Estevan: 
 

That the name of Lyle Stewart be substituted for the name 
of Brenda Bakken on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Estevan: 
 

That the name of Don Morgan be substituted for the name 
of Don Toth on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Estevan: 
 

That the name of Don Morgan be substituted for the name 
of Don Toth on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a motion 
under rule no. 49. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state the nature of the 
motion he wishes to propose. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of the 
chronic nursing shortage that we are experiencing in our 
province, I move a motion that would ask the Assembly to 
recognize the urgency of the nursing shortage in the province 
and to urge the government to take the appropriate actions of 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ request to fund 600 new 
nursing positions. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has explained the motion that 
requires unanimous consent. Is consent granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion 
certainly talks about the need for recruiting and retaining nurses 
throughout our province. We certainly know that we have a 
shortage and I’d be very interested to find out and listen to what 
the government members have to say when they enter into this 
debate on this very motion. 
 
It’ll be interesting to see if they acknowledge the fact that there 
is a nursing shortage, that we have an issue in the province 
regarding our health care professionals. Because when I asked 
questions of the minister, he was quick to stand and say that . . . 
really what I got from his answers is that there is no problem 
whatsoever. We don’t have a problem regarding health care 
professionals. We don’t have a problem regarding human 
resources plans with regards to registered nurses. 
 
And it’s interesting that he would stand there and say that when 
not only do we have evidence from the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses, but we in every one of our constituency offices get 
phone call after phone call regarding health care concerns. And 
when you track it back, quite often the issue is around human 
resources. 
 
I was also interested to listen to the minister when he answered 
one of the questions and held up a human resources plan that he 
says their government has. But it’s interesting that he would 
stand and promote and talk about a human resources plan. But 
after meeting with SUN last night and a number of members of 
SUN last night, they say there is no human resources plan in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So if I was to follow along and I was to listen to what this 
minister had to say in the House today, and I was to follow 
along and listen to what SUN had to say last night regarding the 
issue around health care professionals and in particular nursing 
staffs within our facilities, I would guarantee 10 times out of 10 
I would believe what SUN has to say and I’d disregard what 
that minister had to say. Because this issue hasn’t happened in 
the last six months. It hasn’t happened in the last year. This has 
been a slow-burning issue that the government has failed to 
address. 
 
For as long as I can remember — since 1999 that I have been in 
this Assembly and speaking on different issues — I remember 
the former Health critic, the member from Melfort, and now 
myself, every year talking about this very issue. And every time 
we bring it up the government says, there’s no problem; don’t 
worry about it; there is no issue here. 
 
But there continues to be complaints from front-line workers. 
There continues to be complaints from surgeons. There 
continues to be complaints from nursing homes. There 
continues to be complaints from residents within the nursing 
homes or parents or siblings of people that are in the nursing 
home. Mr. Speaker, it is a continual problem that this 
government has failed to address. 
 
And over the last number of years — and you can go back to 
the time when they closed 52 hospitals throughout this province 
— they cut all those hospitals and so many of the nurses were 
put out of work, and they looked at other jurisdictions. And 
they’ve come back, and they’ve talked about some of the other 
jurisdictions that nurses have left the province for. And they’ve 
come back to some of our nursing graduates and they say, you 
know, the staffing numbers are much greater in other provinces 
than what we’re experiencing here. And that draws nurses from 
our province. That draws health care professionals to other 
jurisdictions because of the work environment, the sheer 
numbers that they are able to work with as opposed to some of 
the skeleton numbers that we are working with here in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s almost like a balloon that you keep 
squeezing and squeezing and squeezing, and you know a little 
part of the balloon will pop out here. And what that would show 
me is in a ward you’re squeezing, squeezing, and it’s getting 
tighter and tighter on human resources. You don’t have enough 
people to do the job, and all of a sudden it’s going to pop. It’s 
going to break. And what that breaking is, is nurses, health care 
professionals, that are claiming workplace injuries, back 
injuries. They’re phoning in sick because they can’t take it any 
longer. We’ve squeezed and we’ve squeezed and we’ve reduced 
and we’ve expected more from less for long enough. 
 
[14:30] 
 
People in the health care profession are saying they’ve had it. 
And unless this government starts dealing with the issue, 
they’re going to see more people leaving the province because 
quite frankly in a number of situations it’s just not safe for them 
to work in the facilities. They don’t have the numbers to back 
them up. They don’t have the support staff. There are major, 
major issues when it comes to human resources within our 
health care facilities. 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

And I’ll be very interested to hear what the government has to 
say when they stand and speak to this motion as to whether 
they’re going to even address this issue because for far too long, 
and I can say that the former minister and now probably this 
minister, I think they have a feeling that if they admit that there 
is a shortage of nurses within our province, they feel like they 
are admitting failure. They feel like they have done something 
wrong. 
 
We’re not going to blame you. Stand up. Admit that there is a 
health care professional shortage, that there’s a nurses shortage, 
and let’s deal with the issue. 
 
Other governments around this country have got over the fact 
that if we say there’s a health care shortage, if there’s a nursing 
shortage, it looks bad on us as a government. Well quite frankly 
listening to story after story from the health care system, it’s 
looking bad on the government because we don’t have enough 
professionals. 
 
So if they would just address the issue and address it with SUN 
and the other organizations and develop a human resources 
plan, not in isolation but with all the stakeholders, I think you 
would find much more buy-in. And I think you would find the 
problem being addressed and being relieved. 
 
It’s interesting the former minister talked at one conference, and 
he was saying that the vacancy rate in the province for unfilled 
positions is 1 per cent. Now the minister today during question 
period was talking about the numbers that we’re using and how 
they’re not credible. The numbers that we’re using are really 
SUN’s numbers, and so what he’s saying is that the SUN 
numbers is not credible. 
 
And I’d be very interested . . . The member from P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote is really quite interested in this conversation 
and I’ll be very interested if he stands today and talks in this 
debate because he will have an opportunity to enter into the 
debate. And when he enters into the debate, I’ll be very 
interested if he actually addresses the issue with shortage, or he 
tries to snow it over. 
 
He says he’s questioning SUN’s numbers as far as what year. 
The numbers are in 2004 is the latest numbers that we used 
according to SUN. But the minister stood at a conference and 
said that the unfilled vacancy rate is only at 1 per cent. So I can 
take that number and say that’s not a bad number if that was 
true. 
 
But then you can talk to the people that are doing the front-line 
work, the nurses that are on the wards throughout this province, 
and they’re saying the unfilled vacancy rate is 7.1 per cent. It’s 
a huge discrepancy. The minister will talk about, oh the 
numbers are wrong. But I guess it’s okay if they use whatever 
numbers they want and they can’t back it up because I know for 
a fact . . . And I’ve been following the correspondence where 
the union of nurses has asked this government over and over 
again to release the numbers that would put them at a 1 per cent 
vacancy rate. 
 
If the minister is going to stand at a meeting and say we only 
have a 1 per cent vacancy rate, I can buy that if he would back it 
up with the numbers. But he will not disclose those numbers. 

He will not disclose those numbers to us as the official 
opposition. He will not disclose those numbers to the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses were frustrated, so they 
went on to ask each particular health authority how many 
vacancies they see in their region — how many vacancies are 
there. They haven’t heard a word back from any of the health 
authorities, and I believe that’s because the minister has told 
them we cannot release that information. They won’t release 
that information because what it will prove is the minister’s 
numbers are absolutely bogus. 
 
A 1 per cent vacancy rate is absolutely false. The vacancy rate 
for unfilled positions in our province is much higher than 1 per 
cent. We’re looking, according to SUN, at 7.1 per cent. And 
where they got those numbers is by asking their own 
membership, by going around to their own membership and 
saying, in your facility how many full-time equivalency 
positions have not been filled? It might be a point two five job 
here and a point five job there and whatever. But full-time 
equivalencies — how many have not been filled? And 
according to the union of nurses, they’re saying somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 200 and . . . roughly around 240 full-time 
equivalencies — 237 in their press release dated February 23 — 
have not been filled. 
 
So these are facilities that are operating. They realize that we 
need at least 235 more to do a job that is probably up to 
minimum standards, not up to, you know, top quality standards 
that all these health care professionals have been trained in. 
This is just getting them up to the minimum standards that the 
health authorities recognize because they’re funding these 
positions. They’re saying we have positions available that aren’t 
being filled. And why is that? Why do we have these positions 
that aren’t being filled? 
 
Well there are a number of reasons why that is. And I think a 
part of it is, is what we were talking about in question period. 
Now we certainly raised some interest from the other side when 
I said one out of three nursing graduates leaves the province. 
And that number comes from . . . and they’ll dispute that 
number. They say, no it isn’t. When I was asking the question I 
could hear the member from Saskatoon Nutana, a former health 
care minister, former Health minister herself, hollering from her 
seat saying, that is not true, that one out of three health care 
professionals leave our province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to the information put out by the 
CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health Information] in 2004, it goes 
through the percentage of RNs [registered nurses] graduating 
and how many stay in their province. And you look at provinces 
like Quebec, for example. Quebec retains 93.9 per cent of its 
registered nurses. That’s a huge retention level — 93.9. Ontario 
retains 91.2. 
 
Manitoba next door to us . . . Now I know the government hates 
when we start comparing Alberta to Saskatchewan. I know they 
may not like us comparing Ontario, but let’s look at Manitoba. 
We’ll talk about Manitoba in many different examples in the 
upcoming weeks because, you know, they get upset because 
Alberta’s got all the resources. We can’t compare ourselves to 
Alberta when we talk about job numbers, how many jobs that 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

Alberta — 70,000 new jobs in the last year — that Alberta has 
attracted. And so they don’t like that because when we compare 
our numbers to Alberta, we really look weak. 
 
So let’s not compare ourselves to Alberta, but let’s compare 
ourselves to Manitoba. And when you compare ourselves to 
Manitoba and you look at the retention of nurses in the province 
of Manitoba, the retention of nurses in Manitoba is 73.5 per 
cent as of 2004. How did they get to 73.5 per cent in Manitoba? 
And according to the numbers from CIHI, in Saskatchewan 
we’re at 66.8 per cent — 66.8 per cent of our nurses graduating 
stay in our province — whereas in Manitoba it’s 75. 
 
What would cause a discrepancy of 9 per cent difference? Well 
I’ll tell you what it is. And when you listen to what the 
Manitoba government is doing to retain nurses, first of all, 
they’re sitting down and they’re working — the Manitoba 
government — with the other stakeholders. They’re talking 
with employers like the health authorities. They’re talking with 
the employees, the Manitoba union of nurses. And the three of 
them, working hand in hand, have worked out strategies to 
retain nurses so that they’re at a 75 per cent retention level 
compared to Saskatchewan. 
 
When I bring up subjects like that, or bring up any examples 
from other provinces, it’s almost like this government 
automatically dismisses them. Because if they don’t dismiss 
them, if they look at them, it’s almost they feel like they’re 
admitting they have failed. I’m saying, forget about that; don’t 
worry about that. If you look at the Manitoba plan and you 
bring it to Saskatchewan, that doesn’t mean what we were 
doing failed. We won’t even worry about that. What we’re 
doing is looking at the best practices from other provinces and 
putting them to work within our province. And that’s exactly 
what needs to happen. 
 
What happens when we are losing nurses like that, when our 
retention is low, when we’re losing one out of three nurses to 
other provinces that are graduating? Well we’re not able to fill 
the vacancies that we’ve got. And that’s certainly what the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has talked about — 200 and 
roughly 40 nurses’ positions have not been filled. The SUN 
goes on to say that in order to get up to a full complement of 
nurses to deal with the chronic shortage, to deal with some of 
the issues of waiting lists, to deal with some of the issues of 
nurse burnout, to deal with some of the issues around workers’ 
compensation claims, to deal with some of the issues around 
patient care, we need to look at bringing on 600 new nurses on 
to staff. 
 
Because that is a reality in our health care facilities. There is 
issues around burnout. It is not fair for a nurse to have worked a 
12-hour shift, a string of three 12-hour shifts, and get called 
back. It’s not fair for a nurse to have worked three or four days 
and have finally booked off on Friday because that was their 
day off, and to be phoned over and over again: can you please 
come in to work. It’s not fair. 
 
And I know this is happening. I know for a fact it’s happening 
in households around the province where a registered nurse is 
living. Continually they get phone calls from their employer 
saying, we are short-staffed; can you please come in? If nurses 
don’t answer the call, if they don’t go in and work another shift, 

what that means is a backup in the whole system. 
 
Just last week we saw in Regina a number of surgeries 
cancelled. Why would surgeries be cancelled? Surgeries are 
cancelled because there isn’t enough support staff in behind. 
The person goes through the operation. They need recovery 
time. They need to be moved up to a specific ward. They need 
people around those beds to help that person recover through 
the whole process. 
 
And because we don’t have enough health care professionals, 
we end up with problems. We end up with people phoning in 
sick. We end up with surgeries being cancelled. There are a 
number of issues that happen because of this that are really, I 
think, to use a health care term, are symptoms of the chronic 
problem of a shortage. These are all symptoms. 
 
Overtime within the Regina Health District and the Saskatoon 
Health District is staggering. The overtime and WCB claims in 
the year 2003-2004, just for Saskatoon and Regina health 
authorities, for those two health authorities, the number of 
overtime dollars spent, the number of dollars spent on WCB 
claims was $11 million in the Regina Health District and $13 
million in the Saskatoon Health District. In one year, this 
provincial government put out $24 million because of WCB 
claims and because of overtime. 
 
When you look at that $24 million, had you hired full-time 
nurses, had you offered full-time work, had you offered 
permanent part-time shifts, you would have certainly dealt with 
some of the overtime issues. You would have dealt with some 
of the WCB claims. And that’s exactly what the union of nurses 
are calling for. By increasing the number of staff on the wards, 
we’re going to certainly reduce, I think, reduce some of the 
costs. 
 
The government may stand in their place and say we can’t hire 
that many more professionals because it’s going to cost too 
much. The cost to the system right now because we don’t have 
enough health care professionals is astronomical — $24 million 
in one year in two health districts, not to mention the other 10 
and the effects that it had in the other 10. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has weighed in on this whole subject 
too and has warned the government that these costs are getting 
out of control, that the overtime costs, that the WCB costs are 
getting out of control. It’s time to start addressing this problem. 
It’s time to have this issue addressed within the next provincial 
budget so that enough money is set aside so that we can 
properly staff our health care facilities. 
 
The other thing that we don’t take into consideration . . . I mean 
those are hard numbers. When I talk about WCB claims, when I 
talk about overtime dollars spent, those are hard costs. We can 
measure those, and we can see how much that costs the system. 
What we don’t measure and is very, very tough — it’s an 
intangible almost — is the care that patients are given within 
the facilities. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Now when we talk about health care, the majority of times 
when we talk about the issues and the problems around health 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

care, it’s the accessibility piece. People are not able to access 
the system. 
 
Most people, when they get into the system, feel they have 
pretty good care. But it’s a relative term; they have pretty good 
care. I don’t know if they’ve been in the hospital a lot. What do 
they have to compare it to? Because, when you talk to the 
health care professionals — and it’s particularly the registered 
nurses — they will all say that they do not have enough time to 
give the quality of care that they were trained for. They don’t 
have enough time to give the quality of care that they feel their 
patients need. 
 
We have the dubious distinction in our province of having the 
shortest stay in hospital. A person comes into the hospital, 
whether it’s a . . . whatever procedure they are receiving, they 
have the shortest amount of time stayed in our hospitals than 
any other jurisdiction in the province. And so that goes back to 
the quality of care that some of the people are receiving. 
 
You know, they maybe are moved out of the hospital because 
the bed is needed by more people coming in. They’re moved 
out perhaps quicker than what they should be. And quite often, 
that manifests itself in a reoccurrence of whatever their problem 
might have been, and they then have to access the health care 
system once again. So it’s a tough thing to measure. 
 
Is there a cost to that? You bet there is a cost to that. We know 
the tangible costs. We know the increase in overtime. We know 
the WCB costs. We know those. It’s the intangibles, about 
quality of care that nurses are telling us they fail to be able to 
deliver because of sheer numbers. They don’t have enough 
numbers on the ward. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about . . . just prior to the fall session, 
the former minister announced 43 new beds being opened in the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority. He said that they would 
be open, I believe, by November. And it was quite interesting. 
The timing was very close to when session was starting, and I 
don’t know if he thought maybe that would deflect some of the 
issues that we are going to be asking about. If we stood up and 
asked questions on health care, he’d be able to stand up and say, 
oh we’ve solved the problem. For example in the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Authority, we’ve increased the number of 
beds by 43, if that was going to solve the problem. 
 
Well it was interesting because they had set a date — the 
provincial government here had set a date — on when these 
beds were going to be open. They obviously hadn’t talked to the 
health authority enough because you can’t open . . . I mean, 
opening 43 beds sounds pretty simple. You open a ward with 43 
rooms, a bed in each room; you’ve got 43 beds up and running. 
 
But you know, I have said ever since I have become the health 
care critic, we talk in numbers of beds. We’re going to open 43 
beds. We’re going to close some beds in other jurisdictions. It’s 
not beds. It’s people. It’s people. You know, they keep saying, 
oh we don’t have enough beds. And people say, well my God, 
can’t you buy more beds? 
 
There isn’t a health foundation in this province . . . And there’s 
a health foundation and a successful one in Indian Head for 
their hospital. There’s a successful health foundation in Regina, 

in Swift Current, in Melfort. There’s health foundations in 
every province. 
 
I’ll guarantee you: if the minister wants more beds, go to the 
health foundation and say, could you please go and raise some 
money because we need more beds. Every foundation will put 
money into capital expenses, whether it’s bed, whether it’s 
neonatal units, whatever it is. That will be there. The hardware 
will be there. 
 
What we need are people around those beds to give care. That’s 
where the shortage is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And this government just prior to the fall 
session announced, we have 43 new beds — came into the 
province in a semi, I guess — and here are the brand new beds. 
What he failed to do is back it up with the professionals that 
need to be around those beds to make them effective because 
what happened was they announced the beds, and then we 
found out well they couldn’t open the 43 beds, not right away. 
They didn’t have enough personnel. 
 
And so the fall session kind of slid by, and only a few of the 
beds were opened up. I remember doing the news scrum 
regarding that issue, and I felt sorry for the poor fellow from the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority that had to stand out and 
answer for the . . . really I would have thought was the 
minister’s claim that they were going to open all these beds. He 
had to stand there and say, well you know we just weren’t able 
to get it done. It was almost like it was the health authority’s 
fault that they couldn’t find enough staffing around the beds. 
 
You know, wouldn’t it have made more sense for the 
government to stand up and say, I am sorry we hadn’t worked 
with the health district? We hadn’t done our homework. We 
didn’t have enough professionals to fill the beds. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, further to that story now, the 43 beds have 
been opened, and they’re probably full. They’re probably full, 
and they’re open. But that doesn’t mean that there isn’t issues 
with that whole situation because what has happened is these 43 
beds have opened, so we’ve had to shift human resources over 
to cover the demand of these new beds. 
 
Now if we were bringing in a whole bunch of new staff — just 
like SUN has called for and just like this motion is calling for 
— if we brought in new staff to man, to cover the beds, to 
service the beds, that would be one thing. But we didn’t bring in 
new personnel. We don’t have the nursing complement in this 
province sitting in reserve so that when the government says we 
need more nurses in this area, we can bring them in and hire 
them full time to deal with the issues around this bed. What had 
to happen was, you start stealing, robbing, from other wards or 
other levels of care to start filling the demand around these 43 
beds. 
 
And you know, I have had phone call after phone call from 
nurses in a certain hospital, the Regina General, in a certain area 
that said, we have lost so many staff to facilitate the opening of 
these new beds. In fact it is so dangerous on our ward right now 
that we are not able to give the quality of care. They are scared 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

of malpractice because they don’t have enough, for example, 
enough staff to monitor the monitors. They may have five 
people on monitors, and one nurse is supposed to cover that 
area, or it might be 10 or 15. I don’t know the numbers exactly, 
but what I do know is the plea from nurses on that ward saying 
it’s absolutely unsafe. It’s unsafe because they’ve pulled nurses 
to cover off a commitment made by this provincial government 
with no backing, with no backing of human resources. 
 
So when we stand in the House and say we need to look at a 
human resources plan, we need to address the vacancies, we 
need to hire more full-time nurses, it’s because there are 
shortages. It’s because there is a lack of quality care because of 
sheer numbers. They can’t do it any more. They have been 
stretched and squeezed and pulled as far as they can, and 
they’re saying we cannot provide good quality health care. 
When we go home at night, we know that we gave the best 
service that we could to that patient because really, frankly, 
that’s what those patients deserve, and that’s what our health 
care professionals want to deliver to the person. We know that. 
 
So it’s an issue where we continue to . . . The minister stood up 
and waved some human resources plan that has really no 
relevancy in the workplace today. We know that the amount of 
retirees, nurses that are eligible to retire, are going to increase. 
The nursing complement in our province, according to again 
anecdotal evidence . . . but also SUN are saying that the ages is 
increasing. It only stands to reason; when you lose graduates, 
our younger nurses going to other jurisdictions, the average age 
of our nursing complement is going to increase. And what 
happens to that then is you end up with retirements and issues 
like that. 
 
I know in small towns it must be a very, very tough issue for 
many nurses in small towns who are eligible to retire but they 
can’t retire. They don’t feel comfortable to retire because what 
is that going to do to the nursing complement in that small 
community? If they retire, they don’t have anybody coming in. 
If they retire, then all of a sudden the health authority says you 
don’t have enough staff to keep this facility open. The 
government is virtually putting on the backs of our health care 
professionals, either you keep working and continue to work 
even though you’re eligible for retirement, or your facility may 
very well close. 
 
Now what kind of a position would that be? You’re sitting there 
and you’re trying to keep your small-town hospital open, and 
you’ve got the weight of the fact that if I quit that could cost us 
the hospital in our small community. 
 
And it’s simply because we haven’t done a good enough job in 
retaining the nursing graduates. For years I know we had called 
on increasing the number of seats, and we have worked to do 
that. That’s only one part of the whole puzzle though. It’s great 
to increase the number of training seats so we produce more 
nurses, but you’ve got to offer them work that isn’t at 25 per 
cent time. 
 
We hear often from nurses who have come out of graduate 
school. They sit on the casual list waiting to get called in. They 
hope they get called in. They’re waiting. They’re waiting there. 
Meanwhile the student loans, the interest is accumulating, 
accumulating. They don’t get enough hours to address that 

issue. So what do you think their next move will be when a 
recruiter comes from Alberta and says we can give you this? 
We can guarantee you this, this, and this — and the nurses, I 
mean what else would they say? That makes perfect sense; I’m 
sorry, I’m going to go out to Alberta or I’m going to go to 
Manitoba or I’m going to go to another province where they can 
guarantee suitable hours. 
 
The minister stood up and said oh we’ve got full-time nurses. 
We probably have more part-time nurses working 25 per cent 
when they want to work 70 per cent. Not all nurses want to 
work full time, but you’ve got to give them hours that make it 
worthwhile staying in our province. And right now we know 
time and time again that isn’t happening. And that’s why people 
are looking for other jurisdictions to go. 
 
And the problem when a nurse moves, when they move, if they 
are married, they probably take their husband or wife with 
them. If they have kids, they take those with them, and they 
probably don’t come back. But you know, I know over and over 
again in our province even if that nurse, the son and daughter, 
she’s graduated or he’s graduated from nursing college, and 
they look for their first job and they say, geez, it looks pretty 
nice in Alberta. It looks pretty nice in British Columbia. I’m 
going to move out there. 
 
And so a couple of years later they’ve established their life in 
this other province and they’re doing quite well. And the 
parents that have worked hard in this province all their life, 
they’ve helped support their son or daughter through university 
— through the four-year program, nursing program for example 
— and they get to the point where they’ve retired now. So they 
start looking around because now they’ve retired from whatever 
job they might have had, and they look at, now where is my 
family? Should I retire here in Saskatchewan, or am I going to 
look to go to where my grandchildren are going to be, where 
my son and daughter has established their life, probably got 
married and started a family? So I’m going to retire here in 
Saskatchewan, or I’m going to follow where my kids have gone 
so I can see my grandchildren grow up. 
 
You know it’s an absolute shame when this government stands 
there and touts the fact that no one will get left behind. Well, 
you know, parents have been left behind in this province over 
and over and over again and it’s an outright shame, because we 
haven’t done the work to keep our youth in the province. 
 
And you know it just is reflective in the job numbers. It’s 
reflective in the out-migration of people. It’s reflective in the 
numbers that SUN has given us. So until this province is ready 
to take seriously the issues around retaining and recruiting 
nurses, until it’s serious about taking the lead with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and other health care 
professionals to develop a long-term human resources plan that 
will address the chronic shortage that we see in our province, 
we’re going to continue to see nurses look to other jurisdictions 
for workplaces that are safe and satisfying because they’re not 
finding them here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, seconded by the member for Melfort: 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

That this Assembly recognize the urgency of the nursing 
shortage in the province and urge the government to take 
immediate action on the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
requesting to fund 600 new nursing positions. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to enter this debate about an issue that I think is 
so critically important to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this seems to be such a tragedy that we have to time 
and time again go through this exercise and go through this 
process of talking about the critical need and shortage that we 
have of medical professionals in this province, and particularly 
registered psychiatric and registered nurses in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in beginning I would like to say that when I 
became the Health critic — seems like almost a decade ago, but 
I think it’s six years ago — one of the first things that I was able 
to determine very quickly in meeting with health care 
professionals is that we were getting into very quickly a critical 
shortage of registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, and 
licensed practical nurses in this province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again in this House we raised the 
issue about what was there going to be for a plan in order to 
meet this critical shortage that was developing. Initially the 
government’s response by the then minister of Health was to 
say we’re going to move away from a degree program and go 
just to a two-year program. And the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association and SUN and many other people 
vigorously opposed that whole decision, and thankfully we 
were able to get the government to change their course of 
action. Mr. Speaker, but as a result, nothing further was done 
and over the years this has been allowed to develop and to get 
worse and worse on a constant basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to hear that SUN is very adamant 
about addressing the issue of the shortage of nurses that are 
currently the situation in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, 
what’s even more alarming, that this shortage is expected to 
become much worse. 
 
There is a chart on a Labour Market Analysis Saskatchewan 
Nursing 2003 Update, by Mr. Doug Elliott in July, 2003 in 
which it sort of shows what the anticipated supply and demand 
forecasts are going to be for registered nurses in Saskatchewan 
going forward from 2003 through to 2007. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when they look at this, they put in the 
scenario of three different types of demand and supply 
scenarios — if it’s an average demand, a higher or low demand, 
and the same thing in terms of supply. If we even look at the 
medium demand numbers, somewhere in between the average, 
it shows that by 2012 that there is going to be predicted to be a 
shortage of registered nurses in the number of 548, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is easy to see why the SUN is asking 
for the immediate funding of 600 positions because it’s going to 
indicate very quickly we’re going to be that much short. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have to recognize that there is a real 

reality and a real chance that these numbers will not just be 
average. We have to acknowledge that the baby boom 
population is growing older, and there’s more and more of us 
that are going to require increased levels of health care services 
as we age. And so we might be into a situation where actually 
the demand for registered nurse services is going to be very 
high and not just an average. 
 
We also have to recognize that at the present rate of educational 
opportunities and training in this province, the supply of those 
nurses might be very low. And so if you end up with those two 
extremes happening, Mr. Speaker, if you end up if you like with 
almost a perfect storm scenario which is indeed possible, the 
shortfall could go instead of 550 nurses short we could be as 
high as some 1,700 nurses short in the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we have the current level of nursing at 
somewhere around that 8,500 level, you can see that if we end 
up in a scenario where we’re actually going to be 1,700 short, 
it’s going to be an untenable situation in terms of the delivery of 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many times in the past I’ve said in this House 
when you look at the whole health care system, that the system 
really is only as strong as the weakest link in the chain. You can 
talk about enhancing and improving services all through the 
system, but if you’re neglecting a critical area that’s creating a 
weakness in the system, the whole system suffers as a result of 
that. 
 
You can’t decrease the waiting times for surgical procedures if 
you don’t have a nurse to tend to someone in post-op 
[post-operative]. You can’t have it similarly if you don’t have 
nurses to work in the O.R. [operating room]. You can’t have an 
increase in the number of surgeries that are being performed if 
you can’t have someone in recovery. You can’t have increased 
numbers of procedures if you don’t have surgeons or 
anaesthetists. All of these people are critically important to 
work in combination in order for us to meet the expectations 
that the health care system has for our population in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly troubling and 
disappointing for me to have to enter into the same debate over 
and over and over again over the years because you’d think 
sooner or later the government would actually open their ears 
and listen to the concerns that are not only coming from our 
side of the House, from the opposition, but have been coming 
from the people in the health care profession these many years 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SUN has been highlighting their concerns about 
the supply of nurses for the system for years. SALPN 
[Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses], the 
licensed practical nurses association, has been articulating 
similar concerns about the shortage of LPN [licensed practical 
nurse] positions in the system. Mr. Speaker, each one of these 
groups and these bodies that they represent and the people that 
are working in the system have legitimate concerns that aren’t 
being met, and as time progresses, the situation gets more and 
more critical and acute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the arguments from the government opposite 
always seem to change and shift over time. You know in the 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

earlier days there was the argument that we weren’t graduating 
as many nurses because we went from a two-year diploma 
program and a degree program. We eliminated the diploma 
program, and so there was going to be a period of time when 
there were fewer numbers of nurses that were going to graduate 
and be available to the system. And because the government did 
not increase the degree program substantially when they phased 
out the diploma program, of course that was a self-fulfilling 
prophesy. Indeed as they moved to this situation, there was a 
drag in time because of the extra two years of training. Virtually 
we ended up with almost zero graduates from a program for a 
two-year period of time, and this made the situation even more 
critical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early in the 1990s we got it in our heads in this 
province that we didn’t need nurses, that this wonderful 
wellness model that the government was promoting was going 
to create such a healthy environment that we didn’t need all 
these nurses. And so many of them lost their positions in 
government downsizing of the health care system. Many left 
this province. Many left this country in search of employment, 
Mr. Speaker. And it seems such a tragedy that young men and 
women who are entering the nursing profession with such high 
hopes are ending up with a sense of frustration because what the 
government has done is created an environment where the only 
employment that they get upon graduation seems to be 
part-time casual with no permanence and no ability to count on 
regular hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know first-hand how painful it is to have 
someone in the family who has graduated with a degree in 
nursing, full of desire and exuberance and enthusiasm for the 
profession and wanting to go out into the community and serve 
as a registered nurse, having no opportunity to get full-time, 
permanent employment. I know how difficult it is for those 
individuals to sit by the phone waiting for casual calls so that 
they can indeed have some security of income to pay back their 
commitments and to start living their life with some 
independence and pride and the ability to meet the 
commitments of student loans and their education costs, etc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, granted that the way this government is 
mismanaging the system, these hours are available. But it is 
nothing you can count on and nothing you can plan for. So you 
can’t have a life that is reasonable at all because you can’t count 
on shifts, and if you want to have a day off, you’ve just got to 
make sure you don’t answer the phone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years people in the system have been saying 
that there’s something tragically wrong with this kind of a 
situation. If we have these shifts, if we’re getting into a situation 
where nurses are being worked to the point of exhaustion, if we 
have the situation where there’s tremendous amounts of 
overtime being paid, why in the world cannot we work out a 
system as other jurisdictions have done whereby these people 
have positions and jobs and shifts and a permanent contract that 
they can count on and plan their life around and exercise their 
profession with some dignity? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, one of the great tragedies in the health 
care system in Saskatchewan is the fact that we end up 
providing a very high quality education experience in the 
nursing programs in our province and then we end up with a 

situation that a third of the graduates from these programs leave 
the province and practice medicine in other jurisdictions. It’s 
our great loss and tragedy, Mr. Speaker, because these are 
highly trained, highly motivated, highly qualified young men 
and women who have a primary desire to serve humanity in the 
nursing profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the statistics and look at the 
retention rate and the comparison with other provinces, you 
know, you have to sort of say shame on us. I mean, it’s usually 
that we have the notoriety of having a record of some sort. 
Unfortunately in the health care system, the record is generally 
the worst in the country. It’s the worst for waiting times. It’s the 
worst for nurse retentions. 
 
And I don’t know why, just once, we can’t get ourselves into a 
situation where we actually are the best at something and that 
we actually achieve something that’s very special. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the percentage change in the workforce of nurses 
over the last four years is also an interesting statistic. And again 
it shows that we are faring fairly badly. The very worst 
province in this regard is Nova Scotia that has lost, in the period 
of time between the year 2000 and 2004, is that . . . Nova Scotia 
lost 1 per cent of its nurse force, RN workforce. Saskatchewan 
lost a half a per cent. 
 
Every single other jurisdiction in Canada has gained — actually 
has more nurses in the workplace than they had in the period of 
time before that. You know, Alberta increased fifteen and a half 
per cent. And I know the government opposite doesn’t like to 
compare ourselves to Alberta, but even Manitoba next door on 
the other side increased by 5.7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan went down by a half a percentage point during 
that same period of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the question honestly and openly, how long 
are we willing to stand by and let these kind of statistics pile up 
and the situation increasingly get more depressing? 
 
There is an incident occurring in the health district where I’m 
from that has a lot of the nurses concerned about what the 
future is going to be for them in health care. And because of 
this issue, I’ve had opportunities to have a fair number of 
meetings with practising registered nurses in our community of 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you ask them what their day was like, they 
come off a 12-hour shift to come and visit and explain their 
situation. And they talk about what level of staffing that they 
had. They talk about the fact that it is very difficult to staff and 
know what’s going to happen for sure. 
 
One day a nurse came to me on a Monday morning, and she had 
worked the weekend shift. And she said on Sunday when it’s 
generally more quiet in the hospital, there were some 
emergencies. There were some special incidents that went on, 
and the capacity of the system was almost at its full capacity. 
And they were unable to bring in sufficient people on 
short-time notice in order to meet the demand. 
 
And so they said, we’re committed to our patients. What we did 
was just sort of reach down inside of ourselves and worked 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

harder to make sure that the people that needed care were 
getting quality care. At the end of the 12-hour shift, this young 
lady was absolutely exhausted and was wondering how many 
more of these kinds of days she could cope with before she 
would definitely need to have some additional support and help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also, I believe, the case that workers’ 
compensation claims are very high for nurses working in the 
health care system and no wonder, because they’re working at 
the point of exhaustion because of the fact that there aren’t the 
people to fill the shifts. And when you are in that situation, you 
try to take shortcuts. You don’t think about doing proper 
procedures sometimes and lifting and you end up hurting your 
back. And then you end up in a situation where you’re shorting 
the workforce even further because these people are on 
compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, when I think of the efforts we’re 
making to train nurses in this province — and they are not 
enough — we’re not going to have enough trained positions to 
cover the retirements that are going to occur. When you look at 
the demographics of the population in Saskatchewan, we have a 
reality that a great many of them are of an age that they’re 
approaching the eligibility for retirement. 
 
And these nurses who are tired and exhausted are going to 
likely take their retirement when they’re eligible to have it 
because they’ve worked so hard in the system. And at the other 
end we have the graduating nurses who are not able to get 
full-time, permanent positions. A third of them are leaving the 
province so that even if we kept 100 per cent of the people 
we’re educating, what we’re doing in reality is only keeping 
two-thirds of them. One hundred per cent isn’t enough to 
replace the retirees and two-thirds of that certainly is not going 
to be enough. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re moving ourselves with absolute 
certainty into a crisis. And SUN to their credit has highlighted 
this as an issue. They’ve been highlighting it for years and I 
think now is the time when this government has the opportunity 
to act. In the past they used excuses like we were training . . . 
changing the educational training model. It was an excuse. In 
the past they said, well we don’t have the financial resources. 
We can’t increase these training seats because we don’t have 
the fiscal resources in order to do that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all of those excuses have gone away. This 
government has the fiscal capacity to do this in a proper way. 
So for the members opposite to stand and say that there is no 
fiscal capacity is simply unfair, and it would misrepresent the 
financial situation of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s not as if other jurisdictions haven’t 
recognized that decisions that were made in the early ’90s were 
decisions that were creating this problem and they’re taking 
steps to reverse it and change it. Mr. Speaker, as was outlined 
by my colleague, Manitoba and other jurisdictions are certainly 
putting together a plan that is working with much more 
co-operation and collaboration, and we’re ending up with a 
situation in those jurisdictions where improvements are being 
made and improvements are fairly significant and that’s very 

important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to make this work in our province, 
this government simply has to stop operating on its own 
arbitrary agenda and is simply going to have to sit down with 
the health care professionals in this province and work out in a 
collaborative way and in a coordinated way, a systematic 
approach to making these very important changes in the staffing 
in the health care human resources policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how in the world are we going to believe that we 
can change the statistics that are saying that a third of our young 
graduating men and women from nursing . . . in the nursing 
profession are not going to continue leaving this province if we 
don’t do something to change that situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is, is that unless we make a permanent 
commitment to permanent full-time jobs for people that are 
graduating, unless we as a government and as a people in this 
province sit down with SUN and the unions representing these 
professionals and work out a practical, pragmatic, coordinated 
plan that’s going to address this issue, it’s not going to go away 
by itself. It’s not going to go away because we wish it would go 
away. It’s simply going to sit there and fester and get worse and 
the statistics that are very difficult now are going to get worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not in an island and young people that 
graduate today are not unaware of neighbouring jurisdictions in 
North America and in Canada. They come out of their degree 
program, and I do believe that if given the opportunity and 
equal opportunity, that they would choose by and large to begin 
their careers in their home province. Most young people love 
this province. They enjoy the opportunities of recreation and 
family, and they enjoy the province that they grew up in. And 
yet if the choices between permanent full-time jobs or part-time 
work is the only choice they have, they can load up their 
diploma and their degree and put it into their car with their 
suitcases and drive to Manitoba, or Alberta, or British 
Columbia, or Texas, or anywhere at all where their highly 
qualified program and training is valued. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the question that we have to ask ourselves 
today: are we indeed in an emergency? And if we’re not today, 
when is it going to become an emergency? When is the 
situation going to get so critical that it’s . . . becomes almost 
irreversible? None of this stuff is going to change overnight. 
This needs to have the absolute commitment of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, of the official opposition, and of the nursing 
professions to say, let’s build a plan that’s workable and 
practical and can be achieved for a relatively short period of 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite chirps from his seat about 
the fact that this isn’t a problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
challenge the member if he’s so sure it isn’t a problem — talk 
to some young graduating nurses. Talk to them instead of sitting 
on the ivory tower and pretend that this isn’t a problem. Sit 
down and listen to these young men and women and listen to 
the real concerns that they’re expressing instead of making 
arrogant remarks from his seat in the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to acknowledge we have a problem. This 
problem has not happened overnight. It is getting worse every 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

day that it is ignored. And this government will be held to 
account if they simply continue to ignore it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly do support the concerns and the desires 
of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. There is the ability of 
this government to fund 600 permanent full-time positions in 
this province. Six hundred full-time positions would make a 
significant impact on the staffing of post-op and recovery beds. 
It would make a significant impact on the staffing of critical 
shortages. It would make a significant impact on the staffing 
that is creating the situation where nurses are overworked and 
burning out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we don’t as an Assembly support this motion in 
its entirety and communicate to the nurses of this province — 
the registered nurses, the registered psychiatric nurses, and the 
licensed practical nurses — if we don’t communicate to these 
precious health care workers in this province that this 
government and this Assembly, at a time when it has the 
money, is willing to commit to making these permanent 
positions available and part of our health care system, we will 
have failed them at a critical opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly support this motion and I call on the 
government to support it as well and to put it into this year’s 
budget process. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I appreciate the support of my 
colleagues as I stand to make my first speech as Minister of 
Health in this Chamber. I want to thank the members opposite 
for putting forward the motion today. I think it is reasonable to 
be debating health care this early in the session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this my first opportunity to address the 
Chamber as the minister, I want to indicate that at the end of my 
remarks, I will be moving an amendment to the motion in front 
of us. Mr. Speaker, the amendment will certainly address the 
fact that while there are challenges existing within the 
recruitment and retention of nurses within the system, Mr. 
Speaker, that those challenges also exist throughout the health 
care field with other professionals and others employed in the 
system. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, the amendment that I will move at 
the end of my remarks will read as follows: 
 

That all of the words after “recognize” be removed, and 
the following words be substituted: 
 
the challenges in the recruitment and retention of health 
care professionals in the health care system, and that the 
legislature work with the government on the 
recommendations of the Working Together: 
Saskatchewan’s Health Workforce Action Plan. 
 

So thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will attempt to address my 
remarks in three phases, Mr. Speaker. I would like to address 
the overall needs of the system. I would like to address the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ request and the subject matter 
of the debate raised by the opposition members today. And also, 
Mr. Speaker, in the third part I’d like to address the broader 
implications of the professionals working in the system and the 
challenges that this government faces as we must deal with the 
entire workforce in health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few things that I think are important for 
Saskatchewan people to recognize. This debate here today is 
important in that it focuses on recruitment and retention in a 
highly competitive environment. Mr. Speaker, the health care 
field is a very complex field. It employs about 30, 33,000 
people throughout the province of Saskatchewan. It utilizes 
approximately 44, 45 per cent of the provincial budget, the 
revenues received by the government to exercise on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan, a province of 1 million people 
were actually a city of 1 million people, the infrastructure 
required to support 1 million people’s health care needs would 
look considerably different than the health care infrastructure — 
capital and human. That infrastructure would look . . . looks a 
whole lot different in a province that is of the geographic 
diversity that this province is. So, Mr. Speaker, we are very 
much aware of the complexity of the system and of the 
challenges that we as those responsible for delivering that 
system to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just in terms of how complex it is and how large it is, Mr. 
Speaker, just a few statistics to open my remarks today. As of 
March of a year ago when all of the numbers were most clear, 
Mr. Speaker, we had physicians employed in the province of 
Saskatchewan: 909 family physicians, 753 specialists. Nurses 
employed in the province of Saskatchewan, March 2004, the 
numbers most readily available: 8,932 registered nurses, 982 
registered psychiatric nurses, 2,279 licensed practical nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the subject of the debate today is, is that enough. 
And in our action plan that I will address shortly, Mr. Speaker, 
the answer is no, that is not enough. We have more work to do. 
 
We are operating in this province of 1 million people, Mr. 
Speaker, 63 acute care hospitals, 2,539 acute care beds, 240 
psychiatric beds, and 314 other beds which would include 
observation, respite, palliative care, etc. 
 
The average daily activity in the health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, would actually surprise most Saskatchewan residents. 
Approximately 30,000 services in health care are delivered to 
Saskatchewan people every day. Average daily activity — 
12,400 physician visits occur in this province every day; 5,000 
units of home care services are provided every day in this 
province; 2,100 patients in hospital beds on any given day in 
this province; 257 surgeries every day; 279 CT [computerized 
tomography] scans every day; 58 MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging] every day; 200 to 250 calls per day managed by the 
HealthLine; and more than 800 immunizations performed every 
day in this province. Mr. Speaker, this is an incredibly complex 
system providing a considerable amount of care to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada recently rated the 
plans of the various provinces with regards to delivering health 
care. Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan, rated by the 
conference board of Saskatchewan, finished third of the 10 
provinces. Mr. Speaker, that’s an incredible accomplishment for 
a province of 1 million people. We are incredibly proud of the 
people who work within the system to deliver the care, services, 
and programs that the people of Saskatchewan desire. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we think more broadly about the 
health care system in Saskatchewan, we are tempted in this 
Chamber to talk about what has yet not been done, Mr. Speaker. 
When you do that, we have a tendency to forget what has been 
done to date. This is not a matter of can you tell me what 
you’ve done, but can you tell me what you’re going to do for 
me next, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact that’s the subject of the opposition motion today, is 
don’t pay any attention to what’s been done to this point, Mr. 
Speaker — which we know is considerable — only tell us what 
you can do, only tell us what we have yet to do. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as we have said in the past, we are working on 
retention and recruitment issues. And, Mr. Speaker, it is clearly 
a priority of this government to work on recruitment and 
retention issues for all in the health care field. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me address the matter at hand, as I 
indicated earlier, in two respects. The first one is to discuss just 
a little bit about the nursing circumstances in the province of 
Saskatchewan, how we are positioned in terms of the rest of the 
country and, Mr. Speaker, the acknowledgement that in fact we 
have more work to do. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So let’s just first of all look at the facts because it’s the facts 
that help to move us forward in finding solutions to what are 
perceived to be and what actually are problems. How are we 
positioned relative to the rest of the country? 
 
In 2003, Mr. Speaker, the number of nurses per capita in 
Saskatchewan stood at 855 per 100,000 people. This number, 
Mr. Speaker, is far superior to the same percentage numbers for 
Alberta and British Columbia. The number of nurses per capita 
in Alberta — 755. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that they can’t hear me 
when they’re speaking. In Alberta the number of nurses per 
capita stood at 755 per 100,000 people; in British Columbia, 
665 per 100,000 people. Remember, Mr. Speaker, the number I 
quoted — 855 per 100,000 people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So in terms of the number of nurses per capita working, we 
have a large number, larger than the other provinces in Western 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge it’s still not enough. We 
have more work to do, but that’s a considerable 
accomplishment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIHI, a study released by CIHI — C-I-H-I — 
released in October 2005, showed that the number of licensed 
practical nurses employed increased by 6 per cent and the 
number of registered nurses increased by 2.9 per cent between 
2002 and 2004. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize that some of the data brought 
forward to us by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses represents 
a time period from 1999 forward. Mr. Speaker, we recognize 
that indeed the numbers have improved considerably during 
that period of time, directly a result of action taken by this 
government. 
 
Let’s continue to look, Mr. Speaker, at the circumstances that 
we have faced relative to the other provinces. The total number 
of registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and registered 
psychiatric nurses in Saskatchewan has increased from 2002 to 
2004 compared to the national average, Mr. Speaker — not 
only to the Western Canada but the national average. 
 
And according to the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association] annual report, immigration of nurse numbers has 
increased since 2001 and out-migration has decreased, 
significantly closing the gap between in- and out-migration — 
Mr. Speaker, again paying attention to what’s been done to set 
the stage for what’s yet to be done. Mr. Speaker, we’ve made 
some significant gains. 
 
Nursing grads, Mr. Speaker, are staying in Saskatchewan. 
Eighty-one per cent of Saskatchewan RNs currently practising 
in this province were trained in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a significant achievement. Why? In part it’s because we 
have well-negotiated collective agreements. In 2003 the average 
annual hour earnings for a nurse in Saskatchewan were $26.14, 
a number that will be even higher with the collective 
agreements that we signed in just the last month or so. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is significant. More nurses are 
working full-time in Saskatchewan than in any of the other 
provinces in Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, this is a significant 
advancement — more nurses working full-time in 
Saskatchewan than the other Western provinces. According to 
CIHI in 2004, 55 per cent of Saskatchewan nurses had full-time 
employment — higher than the Canadian average, and higher 
than all the Western provinces. Certainly significantly higher 
than the province of Alberta where only 39 per cent of nurses 
working in the province had full-time employment. 
 
A nursing education program survey showed that 90 per cent of 
all grads preferred their current employment status, whether it 
was full-time or part-time. People in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, according to the surveys, like the working 
arrangements here in the province of Saskatchewan. Nursing 
overtime has decreased by 11.4 per cent since 2002, and at the 
same time during the past year we have seen sick leave decrease 
and injury rates and time lost drop. 
 
The successes I’ve listed are due in large part to recruitment and 
retention initiatives that have been put in place following the 
release of our 2001 health action plan. Must keep in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, with credit to the previous minister and the 
government that existed prior to the 2003 general election, Mr. 
Speaker, a recognition of some of the challenge that existed. 
The development between 1999 and 2001 of the action plan and 
the bringing into force, implementing recommendations from 
the 2001 action plan have had an impact on nursing numbers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge it’s not enough. There’s still 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

more work that needs to be done but, Mr. Speaker, significant 
improvements have been made. 
 
Nursing projections indicate there may be an adequate supply of 
nurses in Saskatchewan for a period of time. A follow-up 
survey of the 2000 graduating class of registered nurses shows 
that 76 per cent of the respondents were working in 
Saskatchewan. We’re working very hard to ensure that we have 
sufficient numbers of nurses in Saskatchewan. We have added 
100 nursing education seats during the past three years. By the 
fall of 2005 there were 400 nursing education program seats 
existing in the province. 
 
Since 2001 we’ve provided 8 million in return-for-service 
bursaries. In 2003, 97 per cent of RN graduates who received a 
bursary had confirmed employment in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, significant improvement, significant policy. Since 
1991 we’ve invested 3 million in continuing education and 
training; 2 million in Aboriginal awareness initiatives; 5.5 
million in quality workplace initiatives to improve occupational 
health and safety, mentoring, and injury prevention; and 6 
million to purchase electronic beds, patient lifts, and other 
equipment to make safer workplaces. The government spends at 
least $75 million annually to train, recruit, and retain health 
professionals in this province. 
 
We acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that we have a distribution issue 
in this province as well. Like many professions in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, people are attracted in the health field just as they 
are in other professions to work in larger centres. We need to 
find a better way to encourage nursing graduates and other 
health professionals to consider rural and remote locations. Mr. 
Speaker, the hardest part of recruiting in North America — US 
[United States] states, provincial governments in Canada — the 
hardest part of recruiting and retaining professionals is the rural 
parts of those jurisdictions. 
 
We also acknowledge that, given the projected number of 
nurses that could retire over the next few years, there will 
indeed be additional challenges. Therefore Saskatchewan 
Health is working with SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations], the unions, regulatory bodies, and the 
health regions to look at different options to meet our needs 
over a long period of time. One of those options is making 
greater use of health care professional teams and having all 
professionals work to their optional scope of practice. That 
means doing things somewhat differently than we’ve been 
doing them in recent years. 
 
Saying that we have a critical shortage, Mr. Speaker, is not 
accurate. There is a shortage. How critical it is, Mr. Speaker, 
will depend entirely on the way in which we continue to work 
with the communities and the representative associations. We 
can not destroy confidence in the system by talking about what 
has yet to be done without paying some attention to the good 
work that has been done. 
 
In December, Mr. Speaker, of 2005, just a few months ago, we 
released a provincial Health Workforce Action Plan to national 
acclaim. In fact, the Health Council of Canada recognized this 
Saskatchewan action plan as the most comprehensive plan in 
Canada and that Saskatchewan took this matter most seriously 
of all jurisdictions. A number of actions were highlighted in this 

plan with respect to nurses. And I encourage members to read 
the report and stay tuned to the provincial budget for 
announcements that will be forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Working Together: Saskatchewan’s Health 
Workforce Action Plan, indeed as I indicated during the 
question period today, Mr. Speaker, contains a considerable 
number of recommendations for moving forward in the health 
care field. 
 
I want to quote briefly from the introduction to the action plan, 
an introduction written by the Premier and our previous 
minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, the very first paragraph is most 
telling. And I quote: 
 

We are fortunate in Saskatchewan to have highly skilled 
health care professionals who are committed to providing 
the best possible care to their patients. However, like many 
other jurisdictions across Canada and around the world, 
Saskatchewan has experienced shortages in some health 
professions. Supporting, attracting and developing health 
care personnel is one of the biggest challenges in our 
health care system. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve attended a number of different international 
and North America health discussions. Last year here in Regina 
the Midwest Legislative Conference, a group of American state 
legislators, met outside the United States in Canada in the city 
of Regina. Members of the opposition attended that conference 
as I did. 
 
One of the discussions during that conference, Mr. Speaker, as 
you will remember, was health care in the United States; 
comparison of the delivery of health care in the US to the 
delivery of health care in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, listening 
to that conversation of US legislators, state senators, state 
representatives, was like sitting in a coffee shop in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The challenges faced by the Midwest states — Ohio, 
Wisconsin, Kansas, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, 
Illinois — Mr. Speaker, the challenges faced by those 
jurisdictions, recruitment and retention particularly in rural 
areas. The competition for professionals is significant, North 
America wide. Professionals, highly educated and trained 
professionals, are attracted to jurisdictions where the pay is 
higher, where the working conditions are pleasant, the quality 
of life seems better. 
 
In Saskatchewan I think our quality of life is second to none in 
the world, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to live in rural 
Saskatchewan. But sometimes young people are attracted to the 
bright lights of the big city and the parks and the music and all 
that goes with that. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s more and more 
challenging to bring and keep professionals in a rural 
environment — North America wide, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan is a small jurisdiction. 
 
We put together the Health Workforce Action Plan, Mr. 
Speaker, because we know these challenges exist today and are 
only going to be more challenging in the future. Mr. Speaker, 
the plan flows from the first ministers’ meeting that occurred in 
September 2004. At the conference those who were present 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

identified doctors, nurses, pharmacists, technologists as the 
largest groups of health care providers that needed to be 
addressed in our planning process. So fulfilling the first 
ministers’ commitment in the province of Saskatchewan here 
the health human resource plan builds upon the 2001 action 
plan that I described earlier. 
 
We have since 2001 demonstrated our commitment to retention 
and recruitment in a number of ways: educating more health 
care providers in Saskatchewan; developing a workforce that is 
more representative of the people it serves; expanding bursary 
programs for needed health care professionals; expanding 
continuing education and development; improving workplace 
environments; further committing to health sciences education 
and research; and, Mr. Speaker, developing and implementing a 
province-wide health human resource plan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the consultations that have 
occurred across this province — consultations that included 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the regional health care 
authorities, Mr. Speaker — as a result of these conclusions, the 
plan in front of us reflects the common vision, goals, and 
objectives of Saskatchewan people and those who are working 
in the health care field. The actions in the plan reflect our 
collective commitment to recognize and retain health care 
professionals that Saskatchewan has and supporting them in the 
work that they are doing; improving self-sufficiency and 
training for our own heath professionals within the available 
resources; recruiting from outside Saskatchewan to supplement 
our own supply; and finding innovating ways to keep 
Saskatchewan youth in our province, providing them with 
training and employment opportunities in the health care field. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making some incredible inroads in 
recruitment and retention. Others who are looking from outside 
Saskatchewan at what’s going on in this province have told us 
we’re heading in the right direction. We’re doing the right 
thing. And, Mr. Speaker, we are confident that — with our 
continued efforts in conjunction with, in collaboration with the 
professionals in the field — that we are going to be able to 
recruit and retain to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next few weeks I will be meeting with a 
number of representative associations, including Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, to discuss this very subject. Mr. Speaker, I 
look forward to the continuing good relationship that the 
previous minister established, that this government has in place 
with professionals providing needed care. Mr. Speaker, I look 
forward to being able to find a way to ensure that we can 
finance and implement the recommendations brought forward 
in the workplace action plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I view my challenge as the new minister not in the 
broad sense of developing a lot of new things. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that the previous minister and the consultative approach 
to doing things has brought forward a number of 
recommendations that will be very beneficial to the health care 
system and the people of Saskatchewan. I view my challenge as 
minister to ensure that we’re in a position to implement the 
vision that has come before us. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let’s build on the good things that we have 
achieved together in the province of Saskatchewan. Let’s use 
what we have achieved today to assist us in what is yet to be 
done. Concentrating only on what has yet to be done in the 
absence of acknowledging and respecting the work that has 
been done does not serve the interests of the system or the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be to be able to move 
an amendment to the motion, acknowledging the work that 
Saskatchewan nurses are doing but also acknowledging that the 
system is a complex system with a lot of very important 
professionals working in it. I move, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That all the words after “recognize” be removed and the 
following words be substituted: 
 
the challenges in the recruitment and retention of health 
care professionals in the health care system and that the 
legislature work with the government on the 
recommendations of the Working Together: 
Saskatchewan’s Health Workforce Action Plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this would be seconded by the member from 
Regina Lakeview. Thank you very much. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Regina Lakeview — 
and this is an amendment to the main motion: 

 
That all of the words after “recognized” be removed and 
the following words be substituted: 
 
the challenges in the recruitment and retention of health 
care professionals in the health care system and that the 
legislature work with the government on the 
recommendations of the Working Together: 
Saskatchewan’s Health Workforce Action Plan. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise to speak in support of my colleague’s motion as 
we look at the whole health workforce area and have some 
discussion which can provide information to the public of 
Saskatchewan around the good work that has been done in 
collaboration with all of the people who work in our health care 
system. 
 
Now I’d like to start out by just giving a bit of a background for 
many of the people who are listening or who will read this 
information later. Who do we have in our health care system in 
Canada? In the 2001 statistics that we got, I think from 
Statistics Canada, there were 1.1 million people in Canada who 
worked in health care. That’s about one in every ten people who 
work in the workforce. 
 
Canadians use many, many different types of health services, 
and they access many different health care providers. According 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

to the Canadian community health survey in 2003, 82 per cent 
of females and 71 per cent of males consulted a family 
physician during the past year. Also dentists, other specialists, 
chiropractors, massage therapists, and other professionals were 
reported to have been consulted by many people, but usually 
more women than men. 
 
In the year 2003, registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, 
and registered psychiatric nurses accounted for just under 
one-half of all the health care workers in Canada. In 2003, 
CIHI, the Canadian Institute for Health Information, counted 
70,000 physicians in Canada or approximately 220 per 100,000 
Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I describe a bit about how many people are 
involved and why the issue of nursing is so important and why 
we’re also concerned about doctors because this is a Canadian 
problem; this is a North American problem. And in some ways, 
it’s an international problem. 
 
And what we need to do as we move forward is plan and work 
together with the people who are involved in this field to make 
sure that we get the right number, the right mix of health care 
providers so that we can deal with the numbers of patients who 
require services. 
 
A further complicating factor in all of this for us in Canada and 
in North America are the demographics where we end up 
having to deal with the fact that many of us who are in the 
various professions, but especially in health professions, are 
part of what we would call the baby boomer age. And we’re in 
that situation where many of us are planning to retire in the next 
10 to 15 years. Because of that, there’s been much planning 
both around the workforce and also around pensions frankly in 
every jurisdiction in North America. 
 
And so what has happened in Canada has been an attempt to do 
this provincially and nationally. We in Saskatchewan have been 
able to work together with the various professions and with the 
people within our health care system over quite a number of 
years. And as my colleague, the Minister of Health, indicated, 
working together here in our government, we were able to come 
forward in December 2001 with an action plan which set out 
where we were going to go in a whole number of areas. A 
crucial piece of that related to health human resources. And at 
that time we started working in a number of different areas to 
make sure that we would be ready for the various issues that 
would arise as we provided for the workers within our system. 
 
This process included clearly working with many, many 
different groups. But it was also done in parallel with 
colleagues across the country. And these particular issues were 
the subject and continue to be the subject of ministers’ 
meetings, of deputy ministers’ meetings, and others who are the 
health human resource people across Canada. When the first 
ministers and health ministers came together in Ottawa in 
September 2004, one of the key points that was discussed at 
that point was, how are we going to get the information about 
how people are preparing for the health human resource 
workforce, and then how are we going to make sure that our 
planning is coordinated. And at that point it was agreed in the 
communiqué from that particular meeting that every jurisdiction 
would work towards providing a health workforce action plan. 

In Saskatchewan, because we had been working on this since 
our action plan in 2001, we were able to build on the work that 
had already taken place. And last year we went working at this 
in a very sort of clear way. What happened was that we ended 
up getting advice from health and learning stakeholders, 
government departments, around setting up a process. And then 
from May to October 2005 we had health stakeholders come 
and offer their advice and ideas about the issues facing the 
many different health professions in Saskatchewan. Out of this 
consultation five themes arose, and these I think are important 
to just hear what the five key themes were. 
 
The first one was quality of care. The second one was the 
workforce environment. The third one was education and 
training. The fourth one was evidence-based planning; let’s use 
actual facts when we do our planning. And finally the old issue 
of the roles and responsibilities and relationships between the 
various employees that were within the health care system 
along with the administration. 
 
The plan that was developed out of that process was released by 
the government in December 2005. And this plan has many 
aspects to it, but clearly it’s setting out for us our goals, our 
desires about where we’re going to go. And, Mr. Speaker, when 
we released this plan we were meeting the deadline that all of 
the premiers and the Prime Minister had set for ourselves in 
September 2004, but we were the first in the country to actually 
have a document and a plan ready to go. 
 
I’d like to quote from the December-January news bulletin of 
the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association. And this was 
written by Donna Brunskill who is their executive director. 
Quote: 
 

Recently, I had a chance to participate in a new first for 
our province and a first for Canada: open, strategic 
consultation on health human resource planning initiated 
by Saskatchewan Health. It was exciting to participate in 
the dialogue with employers, educators, unions, 
government and health regulatory bodies present. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in the process that we have developed over a 
number of years here in Saskatchewan, we have a good base to 
tackle exactly the problems that have been identified by various 
groups within the system. But we also have a plan that allows 
us all to work together as we do that. And this plan I think sets 
out quite clearly our common vision, our goals, and our 
objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is that vision? And I will put it right here on 
the record. The vision for Saskatchewan’s health workforce is 
that it be an integrated workforce, well educated and trained to 
provide high-quality care that builds a province of healthy 
people and healthy communities. 
 
So how are we going to do that? The guiding principles for this 
plan are that we will focus on the health needs of Saskatchewan 
residents, that we’ll build a representative workforce that will 
respect and value the health workforce in Saskatchewan. We’ll 
be responsive to the service needs, delivery models, and health 
related strategies. We’ll use an integrated approach that engages 
all health sector partners in the planning process. We’ll build 
strong and transparent accountability structures, will be 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

evidence based and outcomes oriented, and that will analyze the 
cost and service implications of any proposed actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are guidelines that are being used as we 
continue to work on the health human resource issues. I think 
it’s important that people understand that, after much thought 
from very many careful and expert people, we end up having a 
vision, having some guidelines, and some principles about what 
we’re going to do. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, there are certain objectives that we have 
that are part of this plan. And the goals and objectives of the 
plan are this: the first goal, that the health care system has a 
sufficient number and effective mix of health care professionals 
who are used fully to provide safe, high-quality care. The 
objective under this goal is that we would improve the 
province’s self-sufficiency by increasing our capacity to train 
more health providers within our fiscal means. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Health minister has already outlined 
some of the things that we’re going to do there. 
 
[16:00] 
 
We’re also, under this objective, we’re going to improve the 
retention and recruitment of health care professionals to meet 
our needs here in Saskatchewan. And we will, under this 
objective or this goal, also support the best and optimal use of 
all health care professionals in working within their scope of 
practice. 
 
The second goal is that the health system has safe, supportive, 
and quality workplaces that help to retain and recruit health care 
professionals. The objectives under this goal are that we would 
ensure that our workplace environments are safe and healthy 
and that we’ll assist the workplaces to support staff in providing 
quality care. 
 
The third goal is that Aboriginal people will fully participate in 
the health sector in all occupations. Our objective here as the 
province of Saskatchewan is that we will become a leader in 
training Aboriginal health care professionals in Canada. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we have many things to celebrate here in this 
province around our nursing programs and all of the work that 
we’re doing to make sure that we have this as an important part 
of our vision for our province. 
 
The fourth goal is that the education and training supply of 
Saskatchewan health care professionals is aligned with 
projected workforce requirements and health service needs. 
We’re going to have to ensure that our education and training 
system is responsive to Saskatchewan’s labour market needs for 
health care professionals, and we want to increase the capacity 
for Saskatchewan’s health employers to provide opportunities 
for students pursing a health career. And clearly we want to 
provide culturally appropriate care for people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under this objective I know that my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, has outlined many areas 
where she’s working around how . . . for all professions in this 
province, but I think especially in health care, that we will 
identify and make it absolutely clear that our post-secondary 
training will meet the needs that we have in our health care 

profession. 
 
The fifth goal is that the health workforce is innovative, 
flexible, and responsive to changes in the health system. And 
our objectives here are that we would educate and train the 
health workforce to work in inter-professional teams to provide 
quality care. And we’d also enhance the workforce information 
and data systems to support evidence-based planning, and we 
will ensure that the roles and responsibilities of all partners in 
the health sector are articulated and understood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this last goal speaks to what we are doing in the 
future, which is hoping and planning to lead the country, if not 
the world, in how we adapt our health workforce to provide the 
best care for our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Our government’s commitment to this is shown in the money 
that we have put forward for the health sciences education 
building and all of the related parts to that at the University of 
Saskatchewan, which will be then related with all of the training 
that we have in this province. That kind of commitment on the 
education side dovetails very nicely with the work that we’re 
going to continue to do as it relates to implementing this Health 
Workforce Action Plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers of things that have been coming 
together through the collaboration of many people providing 
their advice, their assistance, their enthusiasm, is what makes 
our situation in Saskatchewan, even though we have a number 
of issues in various areas, that all this enthusiasm is what makes 
us able to say that we’re going to be tackling these issues in a 
very direct way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are challenges and opportunities and 
responsibilities for all of the participants in the health care 
system. There are challenges at the administration side. There 
are challenges for Saskatchewan Health on a province-wide 
basis. There are challenges for the managers in various facilities 
across the province. But there are also challenges for individual 
employees that they end up having to meet and deal with, and 
continue to develop their educational opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all should be very proud of our 
employees in this province because they have in many ways 
been able to deal with and cope with change that has happened 
in our health care system over the last 50 years. And most of 
them have done that by being very dedicated in making sure 
that they do their continuing education work, that they continue 
to work with their colleagues to make sure that they’re using the 
best practices possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also a number of issues around how the 
various professional groups work together and how the various 
representative groups work within these professions that also 
have meant that people need to think of new ways of how they 
provide these services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will, as leaders in the health care side from the 
government side, continue to ask questions through the 
leadership in the department about what are the things that you 
can do to contribute to making sure that we have the best care 
possible for our patients. And this includes all of the issues that 
have been raised by the members opposite today and other 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

times. They continue to be kinds of questions that need to be 
asked, but they need to be solved in conjunction with all of the 
people involved. 
 
I’m pleased to be able to say and to report very formally not 
only to Saskatchewan people but to the Canadian people that 
we, through a collaborative process with the unions, with the 
professional organizations, with the senior managers, with the 
board representative, board members, with professionals who 
we brought in to analyze some of these questions, have come 
forward with a road map that shows us the kinds of things that 
we need to do and builds on the many things that we have 
already done. 
 
Do we have it absolutely all correct right now? I don’t think so, 
but I don’t think anybody expects that. What they expect is that 
we’ve worked together and that we’ve set out what we’re going 
to try to do. Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of thing that we’re 
going to do. 
 
Now let me just talk a bit about what is extremely frustrating as 
it relates to how our system works here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a certain role for the opposition to raise 
questions about how things are done. And they do that on a 
regular basis. But there’s also a role for them to propose ideas 
and suggestions that may help the system, and that’s an area 
where frankly we haven’t heard much over quite a number of 
years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a challenge, that the people of 
this province expect that if you’re going to go out and attack 
what things are being done that you also provide a contribution 
of some good suggestions of what happens. Now unfortunately 
many of the things that the members opposite have talked about 
can’t totally be relied on so that that ends up being a challenge. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are at a point in the history of our country 
as it relates to our health care system where I think the public 
knows quite clearly where this government stands, where this 
minister stands, where all his colleagues stand about the 
Canadian health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
it’s quite as clear about where the opposition stands. Because 
we see some things happening in other provinces by people 
who have similar political views to what these members 
espouse where it’s causing some great deal of difficulty for how 
our Canadian health care system works. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is not the subject of the discussion that 
we’re having today but I think, Mr. Speaker, it is the subject 
that the public wants to hear about in addition to whatever kinds 
of things the members raise. Where do they stand on our 
Canadian health care system? We strongly believe in a publicly 
administered, publicly funded system that continues to provide 
care for all of the people in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do all that we can to 
make sure that our system provides good care at a reasonable 
cost and in a way that provides care and access across this 
province. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to second 
the amendment that my colleague has made and I thank the 
Assembly for the opportunity to speak on these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege and an honour today to participate in 
the debate about something that is extremely important to 
everyone in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened very closely to the comments of the 
current Minister of Health and I’ve listened to the comments of 
the former minister of Health as they’ve talked about the 
objectives that have been set in action plans — action plans that 
are, you know, three years old — the kinds of things that are 
there. And the words are all very, very nice. They are words 
that people will read and say, these are good objectives. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, one of the criticisms of that action plan is in 
fact that there are no clear and specific targets. And that’s 
what’s missing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to begin my remarks today by talking about 
numbers. People are going to look at the verbatim of today’s 
debate or they may be watching today and it requires an 
understanding of where we were as a province, where we . . . 
how we have moved and what are our plans for the future. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it is very critical to understand that this 
province had both a diploma and a degree program for 
producing registered nurses. 
 
And I’m going to go back as far as the year 1991; 1991 is an 
awful long time ago — 15 years ago. But that is the first year of 
the current NDP government that sits opposite. And in 1991 
there were a total of 364 registered nurse graduates in the 
province of Saskatchewan made up of both a diploma and a 
degree program. 
 
The province decided that the diploma program was something 
that should be phased out. And there occurred over the course 
of the next seven years a reduction of diploma nurses down to, 
in fact, zero. And in the year 2000 the number of graduates, the 
number of registered nurses that achieved that type of 
registration, totalled 138 — all degree nurses. So we went from 
a time of 364 nurses to 138. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there were other provinces that did exactly 
the same thing, and I want to look at the statistic of Manitoba. 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan — very similar in size. We share a 
lot of similarity in agriculture and other things. The province of 
Manitoba in the year 2000 also graduated 146 registered nurses. 
So we’re almost exactly the same. But you know, that’s where 
the similarity ends, other than the fact that there still is a 
socialist government in Manitoba and there still is a socialist 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have now looked ahead to the statistics of Manitoba. And in 
the year 2004, after significant changes by the Government of 
Manitoba, recognition that in fact 145 registered nurses was just 
simply not going to be enough, they’ve made changes. And in 
fact their graduating nurses, registered nurses in 2004 was 479. 
You know what Saskatchewan’s was, Mr. Speaker? It was 210, 
and it still remains very close to that. Because even though the 
minister responded that they are putting in place new training 
seats — and in fact, there were supposedly going to be near 400 
training seats very shortly — we’re not going to see those 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

graduates for four more years. Four more years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at the situation that is facing the hospitals and 
the delivery of care, it’s not about the beds, as my colleague the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone talked about. It’s not about 
the physical plant. It’s about people. And first of all, you have 
to look at who you’re dealing with. First of all, we’re dealing 
with patients. We’re dealing with people who require care. 
That’s the first group of people that are affected. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The second group of people is the health care providers; those 
are the people. And the stress and the kind of, you know, 
responsibilities placed on them is critical, Mr. Speaker. So 
when we take a look at the numbers and say, where has this 
province moved? It hasn’t made a clear forecast for the 
positions that they want. It has been slow. 
 
I recall my colleague, the member from Melfort, speaking about 
this when he was the critic for the opposition, the Saskatchewan 
Party opposition, years ago. When he was the Health critic, he 
was suggesting many, many years ago that it was time to 
recognize that there was first of all a shortage of nurses and 
secondly that we were just getting into the baby boomer 
retirement age. 
 
Take a look around at our facilities, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 
care whether you’re talking about the city of Regina or whether 
you’re talking about Canora, Saskatchewan, or Preeceville or 
Kamsack. The age of the people that work in the health care 
profession, especially in the nursing profession, is going higher 
and higher and higher. 
 
There are nurses who have wanted to retire or have been 
eligible to retire for four or five or six years, but they’ve been 
asked to stay on, to stay on. Why, Mr. Speaker? Why would 
someone who wants to retire be asked by the community to stay 
on? Well that’s because there are no available nurses. There are 
no available nurses. 
 
When we look at the retention rate in this province and we see a 
retention rate that is the worst in all of Canada, a retention rate 
of 66 per cent, that means that one out of three nurses, one out 
of three of those 210 graduates, isn’t looking for a job in 
Saskatchewan. They’ve moved. 
 
And my colleagues have indicated to this Assembly why those 
reasons are there. And, you know, that number one reason is 
full-time occupation. They don’t want to sit at home waiting for 
that call in the morning to say, well we’re short a position over 
in that hospital, or we’re short a registered nurse in another 
hospital. They want to be given permanent, full-time work. And 
that’s not there. 
 
That has been something that has been created in this province 
for the last 15 years. It’s a direction that this government has 
set. That shows lack of leadership, Mr. Speaker — lack of 
leadership in recognizing that a change that we went through, 
through the course of the late ’80s, and reduced the number of 
nurses across this entire country was not the correct move. 
 
And in fact now we’re seeing that the projections which were 

on a low of about 5,000 nurses are now up into that 9,000 
nurses across Canada. And it will continue to grow. But again 
we’ve been left behind. The Premier talks about being left 
behind. Well we’ve left the entire province of Saskatchewan 
behind because now we’re dead last. We’re dead last in 
retention and we’re dead last in terms of how we’ve moved 
forward and ensured that we have a number of nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of situations, as I mentioned, 
within every community. And I recall standing in the 
Legislative Assembly in the year 2002 and raising a concern 
about the community that was then in the Canora-Pelly 
constituency and now is in the constituency of 
Kelvington-Wadena, and that is the community of Foam Lake. 
Foam Lake was in a situation where the health district board 
was suggesting that it should lose its acute care. 
 
An article in the Foam Lake Review of October 14, 2002, the 
headline, Mr. Speaker, says “Staff Shortage Continues to be a 
Problem”. This is after raising this issue for years that in fact 
the Foam Lake hospital was in jeopardy of losing its acute care. 
 
I want to, from this article of the Foam Lake Review of October 
14, 2002, Mr. Ben Weber — who still is the Chair; he is the 
Chair of the Sunrise Health Authority — this was his quote at 
that time: 
 

It’s across Saskatchewan. We face tremendous challenges. 
There are very serious shortages. 
 

And the article goes on to say: 
 

And he says, we are just seeing the tip of the ice berg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was 2002, October, three and a half years ago 
when a community recognized that it was going to lose its acute 
care. Why? Not because it didn’t have doctors. It had two 
physicians in the community of Foam Lake. Not because it 
didn’t have the existing staff right there, but because a nurse at 
that situation, at that facility was wanting to retire and she could 
not because there was no one to take her place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what occurred after that statement in the paper, the 
community went out and tried to secure nurses, tried to ensure 
that they could keep the facility open. And they did get a 
temporary nurse to come in, but it didn’t last. And today, Mr. 
Speaker, the delivery of acute-care services in Foam Lake 
doesn’t exist. Why? Not because there isn’t the proper facility, 
not because there isn’t a physician, but because there are no 
health care providers, the registered nurses. 
 
And we look around the province, Mr. Speaker, I look at the 
other three facilities in Canora-Pelly constituency, hospitals at 
Preeceville, Kamsack, and Canora. Every one of these facilities 
has a staffing component that is aging; they are the baby 
boomers. And when you start to look at the number of nurses 
that are coming through the training program, the retention 
level being the worst in all of Canada, the cities are of course 
going to be the first choice. They will be where the graduates 
look at for the first available job. Why? Because of the services 
in the city, the fact that they don’t have to live in rural 
Saskatchewan and be, you know, in a small community. 
 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the shortage becomes more and more acute, 
rural Saskatchewan sees that compounded situation because the 
problem will compound itself for a rural community and we’re 
seeing that throughout. So, Mr. Speaker, unless this government 
is prepared to move as the motion suggests and is a 
recommendation of SUN that more permanent, full-time 
positions be created immediately, there will be a greater and 
greater loss of services across this province. 
 
You know we can’t centralize into the cities for all care. And 
we can see that. I can see that on the east side of the province 
when I look at the regional hospital in Yorkton. There have 
been many times where the regional hospital in Yorkton has 
closed a certain wing of the hospital. They didn’t close that 
wing because they were short of doctors or that they were short 
of other components. The component that was missing, Mr. 
Speaker, was nurses. 
 
And many people on the east side of the province will recognize 
that the regional facility in Yorkton had a tremendous 
orthopedic surgeon, one of the best I dare say in Western 
Canada never mind just Saskatchewan. He’s no longer there. 
He’s no longer practising in Yorkton. 
 
And the reason was that every day he faced a situation where he 
had diminishing operating room time. Not because the 
operating facility itself wasn’t there and able to be used, but 
they had to cut back in the number of surgeries that they were 
doing because there wasn’t enough nurses back on the 
post-operative care floor to be able to handle the patients. It had 
nothing to do with the physician. It had nothing to do with an 
operating room. It had to do with the fact that there wasn’t 
post-operative care provided by nurses. 
 
We see that in the city of Regina. I’ve had, I guess, the 
misfortune of being in the Regina General many times, and I’ve 
been in wings where there, at the end, there were four or six 
beds that were empty. They were there; they were empty. And I 
asked the nurse who was on duty, why are the beds not being 
used. She said we don’t have the staff to be able to handle them. 
So therefore patients sit on a waiting list. And I know that the 
new Minister of Health recognizes that the waiting list has to be 
dealt with. 
 
And I believe it’s something pretty simple. It’s the utilization of 
our facilities. And I know we’ve talked about regional facilities 
being able to do certain operating room procedures, being able 
to take the stress and the strain off of our major facilities in 
Regina and Saskatoon. But that’s not going to be possible, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not going to be possible if we don’t have the 
nurses to be able to care for the patients. Back again, as I said at 
the beginning of my remarks, back to people — people are the 
ones that are going to be the providers of care. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at, you know, some of 
the recommendations that have been put forward, it’s 
interesting to look . . . And it’s been a while now since we and 
this Legislative Assembly have reviewed the Commission on 
the Future of Health Care in Canada, the final report as prepared 
by a former premier of this province, Mr. Romanow. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, chapter 4 of that final report is called 
“Investing in Health Care Providers,” and it’s an interesting 

chapter because a component of that chapter deals with the 
nursing situation. And there’s a lot of material in this chapter, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m not going to put it all on the record even 
though I’d like to. But I’m very specifically going to deal with 
three points. Mr. Speaker, the comments by Mr. Romanow are 
these. It says: 
 

It also looks like the demand for nurses will increase even 
more in the future. The following are some of the key 
problems that have been identified: 
 

So these are the things that Mr. Romanow sees as a problem. 
And this is cross-Canada, but let’s now narrow our thinking to 
Saskatchewan. First one he says: 
 

Too few graduating nurses — There has been a reduction 
of over 50% in the number of graduates from nursing 
schools in the past 10 years. On top of that, of those who 
graduate, 3 in 10 either leave the country or leave the 
nursing profession . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, that summarizes exactly what I’ve been saying 
about the nursing numbers for the province of Saskatchewan. 
145 registered nurses graduating in the year 2000 didn’t cut it, 
and 210 graduating nurses now still isn’t adequate to meet the 
needs of this province. All you have to do is take a look at the 
retirees. Take a look at the number of registered nurses retiring, 
and you know that those numbers just don’t add up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second point raised by the report, by Mr. 
Romanow’s report, is this: too many nurses leave the profession 
due to stress, poor working conditions, and poor morale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone 
highlighted that very, very well for this Assembly and for the 
people of Saskatchewan. When you take a look at the number 
of times that nurses have been called back, called back after 
working overtime and then receiving, in fact, greater overtime 
. . . Yes, there is a financial benefit to them but there is also an 
emotional problem that occurs. There is a stress level; there is a 
cost. 
 
When I was a member of the Public Accounts Committee I 
recall the Provincial Auditor, when he produced a chapter on 
health care and its problems, identified the cost to the health 
care system of people who were put out on disability or were 
taking sick day leaves. That is a concern to the health care 
systems. 
 
So when we start to look at those additional costs of people who 
are sick, people who are on stress leave, overtime costs, and 
then we look at the fact that we don’t have permanent full-time 
positions created by this government, the whole system just 
seems to beg the question, why? Why are we in a situation 
where we have young graduate nurses sitting, waiting for a 
phone call in the morning? And the other situation is we have 
nurses who are overworked, who are on stress leave. Those two 
need to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third point raised by Mr. Romanow is the nursing 
profession is aging. His comment is that the average age of a 
Canadian registered nurse increased by 1.3 years from 42.4 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

years in 1997 to 43.7 years in 2001. That’s the latest data that 
Mr. Romanow worked with. But I’m sure if that you look at the 
data now, you will see that in fact that has increased even more. 
And those are statistics that are available from the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses or the SRNA. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also read into the record one of the 
quotes that was delivered to the task force that dealt with this 
commission and that quote is this: 
 

For nurses on the job right now, work means mandatory 
overtime. Mandatory overtime means that you can be 
disciplined if you refuse. It places an undue burden on 
nurses and our families, and it puts patient care in 
jeopardy. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that quote is from the Canadian 
Federation of Nurses Unions, 2001 and was part of a written 
submission. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, move that ahead five years to today. 
What’s different? Well now you can probably eliminate the 
Saskatchewan . . . you know, as a global position and you can 
put it into every facility in this province. That is the concern of 
the nurses: mandatory overtime, stress, and, you know, 
conditions that are imposed on families that should never have 
been imposed. So there is very clearly, as Mr. Romanow has 
pointed out back in the final report, there were three conditions 
that this government should have been acting on. 
 
And the former minister of Health, I recall him standing and 
saying, well you know, everything’s well in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve got an action plan. We’re going to move 
forward with this action plan. Well as I said, words are fine but 
if you don’t have clear, set objectives that have timelines so that 
you can meet the needs, you have a problem. 
 
And the problem is highlighted very clearly by the fact that 
today we have the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses coming 
forward and saying we need to create 600 more full-time jobs, 
full-time, permanent nursing positions. And I think, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I think you’ll see very clearly that immediately 
if you created those kinds of positions you would open up some 
beds that are currently closed, that don’t have adequate staffing. 
And as soon as you do that, you will then allow the operating 
rooms in many, many facilities to do more surgeries. You will 
meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s, I think, the point that this government continues to 
miss. It is people. It is people that are part of the system, that 
make up that very demand for the health care system. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, in closing I would just like to 
emphasize that the members opposite I’m sure would want to 
hear a little bit more, but we’ll hold those thoughts for another 
day, Madam Deputy Speaker. We’ll hold those thoughts for 
another day. 
 
But it’s clear; this is not an issue that should be treated lightly 
by the members opposite. This is an issue that needs action 
now, not five years ago when we asked this government to do 

something and the answer was, there was a plan, there was a 
plan. Well today we’re finding out that in fact there has been no 
changes to the system in terms of providing more care. 
 
The member opposite groans about that, but let him take a look 
at the facilities today. Let him take a look at the burden on 
health care workers in those facilities. And I’m sure he will 
understand that in fact that is a true factual statement. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I encourage this government to 
take a good look at what has been proposed. The Finance 
minister is preparing his budget. There is a need to address the 
concerns across the province for all of those regional health 
authorities so that in fact they can put in place permanent, 
full-time positions for registered nurses so that in fact we can 
deliver better care to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you very 
much, and thank you, colleagues. I thank the hon. member 
opposite for participating in the debate. Indeed I welcome the 
opposition for having moved the original motion which I find 
may be well intentioned, but I’m proud to say that I stand in 
support of the amendment as put forward by the Minister of 
Health. 
 
And I want to start my speech today, Madam Speaker, by 
simply reminding everyone what it is that caused nurses to enter 
nursing. I happen to be blessed where I’m sitting with 
colleagues sitting literally on both sides of me who have 
spouses who are nurses. And I’ve taken the opportunity of 
asking them and they’ve confirmed what I already knew. And 
that is that their spouses entered nursing with a profound desire 
to make the world a better place, with a profound desire to help, 
to reach out to people in their time of the most, most need, 
because when we are in most need is when we’re ill, whether 
it’s from an automobile or some accident or whether it’s some 
chronic illness or part of an aging process or — heaven forbid 
— cancer or diabetes or any one of a seeming endless parade of 
maladies that can affect us all. 
 
But what has profoundly affected nurses and motivated them to 
go into the profession, Madam Speaker, is the real desire to 
reach out and to make a difference. And I want to say that 
nurses in Saskatchewan — and indeed I suspect worldwide — 
make a difference every day in so many ways that they can’t 
even recognize themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes, yes, a hand for nurses, exactly. They help, 
Madam Speaker, they help families at a time when . . . Well let 
me get a little bit personal right now. My mother passed away 
not that long ago, and I want to say that the nurses — indeed all 
of the health care professionals — did their job, I guess I can’t 
say beyond what one would hope for, but they certainly did not 
let anyone down. The end was an inevitable end, and they were 
even helpful at that particular moment in our times. 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2006 

Madam Speaker, the member for Canora-Pelly talked about 
1991, and I wasn’t going to go back there. I was not going to go 
back to 1991 when I talked about nurses and talked about health 
care. The member used 1991 to talk about us having changed 
the number of nurse graduates from 364, and he went down to 
138. I believe he used 1995 for that year. 
 
I want to say, Madam Speaker, just to be clear and on the 
record, that those numbers are very close. And I want to say 
that by 2004 the number of graduates, nurse graduates 
registering with the SRNA in 2004 in Saskatchewan, was 268. 
It’s being ramped right back up as fast as we can get the 
training spaces, as fast as we can get the trainers, as fast we can 
get nurses to enter the field, and as fast as, quite frankly, money 
allows it. 
 
There’s always in . . . no matter what it is we do in life, there’s 
always a bottleneck in the funnel so to speak. There’s always a 
problem that needs some specific help and needs to be 
addressed, and indeed the Department of Health has been 
addressing this for some years now as money has become more 
available to us. They’ve been working diligently on it. We are 
determined to continue to increase the number of RNs in 
Saskatchewan. We’re determined to continue to improve the 
situation. Indeed last year Saskatchewan provided $750,000 in 
bursaries for RNs, bursaries for nurses last year in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a number of things that goes on. In fact Saskatchewan, 
Madam Speaker, has the highest number of full-time registered 
nurses in all of Canada, the highest percentage of full-time 
nurses and that’s in all of Canada. That’s not just in all of 
Western Canada, but in all of Canada. Certainly it’s better than 
Manitoba, better than Alberta, better than BC [British 
Columbia], better than Ontario. Fifty-four and a half per cent of 
our RNs are full-time. 
 
We have the highest percentage of LPNs or licensed 
practitioner practising nurses employed full-time — highest 
percentage in Western Canada. The percentage we have is 51.2 
per cent employed full-time of LPNs, and the national average 
is 44.1 per cent. 
 
So to say that our system is somehow in a crisis and its going to 
collapse today or tomorrow or next week is being a little bit 
loose with the facts, Madam Speaker. It suggests to me some 
lack of credibility. We have a situation where we’ve got a 
health system and we’ve got nurses that work hard. We’ve got 
health care professionals that work hard every day. I’ve already 
talked a bit about that and in the interest of time I’m not going 
to return to the scene of that particular statement. People work 
hard every day, this is the point. 
 
Health care — our system — is not, is simply not in a crisis. 
Overall the system is not in a crisis. I want to define, Madam 
Speaker, what a crisis is. A crisis is when I or one of my 
immediate own loved ones is in need. That’s a crisis and that’s 
how we personalize everything. That’s just the reality. I can’t 
tell you how many patients there are waiting for heart surgery 
that are in the hospital today. And yet I can tell you 
unequivocally, it’s a huge crisis for those patients and their 
families. It’s a huge crisis, and one that I wish every one of 
them the very, very best. 

The good news of course is, on a sidebar note, the good news is 
if you want to have heart surgery, Regina is one of the top 
half-dozen places in all of the world to have heart surgery. We 
just excel beyond anything that we should be capable of, but 
there have been studies that say that Regina is just a fabulous 
place if you’ve got a heart condition or a heart problem. This is 
where you would ought to want to be. 
 
The member for Canora-Pelly spoke of 1991 and how we were 
ratcheting down the training spaces for RNs. And, Madam 
Speaker, that’s absolutely true. I know. I was there. I was part 
of that, as he termed it, first-term NDP government. First term, 
1991. 
 
Well I want to say that we had a situation where it was just 
beyond . . . It was not possible to continue to borrow money. 
The province of Saskatchewan was up against a brick wall. The 
moneylenders said, no more. We inherited a $1.3 billion annual 
shortfall — $1.3 billion. In 1991 it was 27 per cent of the 
provincial government budget. 
 
They don’t want to hear it and they just absolutely refuse to 
think about it, but in 1991, Madam Speaker, that was the 
situation. No money. The situation was that we did not know 
with any degree of certainty that we could continue to meet 
payroll — and the obligation as government is to make sure that 
we could meet the payroll for nurses, doctors, teachers, civil 
servants, not to mention all of the various programs that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is involved with and provides. 
 
Madam Speaker, here we are, having come from that situation 
through the 1990s where The Globe and Mail described 
Saskatchewan as the economic jewel of Canada. The economic 
jewel of Canada was Saskatchewan throughout the 1990s with a 
9.8 per cent economic growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Absolutely. And yes, we socialists on this side 
are proud of it and we’re justifiably proud of having had an 
economy, Mr. Speaker, that grew faster than the rest of Canada 
through seven years out of the 1990s. We’re proud of that. 
 
And that’s enabled us to come today where we’re dealing with 
the nursing situation, with nurse training, with the health care 
system, and we’re dealing with a motion that essentially says 
health care is in a crisis. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you 
that the opposition are quick to call crisis. And in health care — 
in health care — they’re quick to call crisis for a very simple 
reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
We are on this side of the House clearly in every day, in every 
way — in every way imaginable — we are clear supporters of 
medicare; of publicly funded, publicly supported health care. 
That’s who we are on this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — We say health care needs to be worked on every 
day, in every way. We say we need to pay attention every day, 
in every way and work to make health care work for not only 



March 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

the people that provide health care, but work for the people that 
are recipients of health care. 
 
And we have a system in this province second to none. We have 
a system. You can find a individual problem. You can poke at 
individual problems. And yes, any time you’ve got some system 
that employs, as the former minister of Health said, one in ten 
people in Canada, any time you’ve got a business that’s that big 
and deals with those critical issues, you’re going to have a 
bottleneck that needs some attention. 
 
And what’s the member opposite’s solution, Mr. Speaker? The 
member opposite would be, well let’s just move away from 
medicare; let’s open it up for privatization. Now I’m hearing 
members opposite say, that’s not what we said. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what they campaign on. And I know leopards 
and I know that leopards don’t change their spots just in the 
heat of one given debate. 
 
I know that we are the party about medicare. I know that my 
grandmother was part of the Thompson Commission that made 
the final recommendations to Tommy Douglas’s government 
that brought in medicare, Mr. Speaker. I know that. I know 
what medicare is. I know who we are and I know who they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so proud of our health care system. I’m 
proud of our nurses. I’m proud of what we’re doing with our 
nurses. I’m proud to say that every day, in every way we’re 
working to make health care work better and better and better. 
The proof is in the pudding. 
 
The members opposite don’t like the numbers of nurse 
graduates going up. They don’t like the $750,000 funding we 
put into bursaries last year for nurses. Mr. Speaker, they see 
challenges. They see challenges. They see crisis. We see 
opportunities. And yes, we see challenges but we see 
opportunities. 
 
We see opportunities to do better. We see opportunities to make 
this work. We see opportunities. We’ve increased the number of 
RNs working full-time. We have the highest number of RNs 
working full-time anywhere in Canada; highest number of 
LPNs working full-time, percentage of LPNs working full-time 
in Western Canada. And they say we’re in a crisis and it’s the 
nursing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of a former premier, a former 
premier who sat on this side of the House — briefly sat on the 
other side of the House after he was roundly defeated — and 
that premier said, well there’s so much more we can be in 
Saskatchewan. He was right. He was right in the statement, 
there is so much more we can be. And we are determined to 
take us there, one solid step at a time, and get us from here to 
the promised land. 
 
And the journey is the fun of it, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re proud to be embarked on that journey. It’s a journey we 
take with the nurses, we take with all of the health care 
professionals. We take it together, Mr. Speaker. We will get 
there. We have a health system, as I’ve said, just an excellent 
health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I clearly have touched some nerves. Clearly I’d 

love to go on, on this debate. I expect there will be some other 
opportunities to talk about health care and to brag about the 
wonderful things that we’re a part of and that health care 
professionals, that nurses — be they RNs, LPNs — are 
delivering. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that nurses have my 
profound respect. I want to say that all health care professionals 
have earned mine and our respect and admiration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park that debate on this motion be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
order questions 565 and no. 566. 
 
The Speaker: — 565 and 566 have been ordered. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:51.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................586 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................586 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................586 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Bladworth Community Rink Roof Collapse 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Bernice Sayese Centre 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Carbon Dioxide Plant Under Construction Near Consul 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Prairie Giant: The Tommy Douglas Story 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................588 
 Canadian Chamber of Commerce Appointment 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................588 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Jobs and the Economy 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................588 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................589 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................590 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................590 
 Safety Concerns for Residents of Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................592 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................592 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Congratulations on the 100th Anniversary of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................593 
MOTIONS 
 Substitutions on Committees 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................594 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................595 
TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................595 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................596 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................601 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................604 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................610 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................613 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................615 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




