


















































Hansard: May 18, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 63B  THURSDAY, MAY 18, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1735 
 May 18, 2006 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being 7 o’clock the proceedings 
will resume as per order of this Assembly. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into the Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — The estimates before the committee this 
evening, Committee of Finance, vote 10, Executive Council. 
We welcome the Premier and would ask that he would 
introduce his officials accompanying him this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
We are joined and assisted tonight by Mr. Dan Perrins, who is 
deputy minister to the Premier; Mr. John McLean, who is 
director of senior management services, and this will be Mr. 
McLean’s first process of estimates in the House and I want to 
welcome him here; and Ms. Bonita Cairns, director of corporate 
services; and my own chief of staff, Ms. Lois Thacyk. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, 
member from Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Madam Chair. First off, 
Madam Chair, let me say to the Premier, thank the Premier in 
advance for the time here this evening, as well to his officials 
for being here as well this evening for the estimates of 
Executive Council. Madam Chair, I’m sure we’ll get into some 
vigorous debate and political debate I’m sure as the evening 
progresses. 
 
I would say however that I would like to begin with what I 
think are basic questions of any head of any government, 
certainly questions that I have, that we have for the Premier. I 
think the people of the province of Saskatchewan are very 
reasonable. I think their expectations of their government are 
reasonable. I think they’d like their government to have a little 
vision, Madam Chair. I think that’s reasonable. A vision for 
growth and a vision for success for their province. 
 
I think, Madam Chair, they’d like to see their government be 
fundamentally competent in the management of their resources, 
as stewards of the taxpayers’ money. And in achieving that 
fundamental, that basic competence that I believe that residents 
of this province want of their government, I think they’d like to 
see, they’d like to know that their government has goals. 
 

I think any organization, if it’s going to be successful, is going 
to have goals in the important areas of delivery that that 
organization may preside over. And, Madam Chair, Mr. 
Premier, I would ask you tonight to tell the Assembly, tell this 
Assembly and therefore the people of Saskatchewan what your 
goals are. 
 
And we’ll start with population. We have heard members of 
that side of the House say things like they believe it’s 
statistically impossible for this province to grow, even at the 
national average which is just about 1 per cent. We’ve heard 
heckling from the back that well in terms of population 
numbers, we’ve heard heckling that, you know, 900,000 is . . . 
there’s nothing wrong with that number. The state of Montana 
has 900-and-some thousand and the state of North Dakota has 
this, as if it’s some sort of justification for the fact that we’re 
losing . . . we continue to lose people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well obviously if we’re going to sustain the quality of life we 
enjoy in the province, we’re going to need more than that. 
We’re going to need a goal set for population growth, and I 
would ask the Premier to share that with the Assembly now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
And I want to extend my own again greetings to our officials 
and to all members who are here tonight to participate in the 
estimates of Executive Council on such a fine Saskatchewan 
spring evening. 
 
Madam Chair, this session began as all members will recall 
with a Throne Speech in the fall, beginning a new process for 
this legislature or a revival of an old process where we will 
meet in the fall, deal with Throne Speech, and essentially meet 
in the spring to do some legislation and budget. 
 
And so I refer the Leader of the Opposition to the Speech from 
the Throne which began this session, Madam Chair, a speech I 
believe he and his colleagues voted against. Madam Chair, in 
this speech we set some very visionary goals for the province of 
Saskatchewan — very visionary goals. And I would argue, 
Madam Chair, for the time I’ve been in this Assembly this is 
one of the most visionary throne speeches that has been read by 
Her Honour or any former Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Madam Chair, in this Throne 
Speech the vision and the goals that we outlined very much 
reflected the vision and the goals that we took to the people of 
Saskatchewan in the last general provincial election, an election 
that endorsed those visions and goals. And they are put in this 
Throne Speech and with some very practical and 
forward-looking, forward-looking detail. 
 
We talk in this Throne Speech of building a green and a 
prosperous economy in this province. We talk about building 
diverse and growing communities, Madam Speaker. We talk 
about, Madam Speaker, a community and a society and a 
province where people are not being left behind on the pathway 
to opportunity, Madam Chair. These are the kind of visionary 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

goals. We set goals for our environment. We set goals for 
sustainable energy. We set goals for immigration. 
 
Madam Chair, we have an overall arching vision and a goal for 
this province — to build a better life for Saskatchewan people 
here. That’s our overarching goal, Madam Chair. In that goal 
we want to see, as I said, diverse and growing communities. We 
want to see population growth. We want to see solid, solid 
social programming for our people. We want to see a thriving 
economy. 
 
And as we debate this budget, the budget that I expect again 
will be voted against by the members opposite, a budget that 
brings about that vision and that goal in very practical ways, 
Madam Speaker, let me reference the program of immigration 
that we’ve talked about in this Throne Speech followed by 
some very specific actions in this budget. 
 
We have set some very, very ambitious, albeit ambitious goals 
but very specific goals in increasing the number of immigrants 
into our province. Now in this budget that I expect they’ll vote 
against again tomorrow, in this budget significant new 
resources to reach out to the nation, to the continent, and the 
world to draw people to our province through the process of 
immigration. 
 
But it’s not just immigration we want to use. We want to 
develop our own young population, particularly our young 
Aboriginal population. 
 
Madam Speaker, we are not going to set, we are not going to set 
a number. We are going to achieve the best that we can possibly 
achieve in this province. We’re not going to set an artificial 
target. They had a plan. I remember. They ran it in an election 
when the member from Rosetown-Elrose was leading the party 
over there. They had a plan. They said they were going to grow 
the population by 100,000 people. That’s what they said — 
100,000 people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Madam Chair, where is that goal 
today? Where is that goal today? Where is that plan? It’s been 
trashed, Madam Chair. They don’t even refer to it any more. 
 
Madam Chair, then they come up with, the last session, they’ve 
got 100 new ideas. That was in the last session — 100 new 
ideas. I don’t think they talked about growing population by 
100,000. The idea was gone by then. But they got 100 new 
ideas. 
 
Now we come to this session and this budget and the debate 
about this Throne Speech. There’s no plan at all. Not a plan at 
all. In fact they refused, they refused as late as today with the 
media to talk about their plans, Madam Chair. 
 
We have set ambitious goals, we have set ambitious visions, 
and the difference is, Madam Chair, we accomplish our vision 
and our goals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, and with respect to the Premier, 

with respect to the Premier, saying the word goal a number of 
times in the answer does not constitute a goal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, saying that you want a green and 
prosperous economy does not constitute a goal, Madam Chair, 
by any fair measure. Saying that you want, saying something 
about the . . . Saying something about lots of people on the 
pathway to opportunity is not a goal, Madam Chair. 
 
These are platitudes. That’s what they are, Madam Chair. I 
mean I guess people in the province also have their own goals. 
We would like summer to be longer and there to be fewer 
mosquitoes. But they’re not goals either. They’re just 
sentiments. They’re sentiments. The Throne Speech press 
release is full of them. The Throne Speech itself is full of them. 
 
The question to the Premier is simple. We’ve heard MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] on the government side 
say they don’t believe, it’s statistically impossible for the 
province to grow at the national average, which is about 1 per 
cent. Does the Premier concur with that? Does he believe that 
it’s impossible for us to grow? And if he doesn’t agree with it, 
what is his goal for growing the population of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I repeat, we are not going 
to set artificial numbers which will somehow satisfy the Leader 
of the Opposition. I’ll tell you what we do over here. We set 
vision and we set goal and then we go about accomplishing it. 
He says, he says that the vision, he says that the vision of a 
green and prosperous economy is a hollow vision, a hollow 
goal. No, I’ll tell you what it means. I’ll tell you last year, 
Madam Chair, in this province gross domestic product grew by 
3.3 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That is a growing, prosperous economy. 
And this year, Madam Chair, the anticipated growth is 3 per 
cent. These are both well above national average. 
 
Madam Chair, we take our vision and our goals, we turn them 
into practical reality, and the people of Saskatchewan tonight 
are seeing that and they’re feeling it. There’s an optimism in 
our province that I have not sensed for years. They are seeing 
the result of strong vision, strong goal, and practical reality and 
practical policy by this government, not hollow commitments 
made in an election campaign by leaders of the opposition, 
which are then lost, lost only months after the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the truth of the matter is, Madam Chair, the 
government used to set goals. The government, Mr. Romanow’s 
government set goals. And I think even this Premier may have 
set a job creation goal — 30,000-plus jobs over a four-year 
period, I think was the goal. But of course they fell woefully 
short of the target. The Premier’s government has actually 
presided over one of the worst job creation records in the 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

country. 
 
So in the latest effort of the Premier and the Minister of 
Industry and Resources when they tabled their report, their new 
plan, there were no goals at all. They had decided, much as the 
Minister of Health has pointed out with respect to nurse 
recruitment and retention, we’re not going to set a goal. Why? 
Because we’re pretty sure we can’t achieve them. 
 
Well the difference of course, Madam Chair, is that — and it’s 
an important difference — the we that they’re referring to when 
they say we can’t achieve them, is that NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government. The people of this province are more than 
capable of achieving those goals, Madam Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The Premier doesn’t have a goal for population. 
In fact as far as we know they’re looking at a goal for it to be 
reduced, if you listen to members opposite. Well you know 
what? There’s the minister responsible for the SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] debacle 
and he’s chirping and he has weighed in on the issue of 
population. I remember that when he was asked about 
out-migration in the province of Saskatchewan he said, don’t 
worry if people leave because there are more left for the rest of 
us. Is that the population goal of the government? Maybe that 
is. 
 
I would argue again, as I have in the past in this Legislative 
Assembly, that there is some truth to that — that if certain 
people were to leave the province, there would be more left for 
the rest of us and it’s that front bench right over there, Madam 
Chair. That’s the truth of the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I will ask the question of the Premier with respect 
to jobs. What is the Premier’s goal for job creation in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I’m always surprised a 
little bit how quickly the Leader of the Opposition seems to get 
angry in his presentations. The fact of the matter is — and these 
are widely known and felt in the province of Saskatchewan — 
in the year 2000, more jobs in this province than ever before in 
our history. This most recent month of April, again more jobs in 
the province of Saskatchewan than any April on file in the 
province’s history. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition would turn up a newspaper and 
look at what’s happening in the communities around us, just 
this week, Madam Chair, just this week the young person who 
is in charge of operating the student employment centre at the 
University of Regina said to the people of Saskatchewan he’s 
never seen anything like the job market that he sees this 
summer for students in this province. 
 
In fact he said and I quote, I quote, Madam Chair, “I can 
guarantee that any student that comes to this job placement 
centre will have a job in 24 hours.” He has, he says, 2,000 jobs 
available at this job centre. The story is repeated across the 
province. 

If the Leader of the Opposition and members of the 
Saskatchewan Party ventured out of this building once in a 
while they would see, as we see everywhere we travel, help 
wanted signs in the variety of windows that we pass by — help 
wanted signs. There are thousands of jobs available today, 
Madam Chair, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Chair, the challenge that lies before us, having 
created this buoyant economy where the headlines are telling us 
that boom times are here and boom times are coming, having 
created this vibrant, vibrant economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan, we have challenges. We do. And that is to meet 
the needs of this expanding economy, to meet the labour market 
needs today. 
 
Madam Chair, that’s why you will see in this budget — a 
budget that I expect they will vote against again tomorrow — 
that’s why you will see in this budget, Madam Chair, record 
investments in training for our young people, record 
investments. I’m told that we have now over 67,000 training 
spaces available in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s why 
you see in this budget a commitment to freeze tuition fees for 
the students of Saskatchewan at post-secondary universities in 
our province. That’s why you see in this budget, Madam Chair, 
the very budget they will vote against, the most significant cuts 
to business taxes in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why, Madam Chair? To encourage investment, to see job 
growth in our province, and provide even more opportunities 
for our young people to develop and live their careers and lives 
here. That’s what you see in this budget. What does this 
opposition do? They complain. They get up and they complain. 
They don’t offer a positive suggestion. We haven’t heard one 
positive suggestion of what could be done or should be done in 
this province. We don’t hear it from the Leader of the 
Opposition on a daily basis. 
 
Madam Chair, this is a government that believes in the future of 
this province. This is a government that has taken this economy 
and brought it to new heights. We are seeing more jobs in our 
province. We are seeing more opportunities for our young 
people. And as a result of the budget now under debate, Madam 
Chair, I tell you the world is opening to us for the future and for 
the future of our young people. 
 
And, Madam Chair, mark my words, they will vote against it. 
They will vote against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well first of all . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before the next question is put, I’m really 
allowing a lot of spirited support for those members speaking. 
But I would ask that members do not yell across the floor while 
people are on their feet asking or answering questions. Thank 
you. Both sides. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, let me first of all assure the 
Premier that members on this side of the House, and 
specifically myself, the Leader of the Opposition, I’m not 
angry. But I am very, very disappointed in this government. 
And we are very, very disappointed even in the answers we’ve 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

got tonight because so far what we’ve found on the Premier’s 
pathway to opportunity is that there are no goals for population 
growth in this province. 
 
There are no goals even though, Madam Chair, since the 
Premier took office in February 2001, Alberta has gained 
213,700 people, BC [British Columbia] has gained 271,200 
people, Manitoba, 66,110 people. And under this Premier we 
have lost over 7,800 of our most precious resource. And in that 
context the Premier offers no goal for population. 
 
He doesn’t have a goal for job creation even though we know 
again we have, in a boom time as the Premier has highlighted in 
terms of commodity prices, we have an NDP economic plan 
that’s presiding over a terrible, one of the worst job creation 
records in the country. After seven quarters of loss, finally the 
uptake happened last month. And what did the numbers show, 
Madam Chair? 
 
They showed that Manitoba next door, not nearly as well 
blessed with natural resources as we are, is creating jobs at three 
times the rate as this province. In BC and Alberta it’s about 20 
times the rate of job creation in this province. So that’s the truth 
of it. That’s this Premier’s record. 
 
He’s managed to do this, mind you, at a time of $70 a barrel 
west Texas and a time of high natural gas prices, a time of high 
commodity prices in terms of potash and uranium. And yet 
leave it to this NDP government to manage to squander the 
opportunity that should be here in that kind of a boom time 
situation. 
 
So there’s no goal from the Premier on population growth. He 
doesn’t have one. He doesn’t want to set one. Why? Because 
well he knows his government, his economic plan can’t achieve 
it. Number two, on job creation the same is true, there is no 
goal. 
 
So what about some other issues, Madam Chair? Does the 
Premier have a goal for, let’s say for instance, nurse recruitment 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I want to remind the 
Leader of the Opposition of a number of facts as opposed to the 
kind of rhetoric we get from the leader and from members 
opposite, the number of facts. In 2005 there were more jobs in 
this province than ever before in Saskatchewan’s history. That 
is a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In 2005 we enjoyed the lowest 
unemployment rate in this province’s history in the last decade, 
in the last decade. A far cry better, if I may say, than when that, 
when that Leader of the Opposition was working upstairs here 
in the Devine government. 
 
This year, 2006, a fact: private sector investment, and these 
figures are determined by RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] and 
other financial institutions, the private sector investment in this 
province is expected to grow 561 million additional dollars — 
that’s a 6.7 per cent increase in private sector investment. That’s 
the prediction for this year. In mining, oil, and gas capital 

spending the anticipated growth is a whopping growth of 18 per 
cent. 
 
Now those statistics translate, Madam Chair, they translate into 
real jobs for real people in our province. Real jobs for our 
young people in our province. And that is the record, that is the 
factual record of the New Democratic Party government in this 
province. 
 
I will compare that factual record with the record of that 
government in office any day of the week on any platform in 
the province. Because there are many people in this province 
who remember the out-migration, the massive out-migration of 
Saskatchewan young people and Saskatchewan people 
generally when that leader and his party governed this province. 
It was massive. It has taken us a decade to repair just some of 
the damage they levelled on the province. 
 
Now with that repair in place, we are building this green and 
prosperous economy. We are providing growing and diverse 
communities. And we are offering opportunities to our young 
people. Those are the facts and they are undeniable, Madam 
Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, the question to the Premier was 
this: what are his government’s goals for nurse recruitment in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I will speak very directly 
to the issue of the recruitment and the retention of nurses in our 
province. And of course to put this in context, I’m not sure 
there is a jurisdiction in North America who isn’t facing some 
of the same, the same challenges in providing health care 
providers to meet the needs of today. 
 
Now it is one thing, Madam Chair, to recognize the problem, 
and the Leader of the Opposition is good about that. It’s quite a 
different thing to move to solution. 
 
Now an interesting thing happened today in this legislature, in 
its rotunda, when the Leader of the Opposition was asked, why 
is it you only raise concerns and questions and never a positive 
solution? Never a plan. Never an idea. You know what the 
Leader of the Opposition said to the journalist right out here in 
the rotunda? He said, oh no, no, I’ll tell you all about that when 
we get into the election campaign for the next provincial 
election. I see. He’s not going to reveal any health care plan, no 
plan to deal with the kind of challenges and the retention and 
recruitment of nurses or physicians. No, no, no. The people of 
Saskatchewan should just ought to wait until the next provincial 
election, then all will be revealed. 
 
Well now, Madam Chair, that tells me . . . Well there’s only one 
or two, there’s only two explanations for this. Either there is no 
plan today, there is no plan at all over there today, and/or this 
plan is not something that’s going to be very popular with the 
people of Saskatchewan and they don’t want to talk about it. 
 
Now here’s the difference. Here’s the difference, Madam Chair. 
Here’s the difference. We recognize, whether it’s in recruitment 
and retention of nurses or physicians or health care workers 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

generally, whether it’s in the many and varied challenges that 
face publicly funded health care in this country, we, Madam 
Chair, come with vision and plan, vision and plan. 
 
Now I’m going to underline the vision. The vision is of a 
publicly funded and publicly administered health care where 
your access to that health care is not just determined by what 
you have in your pocket; it’s determined by your health needs 
as assessed by the professionals in the health care system. 
 
Now, Madam Chair, when we meet a challenge, we come with 
a plan. In this budget, the budget again I expect the Leader of 
the Opposition will jump up tomorrow and vote against — I 
expect it; I expect it — there is within this budget specifically to 
recruiting and retaining nurses, there is a $5 million new 
bursary plan in this budget for nurses. 
 
Through work in this budget and through the minister and the 
Department of Health, we are today helping internationally 
trained nurses to come into our province and join our 
workforce. There are targeted funding resources to implement 
the action plan, of which the minister has spoken of earlier 
today, to implement the action plan for recruitment and clinical 
placement opportunities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, get this. From this budget alone, $19.4 
million, $19.4 million will be going to training nurses in our 
province. That is a serious investment. That is a serious 
investment in meeting our health care needs for health care 
workers, particularly nurses. 
 
Now the good news. The good news, Madam Chair, is that of 
the graduating class of April this year, 95 per cent of that 
graduating class have informed the province’s chief nursing 
officer that they have jobs lined up. And where are they lined 
up? Right here in the province of Saskatchewan, Madam Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now that’s a very focused approach. 
That’s a real approach to meeting the challenges, whether it be 
in nursing or in doctors or in the provision of other health care 
workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Madam Chair, the Premier is zero for three. 
There’s not a goal from this government with respect to 
population growth. There’s not a goal with respect to job 
growth in the province. And he doesn’t have a goal with respect 
to the number of nurses we need to recruit into the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Others have goals. SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] has 
been pretty clear. Their goal is 600. The minister says he’s got 
some numbers, but he won’t tell anybody. Apparently he’s not 
telling the Premier either because he just failed to give any 
indication of what his goal is. What is the number of nurses that 
he would like to recruit for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And with respect to the Premier’s recruitment and retention 
plan, those who weighed in on the issue this week in a letter, 
they don’t like it. They don’t think the plan’s worth much. They 

highlight the fact that while this Premier’s been in office we 
have had a net reduction in the nursing workforce in 
Saskatchewan, a reduction. 
 
What has happened across Canada? There’s been a 6 per cent 
increase, an increase in the nursing workforce across Canada. 
Do you know why that is, Madam Chair? Well that’s because 
other provinces, even those with NDP governments like 
Manitoba, do you know what they’ve done? They have 
developed, they have developed a recruitment and retention 
program that works. And it’s working in other provinces. 
 
Our government has done what? Well, they’ve set some 
platitudes. And then they’ve done some reports. And then 
they’ve commissioned a report on the report. And did a 
brochure on the report on the report that the minister waves 
when the member from Indian Head asks questions about their 
plan. That’s not a goal. And if this government is going to 
achieve anything with respect to the economy, with respect to 
the provision of health care, for example, they need to set some 
goals. 
 
What about post-secondary wait times? There’s a number of 
people that are waiting. As of November 2005, here are some 
people waiting for training with respect to post-secondary 
education. How many were waiting for practical nursing 
training? — 207, Madam Chair. How many were waiting for 
medical radiological technician? — 521. Primary care 
paramedic, 123; pharmacy technician, 92; combined x-ray lab 
tech, 98; continued care assistant, 42. Electricians, we need 
electricians in the province. What was the waiting list? — 135. 
For welding, 162; carpentry, 60; automotive service technician, 
the waiting list is 98. 
 
And for the pleasure, mind you, of sitting on this Premier’s 
waiting list for post-secondary education for an economy that 
needs these workers, you do what? You pay. You have to 
actually pay to stay on the waiting list. 
 
I would like the Premier to inform the members of the 
committee today what his plans are. What are his goals with 
respect to post-secondary waiting lists in these areas? Maybe he 
just has a general goal. That would be fine. It would be the first 
goal he presented so far this evening. I would ask him for that. 
 
[19:30] 
 
And then I would ask him this. When we raised this issue and 
we raised the attendant fee that the government charges people 
for the honour of waiting on their NDP waiting lists, when we 
asked the minister about that, she said that she would make 
short work of that fee. I think that was the response. It was 
going to be gone because after all she is the minister 
responsible. She is the minister in charge. Now right after the 
minister in charge said that, officials at SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology] said what? Well I 
don’t think we have a plan to get rid of the fee. 
 
So while the Premier’s on his feet, if he wouldn’t mind telling 
this Assembly, telling the people, about his goals for 
post-secondary wait times, wait lists. What has he done with 
respect to the fee that he charges people for the honour of 
waiting on his lists? 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Madam Chair, it’s an interesting, it 
is an interesting debate because I tell you the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t want to stay on one subject for more than 
one question. He doesn’t want to talk. He doesn’t want to talk 
about health care and health care workers because he has no 
plan. He has no plan. He’s got all the complaint. He has no 
plan. 
 
Now here, I just had brought today, his exact quote. The exact 
quote of the Leader of the Opposition when he was speaking to 
the journalists today — today in this rotunda. When the 
journalist was asking the Leader of the Opposition if he has any 
kind of a plan for health care, if he has any kind of a plan for 
health care, what did the Leader of the Opposition say today in 
the rotunda? “Well we’re going to be very clear with our plan 
not just for health care but notably the economy and other 
issues in the next election campaign.” 
 
Well you know what? That, Madam Chair, is simply not 
credible. The people of Saskatchewan know that is simply not 
credible. It means they do not have a plan today, and they’re 
going to cook something up before the next election. If he has 
any kind of a plan, any kind of a plan beyond this plan for some 
kind of a value-for-money audit on health care workers . . . 
Now he’s spoken about this value-for-money audit on health 
care workers. I’d like to have that Leader of the Opposition tell 
us precisely who he would have do this value-for-money audit 
on health care workers. 
 
Beyond that he has no plan. And he will not even speak to a 
plan. He says I need to wait until the next election. Well it’s 
simply not credible. And it’s not satisfactory to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They want to know where we stand. They know 
where this government stands. They see what we’re doing. 
 
And I just, Madam Chair, want to tell you the result of what 
we’re doing, what we’re doing in terms of nursing in this 
province. We have this year a 2.6 per cent increase in the 
number of registered nurses in Saskatchewan — 2.6 per cent 
increase — in terms of licensed practical nurses, 5.8 per cent 
increase in licensed practical nurses that work in this province, 
and registered RPNs, the registered psychiatric nurses, a 4.6 per 
cent increase. That’s the record. 
 
And tonight as we meet in this legislature, there are 1,600 
young men and women training to be nurses in our province. 
And the record of the April graduating class — 95 per cent of 
them at work in Saskatchewan. That is the result of a plan that 
is working for the young people of Saskatchewan. It is working 
for the health care system in the province. We’re not afraid to 
talk about our plan. We’re not afraid to talk about what we’re 
doing. 
 
I challenge the Leader of the Opposition when he’s complaining 
every day, could he at least just once, just once raise a positive 
idea, a new suggestion other than his value-for-money audit. 
 
Now he wants to talk about training and employment. He wants 
to talk about training and employment. He wants a response to 
the proposal that I know the SIAST board had a look at, of a fee 
for the waiting list. This too is illustrative, Madam Chair, 
because the Leader of the Opposition and many of his 
colleagues don’t either understand or won’t tolerate others 

making decisions, responsible individuals in our province 
making decisions. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that we have a board that governs 
SIAST. And they are charged with making responsible 
decisions for SIAST. We have boards of governors at our 
universities who are charged with making responsible 
decisions. We have boards that have responsibilities for our 
health care districts. We have school boards elected that have 
responsibilities. This opposition party, over the course of this 
session, over and over again question, question those men and 
women who are dedicating their lives to good decision making. 
 
So it is fair to say that the board of SIAST, charged with the 
responsibility, was given some opportunity to consider a 
waiting fee of $20, I believe it was, $20 for five programs. Now 
I’m told by the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment in fact they have rejected that option. They have 
rejected that option. And so I hope the Leader of the Opposition 
in fact will congratulate the board of SIAST who, from his 
point of view I think, didn’t want to see that option. They’ve 
rejected that option. That’s what I’m told by the minister. 
 
But the fact of the matter is we trust these individuals to make 
good decisions. We trust these individuals to make good 
decisions for their institutions and for the young people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now again I want to share with the House fact, not aimless 
political criticism and complaint. I want to share fact. Today in 
this training sector — reflected primarily through SIAST but 
through some other opportunities — in the training sector this 
budget has the largest single investment in the training sector in 
this decade, Madam Chair, the largest single investment in a 
decade in the training sector. 
 
Now this is the budget that the Leader of the Opposition 
tomorrow, I bet, will stand up and vote against again. He will 
vote against . . . He and all his colleagues who chirp from their 
seats they will stand up and vote against the young people of 
Saskatchewan. They will vote against these training 
opportunities for the young people of Saskatchewan — you 
mark my words. 
 
Well that’s not the position of this government. We’re 
providing these opportunities for our young people. We want to 
see them in Saskatchewan. We want to see them developing 
their careers right here, and we are putting a record investment, 
a record investment into training in our province. 
 
And if I may say before I take my place, Madam Chair, we have 
broken some boundaries in this budget, for we are now 
participating directly with the Aboriginal people of this 
province. For the first time in history we are directly funding 
seats and opportunities in the Saskatchewan Institute of Indian 
Technologies. We want our First Nations youth in this province, 
our Aboriginal youth, our Métis youth also to be achieving their 
futures and their opportunities right here in the province. And 
for the first time in history, we are funding directly seats in the 
training institute of Saskatchewan Institute of Indian 
Technology. And we are very proud of that accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Premier, the 
question was, is there a goal with respect to wait times for 
post-secondary training? The answer obviously is no. There is 
no goal for that. There’s no goal for nurse recruitment. There’s 
no goal for job creation. There’s no goal for population growth 
in the province. 
 
But interesting in the Premier’s answer, he said he’s, well he 
said he was one question behind. Well we would say to him, 
with respect, that it’s his job to keep up, Madam Chair. And if 
he is so anxious to find out about the election platform of the 
Saskatchewan Party, all he’s got to do is call a general election 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ll outline the entire 
platform for the Premier. 
 
Interesting as well, he noted how he allows, his government 
allows, all these third parties to make decisions. And these 
boards, he won’t interfere with these boards or the various 
review committees he puts in place. It doesn’t seem to have 
stopped what either that Minister of Learning, the former 
minister . . . of Labour, sorry, or the current Minister of Labour 
from either indirectly or directly getting involved in the 
situation with Mr. Matkowski. There’s certainly an allegation 
out there about the government willingness to get involved with 
that independent board. There is a concern with respect to Legal 
Aid and whether or not this government was happy to get 
involved with that independent board. 
 
But on this note, on this note, where the Premier basically says 
well I wasn’t going to make the decision on the wait times fee 
that they were charging for potential SIAST students. Here’s 
what the Premier said not long ago. He said, on this subject, on 
the subject of the powers of the Premier and the cabinet he said: 
 

I’ll tell you precisely how this works, [he said] I will 
receive from my departments and my ministers, a variety 
of advice. But at the end of the day, I’m the premier 
around here and at the end of the day I will make the 
choice of what I believe is the proper way to approach . . . 
[things, Madam Chair.] 

 
So I mean which is it? Which is it? Is the minister responsible 
for SIAST together with the Premier able to make the decision 
to say, look these fees are ridiculous, and we’re going to stop 
charging them, or are you just going to let the decision 
hopefully be made by another group because they don’t seem to 
hesitate to interfere in other areas. 
 
I’m going to give the Premier one more question, one more 
chance with respect to goals. There is significant wait times for 
post-secondary programs and we need the skilled workers these 
programs can produce. Does he have goals? Maybe if he 
doesn’t have them handy — I understand that — will he just 
endeavour to send them over to the opposition when he finds 
them, when he finds his goal for wait times for post-secondary 
training? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well now, Madam Chair, I want to 
review the Hansard very carefully with what the Leader of the 
Opposition just said because I believe that Leader of the 
Opposition in this House tonight made some very serious 

accusations, some very serious accusations about interference 
with the Labour Relations Board. He didn’t suggest that they 
were accusations of somebody else; he made the very 
accusations himself. 
 
And I wonder now, if he wants to talk about this kind of 
interference with duly appointed citizens who are governed, 
does he in fact, does he in fact share the view of the member — 
Where is Mr. Morgan from? Saskatoon — the Justice critic over 
there? Does the Leader of the Opposition share the point of 
view of the Justice critic from Saskatoon who said in this 
House, who said in this House that members of the Legal Aid 
Commission were carrying out a political vendetta, a political 
vendetta. Does the Leader of the Opposition share the opinion 
of the Justice critic that the Legal Aid Commission was 
conducting a political vendetta in regard to the issue around 
Jack Hillson? 
 
Now interestingly you see, the Justice critic there he said it in 
this House. He said that in this House. You couldn’t pry those 
words out of his lips out there. Well I wonder if the leader has a 
little more courage. He makes the same kind of accusation here 
in the House about the Labour Relations Board, about political 
interference. He then makes the same accusation about the 
Legal Aid Commission made by the Justice critic over there. I 
wonder if he’s got a little more gumption than the Justice critic. 
Will he go out in the public when he’s not protected, when he’s 
not protected in here and make those same kind of accusations? 
Madam Chair, we are going to review the Hansard of the 
leader’s comments very, very carefully tomorrow. 
 
Now let’s talk about the broader principle. Let’s talk about the 
broader principle which apparently either the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t understand or doesn’t want to understand. 
We invite citizens, sometimes through a broad public selected 
process, sometimes through direct appointment, to provide their 
expertise and their talents to boards of governance for various 
agencies, commissions in our province. We appoint those 
people, giving them the trust of government, giving them the 
trust of the public. And we honour their work. We honour their 
work. We don’t second-guess every decision that they will 
make. 
 
Now they may favour a government that will second-guess the 
decision of every school board, of every board of governor at 
the university, of every board member in SIAST. They will 
want to question the work, I expect, of the board that now 
governs Investment Saskatchewan. They will want to question 
the engagement of citizens on our Crown corporations board. 
They would want to govern like I’m afraid I see their 
government in Ottawa governing, straight out of the PMO 
[Prime Minister’s Office] or straight out of the Premier’s office. 
That’s what they’re suggesting. 
 
Now, Madam Chair, that’s not our approach. Our approach is to 
work with people in this province. Our approach is to partner 
with people. Our approach is to draw the expertise of 
Saskatchewan people and utilize that expertise because 
Saskatchewan people . . . You know, not all the wisdom in this 
province is located in this room, or at least on this side of the 
room. 
 
Madam Chair, there are people who are willing to contribute 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

their time, their efforts to legal aid commissions, to labour 
relation boards, to governance of SIAST, to governance of the 
university. We work with them, Madam Chair. We work with 
them. We do not supplant their appropriate decision making. 
Now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well they shout from their 
seats. Who was that just shouting? I don’t know. It’s hard to 
hear in here on occasion. You know, they shout from their 
seats. They won’t . . . There’s lots of opportunity. Any one of 
them have lots of opportunity to get to their feet. But no, no, no, 
they shout from their seat all the time. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition had some interest — at least 
for a moment or two — he had a little bit of interest in what’s 
happening . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you are, 
Madam Chair. They’re shouting again . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh it’s impossible, Madam Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Madam Chair, there was plenty opportunity 
in those questions for the Premier to enunciate some sort of a 
goal in these very important areas for the province. I think the 
people of Saskatchewan would like to see that. Not a platitude, 
not a statement about the pathway to opportunity and the 
unbreakable fabric, but a goal, Madam Chair, that speaks to 
growth, that speaks to the future. 
 
And you know what? Absolutely I think it’s fair that any 
government that sets a goal risks the fact they won’t attain it. 
But you know what? I think the people of this province will 
have a lot more respect for a government that sets a goal and 
develops a plan, executes a plan to get to that goal, even if they 
fall a little short. They have a lot more respect for that kind of 
government than the kind of government that offers only 
instead platitudes and no specifics and no, no goals in terms of 
where the province will go. 
 
I will turn now though, Madam Chair, to the Premier’s own 
Executive Council budget for just a few minutes, if I may. It’s 
interesting to track what’s happened in the Premier’s 
communications budget. In 2001-02 the Premier, his first year 
in office, the communication budget was $1.124 million; ’02-03 
it went down actually, 1.064 million; ’03-04, 1.063, stayed 
about the same; ’04-05, 1.063. And then in 2005-06, ’05-06, the 
budget dropped by a half million dollars to $1.56 million. The 
Premier justified it at the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Increase, sorry. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition is correct. 
It increased by $500,000. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Now, Madam Chair, the Premier — at the time I think when we 
had this meeting last spring — offered this as an explanation. 
He said: 
 

Mr. Chair, there have been . . . I think anyone who 
observes the functioning of this legislature for any period 
of time will recognize there has been an unprecedented 
number of written questions provided by the opposition. 

 
And may I just say, before I continue with the quote, and thank 
the hon. members for all the hard work they do with respect to 
written questions they’re asking on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. But the quote goes on to say: “We believe that 
each of those written questions deserve . . .” 
 
Wait a minute. They’re laughing now that the Premier a year 
ago said, “We believe that each of those written questions 
deserve serious attention and a serious response and an accurate 
response.” 
 
And so therefore that must have been his justification for a half 
million more in taxpayers’ dollars for the Premier’s personal 
communications expense. 
 
Well, Madam Chair, the budget for ’06-07, the budget is up 
significantly again — 1.84 million taxpayers’ dollars for the 
years that this Premier has been in office. The communications 
budget has increased a whopping $720,000. That’s 64 per cent. 
 
Would the Premier just explain to the members of the 
committee and the people of Saskatchewan, what value are they 
getting for a 64 per cent increase in the Premier’s personal 
communication budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Madam Chair, this is so typical of 
this leader and that party. He describes this as my personal 
communication budget — my personal communication budget. 
Have you ever heard anything so ridiculous in all of your life in 
this legislature? Only from that leader and that party. And he 
wants to talk about personal communications. I expect we’re 
going to be talking about his personal communications before 
the night is over. 
 
The communications function of Executive Council is the 
coordinating communications function for the entire 
Government of Saskatchewan. The entire Government of 
Saskatchewan’s communications is coordinated through 
Executive Council. That means the broad number of public 
service advertisements and so on — while some being paid for 
by various departments — are coordinated through this 
department. It is this department that will promote to the nation 
and to the world and to our own people the province of 
Saskatchewan, joining with other departments. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition talks about the 
discussion we had a year ago. Of course he won’t talk about the 
full discussion. He’ll take, as they always do, one little section 
of the discussion. Yes, I talked about the number of questions 
that have come from this opposition in record, record numbers. 
Questions that take hours and hours and hours of public service 
time, willingly given, to achieve it. But I tell you, Mr. Chair, 
these answers that are provided to the legislature don’t just 
appear out of air. They are accurate and they are researched. 
And, Mr. Chair, they take a great deal of staff time. 
 
I think last year was the record, 1,340 questions. This year I 
think we’re up to 1,000, 1,100 — something like that, Mr. 
Chair. Of course it takes people to do it. But this is not to be 
confused with a personal communication budget. It is the 
coordinating function for the communications of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And given the kind of misinformation, the misinformation that 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

is put into the public airwaves by that leader and that 
opposition, paid for I may say by the taxpayer of Saskatchewan 
. . . Every time that Leader of the Opposition appears in your 
television screen, every time we see his face on your television 
screen, you ought to be reminded that’s being paid for by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And we’ve had such a vivid 
example lately of the misinformation that he’s willing to put his 
face beside on a television screen in Saskatchewan and then ask 
the taxpayers to pay for it. 
 
The information that comes from this Executive Council and 
from this government is accurate information. It’s to the point, 
Mr. Chair. And I tell you, part of that budget is to answer the 
flagrant abuse of written questions in this House by that 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, welcome aboard. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that’s really quite an incredible answer and it does go to I 
guess the next issue of advertising that the Minister of Finance 
engaged in, though not in this particular . . . in the Premier’s 
Executive Council budget which has gone up over 60 per cent 
since he became the Premier. I’m not sure if he needs more 
communications help than did Premier Romanow, that much 
more, but certainly a 64 per cent increase begs a lot of question 
for a lot of people. The people of Saskatchewan have different 
priorities I think than worrying about the communications 
budget for the Premier that’s gone up 64 per cent. 
 
But with respect to the Finance minister’s advertising, I’d like 
the Premier to justify, to justify it in the context of these 
remarks made by himself when he said, this government, 
referencing the government of the 1980s: 
 

. . . this government must be spending millions of dollars 
on self-serving advertising. It’s just, in my judgement, Mr. 
Speaker, the wrong kind of priority. 
 

Does the Premier, does the Premier still agree with that 
sentiment today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Let’s find me those liquor bills here. 
We’ll talk about the ’80s all right. Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, the 
Leader of the Opposition stands up and asks why it is that the 
Government of Saskatchewan needs to communicate accurately 
to its citizens and beyond the borders of this province. Why it is 
the Minister of Finance needs to communicate accurately the 
good news of this budget that they won’t vote for. Why is that? 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, he wants me, he invites me, he invites me to 
share with this House tonight and with the people of 
Saskatchewan what he does with taxpayers’ money. He puts his 
face, his face, in a political ad on taxpayers’ dollars on the 
television screens of Saskatchewan and this is what he says. 
This is what he says in his ad paid for by the taxpayers. He says 
to the people of Saskatchewan, in reference to the government, 
are they cutting your taxes? Then they put in a little sidebar, 
higher taxes burden the province. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, in this budget you will 
see the largest single cut to business taxation in this province’s 
history. That’s what you see in this budget, to create the 

competitive environment that we know will draw investment, 
that we know will create jobs, that we know will create a future 
for the people of Saskatchewan and the young people of 
Saskatchewan. He says in his paid-for ad by the taxpayer that 
the taxes are going up. The taxes are going down, Mr. Chair. 
 
He says, he says in his ad, is university more affordable? That’s 
what he says in his ad. Is university more affordable? Then he 
had an ad running that said that no, no, the tuitions are rising. 
That’s what he said in his ad. The tuitions are rising. That’s a 
plain inaccuracy, Mr. Chair. It is an inaccuracy. Last year we 
froze tuition fees. In this budget which he votes against, we are 
freezing tuition fees for two years. Well he admits there’s kind 
of an inaccuracy there so he puts out another ad which says 
now, is university more affordable? Higher tuition costs, higher 
tuition costs. That is misleading, Mr. Chair. He’s doing that 
with taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Is there any wonder the Minister of Finance has to take to the 
airwaves to provide accurate information to the young people of 
Saskatchewan that this government stands with them, that this 
government has frozen tuition fees not just a year ago but for 
two years, that this government is having a serious look at the 
whole question of financial accessibility through the work of 
the member from Regina Elphinstone? We need to tell the 
people accurate information because of this kind of 
misinformation coming from the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Then he says in his ad paid for by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan on our television screens, then he says: are they 
helping cope with higher energy costs? The implication is we’re 
not. The fact is we are, with the Energy Share program, Mr. 
Chair, widely known in the province and widely appreciated in 
the province. 
 
Now you see, is there any reason that we need to provide 
accurate information to the people of Saskatchewan? Of course 
there’s a reason when you’ve got a Leader of the Opposition 
taking taxpayers’ dollars and providing clear misinformation to 
the people of Saskatchewan. What for? What for? For his 
political benefit. Not for the benefit for the people of 
Saskatchewan, not for the benefit of the future of this province, 
but for one benefit — his own political benefit and the fortunes 
of a political party that needs taxpayers’ dollars to get his cause 
done. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, this is not a government that puts politics 
before principle. This is a government that puts principle first. 
That’s what we’re doing over here, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well if there’s any television ad out there that’s 
asking the people of the province what this Premier has done 
with their taxes, I hope the people in 63 out of 81 of the former 
school divisions see the ad, because they’ll know that the 
answer is that Premier has raised their taxes after promising to 
reduce their taxes. That’s his record. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, that Premier amazingly went to Birch Hills 
and had another video dance party announcement, the likes of 
which they haven’t had since they announced the imaginary 
ethanol plant at Belle Plaine. And what did the Premier 
solemnly say? He said education property tax burden is too 
heavy on farm land and this government was going to do 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

something about it. And this government did something about 
it. This NDP [New Democratic Party] government set out an 
amalgamation plan of school divisions that set out a budget, 
funding for education that resulted in a tax hike in 63 of 81 
former school divisions. That’s that Premier’s record on the 
issue. 
 
So if anybody in Saskatchewan is saying, is questioning this 
Premier’s commitment to affordable taxation in the province, 
boy that question that they have in their mind is justifiable. 
Sadly, it’s justified by the actions of a Premier who doesn’t 
mind issuing press releases that say one thing, but then delivers 
a budget and forced amalgamation that does completely the 
opposite thing, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s not my words, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
Premier himself said that the self-serving advertising . . . And 
we’ve all seen the ads of the Minister of Finance and, you 
know, the minute I think . . . I think we understand that Minds 
Eye Pictures of, you know, a big-time movie studio apparently 
helped with these ads. And we know they’ve been involved 
with this NDP government in many different ways, financially 
and otherwise, but no doubt able to produce a high-quality 
product. And so they shine up the Minister of Finance in these 
ads and we see him telling people, in very general terms — in 
very general terms — about the budget. 
 
Now in previous years, in previous years, under the tenure of 
the former minister of Finance, the member for Regina Victoria, 
I think that’s the name of his . . . No it’s not. The member from 
Regina that was the former minister of Finance, you know what 
he did? I would say this, Mr. Deputy Chair, he was much more 
responsible. He understood that yes, there’s some attendant 
communication requirements with a budget. A budget is an 
important document in the life of a province. 
 
And so that minister of Finance understood that he had a 
responsibility to communicate what was in his budget. And you 
know what, Mr. Deputy Chair? He was able to do it for, I think, 
less than $60,000. About 10 per cent of what this Premier is 
now spending to burnish the image of his government and 
arguably the Minister of Finance, one of his chosen successors 
perhaps, I’m not sure. 
 
To the Premier: does he still believe what he said in 1988 about 
self-serving advertising? Does he still believe that? And if he 
does, how has he lost his way so much that he would approve a 
tenfold increase in the budget to advertise the budget from that 
former Finance minister to the current Finance minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, when it comes to the kind of 
self-serving advertising that’s being paid for by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan on our screens on a daily basis by the Leader of 
the Opposition, you bet I’m opposed to it. You bet I’m opposed 
to taking tax dollars and funding the political future of a leader 
and a political party. And it isn’t, by the way, going to work 
because the people of Saskatchewan are not fools. 
 
When they see a Leader of the Opposition who you would think 
would be concerned about his own credibility, standing up in an 
ad paid for by the taxpayers, paid for by the taxpayers that is 

completely, completely averse to the truth, Mr. Chair, I would 
be very, very concerned if I was that Leader of the Opposition 
and his credibility . . . And talk about self-serving ads, you bet 
I’m opposed. 
 
Now he talks about the ministry of Finance and the advertising 
they’ve done for the budget. Of course we are going to tell the 
students of Saskatchewan, we’re going to tell the young people 
in Saskatchewan that there is a future here; their future is here 
in this province; that this is a government that will stand behind 
them because the people of Saskatchewan are standing behind 
them. And yes, we’re going to tell those students that we are 
dealing with accessibility to post-secondary education and 
financial accessibility. You bet we’re going to tell those 
students that their tuitions are frozen for two and three years in 
a row. And we’re going to explore every option to make sure 
that post-secondary education for our young people is 
accessible, depending on what’s in your mind and not what’s in 
your wallet. You bet we’re going to tell the young people. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, we are not going to cease in telling the people 
of Canada, the people in North America, and the people of the 
world about the competitive tax regime that is in Saskatchewan; 
about the welcoming investment climate for their capital and for 
their labour that exists in this province. You bet we’re going to 
do that. 
 
And I’ll take any amount of criticism that man or that party 
over there wants to deliver because I’m going to tell, we are 
going to tell the story of Saskatchewan. We are going to blow 
this province’s horn. We’ve been quiet too long and we are 
going to see it done, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of 
Industry and Resources, everyone in this government. 
 
Now he made some comments about a very valued, a very 
valued participant in the Saskatchewan economy, particularly in 
film and video, Minds Eye Pictures. I’m not sure if it was 
Minds Eye that did these particular Finance ads or not. I don’t 
know about that but I know it’s a valuable, it’s a valuable 
group. 
 
But what the Leader of the Opposition ought to check out is 
whoever does his ads and spells the name of the province 
wrong, spells the name of the province wrong. Can you believe 
it, Mr. Chair? The Leader of the Opposition would put his face 
on an ad paid for by the taxpayers, full of misinformation, and 
then spell the name of the province wrong. 
 
I observed yesterday — it’s a peculiar thing — someone who 
wants to be the government of Saskatchewan, they can’t spell 
government. They can’t spell Saskatchewan. I wonder, Mr. 
Chair, if they can spell the word of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[20:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Talking about spelling, I remember just this 
morning getting a news release from the Minister of Agriculture 
spelling agriculture wrong. 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

But anyways talking about plans, talking about plans for what 
this government has, what about the plan for the Watrous 
long-term care facility? For a number of years they’ve been 
planning the long-term care facility in Watrous. You keep 
talking about plans. What plans will you give them, Mr. Chair? 
Will the Premier answer what year they will build that facility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I beg the indulgence of the 
House. I simply could not hear the member’s question because 
the member from Rosetown-Elrose was hollering so loud. I 
could not hear the member’s question. I beg his indulgence. 
Could he repeat the question. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The member for Arm River-Watrous, 
before I recognize you again, I want to ask members on both 
sides of the House to please keep the volume down, keep the 
heckling down, keep the shouting across the House down. Let’s 
have some order in the Chamber. I recognize the hon. member 
for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, my question to the Premier is, 
the town of Watrous has been trying to building a long-term 
care facility for a number of years. You talk about planning. Do 
you have any plans? Can you tell them right now when they can 
start construction on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for his 
question. I do not have at my disposal tonight the detail of the 
capital planning and the capital program of the Department of 
Health. I don’t know if the member had that opportunity to ask 
this very same question to the ministry of Health when they 
were here for estimates. I don’t know that. I will commit to the 
member that we will find, we will find a more specific answer 
to the Watrous situation. I’m not aware of where the Watrous 
proposal is in the capital planning of the Department of Health. 
 
Now I think all members will recognize that our . . . Well 
there’s the member from Cannington shouting from the back 
door now, Mr. Chair. He ought to stand up and shout on his feet 
instead of just shouting from the back door. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I think all members will be aware that the 
Department of Health, through its coordinating, through 
coordinating efforts, will draw together all the proposals for 
capital expenditures from all of our health regions. There will 
be a priorization. There must be a priorization. We cannot 
simply do all of the capital work in one year. And much of the 
capital work takes a fair bit of planning, particularly health 
capital. 
 
So I will find from the Department of Health where the Watrous 
proposal is in terms of the priorities for capital. But what the 
House needs to know tonight, Mr. Chair, what the House needs 
to know tonight in this budget now under consideration, we are 
increasing health capital in this province by a full 20 per cent in 
this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A full 20 per cent increase in health 
capital. That’s capital for hospital projects. There will be capital 

for some, I expect, long-term care projects. There will be capital 
for other health needs in our province. That’s a 20 per cent 
increase. Now I served for a time in the ministry of Health. I 
cannot recollect a budget that I was responsible for where we 
had a 20 per cent increase in capital. And I congratulate the 
minister — and I congratulate the department and government 
generally — for coming forward with this very major 
investment. 
 
And I know this capital, some of it is going directly into the 
Leader of the Opposition’s own constituency, right into the 
regional hospital at Swift Current. That’s what makes us, we as 
members of government, very puzzled when the Leader of the 
Opposition and members over there will stand up and vote 
against that kind of capital commitment to health care facilities 
in the province. It is completely a mystery to me why the 
Leader of the Opposition would stand up and vote against the 
very capital commitment that will provide a regional hospital in 
his own city of Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You talk about not 
knowing where it is. Well I don’t think you know where it is. I 
don’t think you do know. I’ve been asking questions on this for 
a number of years. This process started in 1994, is when they 
first went. In 1996 the Department of Health, your officials, 
your department, determined that . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. I’d ask the hon. member 
to please make his remarks through the Chair. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Okay. Mr. Chair, this has been going on for a 
number of years. In 1996, Department of Health, their officials, 
that government over there said that should be a high priority 
for capital funding. They’ve had over 10 years to plan this, over 
10 years to plan this capital funding for this project, Mr. Chair. 
For 10 years, them people in Watrous have . . . 
 
I was there last year. You know what? The roof was leaking 
there. You know what? And they don’t know whether they 
should spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to fix it or to 
wait because maybe next year this government just may okay 
the funding. In over 10 years this government can’t plan, can’t 
tell the town of Watrous when they’re going to build it. 
 
They’re not asking . . . This proposal didn’t come out two 
months ago, didn’t come out six months ago, didn’t come out 
two years ago. Came out over 12 years ago. For 12 years 
you’ve been putting them off. All they want is a date. They 
want to know maybe next year or the year after so they can 
plan. They still have to raise money because construction costs 
keep going up. Every year they have to keep raising money 
because they don’t know how much the cost of inflation is 
costing them and what the extra cost is going to be. 
 
You’re putting that people and that town in a hardship and also 
the residents in there that in overcrowded, that need a new 
building. And in 10 years or 12 years . . . You talk about 
planning. You have no plan to even figure that out. Your share 
of the funding is probably the whole thing that a few years ago, 
Mr. Chair, was over seven and a half million dollars. It’s not a 
big investment that you could figure out over 10 years. 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

You know what they’re saying in Watrous? This government 
couldn’t organize a three-car parade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I just want to say I have a 
high level of regard for the member who represents the 
community of Watrous. And I know he speaks with great 
passion because he feels it, and he feels it on behalf of his 
constituency. My view is that he’s one of the few over there 
that’s not putting politic ahead of principle, and I respect his 
passion. I respect his views. 
 
I also respect that in meeting the capital needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan there are many, many demands, and there must 
be priorization. There must be priorization. I well recall 
representing the great people of Moose Jaw in this legislature 
when that group of men and women were in government, and 
we were in desperate need, desperate need of new nursing home 
facilities. It took well more than 10 years before we saw the 
reality of that need filled. 
 
I respect the members opposite. I respect the member from 
Watrous who’s representing the community of Watrous here 
tonight and who brings passion to this debate. I’ve committed, 
I’ll find for the ministry of Health precisely where it is in terms 
of the priorities and get back to him. 
 
Again I say though, it is very peculiar that when there is a 
budget that provides 20 per cent increase in the capital spending 
for health care capital, facilities and other capital, that this 
opposition would vote against it. 
 
It is very peculiar in my view, Mr. Chair, that when the national 
government, the new Conservative government of Canada puts 
a 6 per cent increase in health care funding generally for 
Canadians — a 6 per cent — the Leader of the Opposition and 
this party over there, they jump up and down and say, that’s a 
very, very good budget. It’s a very, very good thing. 
 
This government has placed in this budget, not a 6 per cent 
increase, not a 7, not an 8, not a 9, but a 10 per cent increase in 
health care funding, a 20 per cent increase in health capital 
funding. And members opposite will vote against it. It doesn’t 
make any sense to Saskatchewan people, and it is simply not 
credible, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Chair, tonight I’d like to talk to the 
Premier a little bit about agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’d like to talk a little bit about what’s happening 
to farm families out there and what’s been going on for the last 
number of years and times right now I would compare to the 
1930s. Although the dollar values are far different and the 
situation is different, many farm families are struggling just as 

they did in the ’30s. 
 
And I would like to ask the Premier tonight in light of . . . 
We’ve gone through the BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] out there on the family farm. We have the 
highest input costs and the lowest grain prices we’ve had for 
many, many years out there. And I’d just like the Premier to 
maybe tell me what actually his government under his 
leadership is doing for farm families this year. What can he tell 
the farmers out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I thank the member for the question and 
again, I think, a member who has some bona fide concern about 
farming families in this province, as do we. I don’t think there’s 
a member in this legislature that doesn’t have a deep concern 
for the farming families of Saskatchewan particularly, Mr. 
Chair, this spring where we know, where we know that income 
crisis is having a devastating effect on many of our farm 
families, where we know the sale catalogues this spring have 
been thicker than they’ve been for many years. 
 
And it’s a result of years . . . We’ve gone through some years of 
significant drought in this province. We’ve weathered the BSE 
crisis. And we continue to be forced to weather international 
subsidy that forces this income crisis upon our producers — 
producers, if I may say, Mr. Chair, who have diversified, who 
have changed, who have explored almost virtually every new 
option. 
 
What is this government doing, the member asks. Well there is 
significant commitment in this budget to the CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program. He will know that a 
year ago we announced the full funding of CAIS for this year. 
There’s the base funding this year. We have the new work 
that’s being done with and by Ottawa. We want to assess all 
that. We’re supporting the CAIS program and supporting some 
of the changes that are being made to make it a better program. 
 
There is significant commitment in this budget to the crop 
insurance program. There is significant commitment in this 
budget to farm families through educational property tax relief. 
I know this was raised earlier by the Leader of the Opposition. 
He says there’s no relief. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, in this budget there is 67 
million — 67 million new dollars for the farm families of 
Saskatchewan to alleviate some of that property tax burden, to 
move us to a province-wide average of 60/40, the kind of 
average that the producers of Saskatchewan have called for, for 
many, many years, for many, many years — for decades in fact, 
Mr. Chair. We have achieved it with a commitment this year in 
this budget of $67 million to the farm families of Saskatchewan. 
And again it is a peculiar circumstance when these kinds of 
resources are being provided to the farm families of 
Saskatchewan that the member opposite and the members 
opposite will stand up and vote against that kind of budget, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. To the Premier, 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to talk then about education tax. That seems 
to be about the only thing that he could mention that they’ve 
actually done for farmers. 
 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

But let’s go a little further with that education tax dollars. On 
the east third of the province, with reassessment in the last 
couple of years we’ve saw our assessment skyrocket out there. 
And what has happened, when the assessment’s gone up, the 
foundation grant’s gone down? What’s happened to the mill 
rate in the school divisions? They’ve gone up. What — 63 out 
of 81 in the province of Saskatchewan are having to raise their 
mill rates. Now that doesn’t sound to me like you’re doing any 
favours for any farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I’d like to know if the Finance minister 
discussed the budget with you before he actually drew it up, 
because you may not, and you don’t seem to understand that 
last year the budget for agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan was $430 million. Do you know, Mr. Premier, 
what it is this year? It’s $264 million. 
 
At the same time the Premier, Mr. Chair, said he understands 
the hurt that’s going on in rural Saskatchewan. Anybody that 
understands the hurt going on and could at the same time cut 
$166 million out of the CAIS funding is just totally amazing. 
 
And he also said oh, we put all this money into crop insurance. 
Do you know, Mr. Chair, what he did with crop insurance? He 
cut $12 million out of the Crop Insurance Fund. How on earth 
does that relate into any relief or help for Saskatchewan farm 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You see again, Mr. Chair, we have an 
example of members of the Sask Party at best confusing the 
facts — the kind of thing they do on their televised ads. That 
member knows full well . . . I believe he’s had this discussion 
three times with the Minister of Agriculture. I believe he had 
this very same discussion in the estimates of the Department of 
Agriculture. If he didn’t, I don’t know why he didn’t. 
 
He will know that in this budget there is 67 million new dollars. 
It does not flow through the Department of Agriculture. It flows 
through the Department of Government Relations. That’s real 
tangible money for Saskatchewan farm families. That’s real 
dollars. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. Chair, he also knows that in last year’s budget we fully 
funded CAIS for last year and this year, fully funded for last 
year and this year, Mr. Chair. He knows that, but he wants to 
play the mischievous game of appearing that the support is 
falling. The support is growing, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now this province and its people support its farmers and its 
producing families at a level that is significantly, on a per capita 
basis, higher than any other province in the Dominion of 
Canada, significantly higher. Fair enough, Mr. Chair, because 
we support, we support, we support the producers of 
Saskatchewan. We understand the importance to our total 
provincial economy. But it’s a fact, Mr. Chair, that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, through their government, at a level 
that is double and even triple what other provinces are doing. 
 

Now we put this in context, then, of what the national 
government is doing, what the national government is doing to 
support Canadian families and producers coast to coast. And I 
invite that group — who has now a real relationship with the 
new Conservative government — to compare what Canadians 
through their national government are doing for producers to 
what the governments of the United States and what the 
governments of Europe are doing for their producers. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, this national government — whether it’s 
Liberal or Conservative — have not stood behind the producers 
of Canada as governments in the United States and Europe have 
done. And until we can bring resolution to the international 
subsidy sponsored by Europe, sponsored by Washington, the 
national government of Canada is going to have to be there. 
 
Now what we’re seeing . . . We’re seeing some change in 
CAIS. Some of it positive. Some of it we’re not so sure. But 
we’re also seeing this new national government pulling the 
opportunity of the railcars from the farm coalition in this 
province. And I hope that was raised by the Leader of the 
Opposition when he was in Ottawa. 
 
There is work we need to do with our national government, 
work that we would be assisted by that opposition. And 
therefore it is very peculiar, Mr. Chair, when the Minister of 
Agriculture from the Government of Saskatchewan joined with 
farm leaders from the entire sector of the farm community in 
Saskatchewan to go to Ottawa to work on and with this federal 
government, that the member who now stands in his place and 
asks questions tonight refused to go, refused to go to Ottawa 
with the Minister of Agriculture and the farm leaders from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He was invited. He refused to go. And when he was asked why, 
his only explanation was, he doesn’t get along with the Minister 
of Agriculture. Well the member should get over that. The 
member should get over that for the sake of Saskatchewan 
producing families. Join with us as we work with the national 
government to bring more benefit in this very difficult time for 
the producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. For the 
Premier’s information, I was just a little late getting on the 
plane. I got on the one last week and went down and talked, and 
it must have done something because we got what? Billion and 
half dollars come out. Somebody did something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, I’d like to go back. 
The Premier talked, in his response he was talking about 
playing games. Let’s talk about playing games and talk about 
the games they play with their CAIS funding. 
 
In the last two years, they haven’t put the CAIS money upfront, 
and farmers couldn’t go to the bank and rely on that for 
operating loans. They had to wait till the eleventh hour, till that 
government was under pressure and finally coughed up the 
money. 
 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

And what are they do again this year with $1 billion windfall 
from gas and oil? They have the money available to deal with it 
now, and we’re talking estimates for agriculture. We’re not 
talking exact dollars. We’re talking estimates. By now CAIS 
has been in play long enough. They should have a pretty good 
idea what it’s going to cost them this year, and they could have 
put that money in. And I find it amazing that with the money 
available from the windfall of gas and oil money, they wouldn’t 
see fit to help farmers out at this time of year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said to the Premier before — and I don’t 
know if he even realized this — that they cut the budget from 
430 million to 264 this year. It didn’t seem like it in his 
response because he was so positive in his thinking about all the 
things they’re doing for agriculture. 
 
Well let’s list some more things they’ve actually done for 
agriculture this year. He talked about crop insurance. I talked 
about the $12 million cut there. On top of that they kicked out 
over 500 farmers out of the crop insurance program. They 
would not extend the deadline. And I find that amazing, Mr. 
Chair, because that wouldn’t have cost Crop Insurance or it 
wouldn’t have cost the Saskatchewan government or the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer one red cent to delay that for, say, three 
months. We had the occasion of a farmer come in here four 
days late. And would they reinstate his crop insurance contract? 
Absolutely not. It’s heartless, Mr. Chair. It’s something that this 
government should know better, should not devalue the rural 
population in Saskatchewan to the point where they’ve totally 
written them off. 
 
It’s time to come to the table, fund the CAIS program, put your 
money upfront. He knows as well as I do. The Agriculture 
minister knows they’re going to have to fund it somewhere. Put 
it in, Mr. Chair. Put the money upfront. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, what also happens when you cannot get crop 
insurance, you do not get an operating loan from the bank. You 
cannot apply for a cash advance because you’re not in the 
program. So what they’ve done by not even extending the 
deadline and giving these farmers a chance, they’ve cut them 
out of all these other things. And I’ll bet you in many cases, 
there’s farmers that are selling out that are caught in the squeeze 
or declaring bankruptcy or just giving up out there. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have land that’s not even being farmed this 
summer. We have situations where actually the landlord is 
paying the renter to put a crop in and farm the land this year. 
That’s how bad it is, Mr. Chair, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the Premier sits there and smugly says, 
we’re doing all these things for agriculture. This is probably the 
lowest amount any government in this province has put into 
agriculture in the last 15, 20 years — especially the last 15 
under the NDP’s leadership. 
 
Another thing that they’ve done to help farmers in the province 
of Saskatchewan, they just put up pasture fees on Crown land 
— 38 per cent. Boy, that really helped the farmers out there 
who haven’t even got over the BSE problem out there with low 
prices for their cows, bulls, and calves. Calves have returned a 
bit, but already the provincial government’s jacking up pasture 
fees. 
 

Will the Premier stand tonight in his place and do the right 
thing and fund the CAIS program and tell us some other thing 
that he’s got good news for farmers in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was not able to be 
present in committee when the estimates of the Department of 
Agriculture were being debated and discussed. But I’m told that 
there were very, very few questions by that member or any 
other member over there about the CAIS program when the 
Minister of Agriculture was available and all of the officials 
were here to discuss it. They didn’t even want to talk about it, 
Mr. Chair. Now what is this? Is this principle or is this politic? 
I’ll tell you that, Mr. Chair, for the most part, it’s politic. 
 
Now the member full well knows, he’s been told — he’s asked 
the question in question period and in other forums — that 
CAIS this year is fully funded. We made the announcement last 
year. I made the announcement last year. The money was in last 
year’s budget. That’s where the money is. He can see it. He 
knows it. 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, the applications for CAIS will not be 
coming in till January or even delayed, the Minister of 
Agriculture tells me, into . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They start coming in January. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They start coming in January 2007. 
Meantime we’re working with the national government to build 
a better program. 
 
CAIS is fully funded for this year. He knows that. But he wants 
to try and make out as if it isn’t, Mr. Chair. 
 
So now let me just, let me just observe on this. He claims that 
he went to Ottawa and came back with a billion five. Now this 
is, this is a fine and dandy thing. Now we’ve found out that 
what we need to do is send the member from Saltcoats down to 
Ottawa. 
 
Maybe he can get our labour market money back too. That’s 
about 100 million. Maybe the member from Saltcoats can go to 
Ottawa and do something about putting the Kelowna accord 
back in place. Maybe the member from Saltcoats can run down 
to Ottawa and get a child care deal that we knew we had and 
now seems to be disappearing. Maybe the member from 
Saltcoats can go to Ottawa and get the fair equalization deal that 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan people deserve. 
 
If he’s so successful in his last trip, I hope he goes next week 
and brings home a few more things. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is the 
member of Saltcoats, I believe the member of Kelvington, I 
know the Leader of the Opposition, went to Ottawa for one 
purpose. It was to raise money for the Saskatchewan Party. 
That’s why they went to Ottawa. They had a fundraiser in 
Ottawa for the Saskatchewan Party. They put the big ads right 
there on their website, you see. They go now . . . They used to 
always just . . . 
 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order, order. I’d ask the member 
from Wood River to please refrain from yelling across the floor. 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So we all know that what the point of the 
trip to Ottawa was, was to raise money for the Saskatchewan 
Party. It’s right on their website. They ran the ads and 
everything else. They used to just go to conservative Calgary, 
now they go to conservative Ottawa to collect money. 
 
So but, you know, if the member from Saltcoats is convinced 
that he went to Ottawa and brought home a billion five, well I 
hope he goes next week and brings another billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’m glad 
the Premier recognizes accomplishment when he sees it. 
 
Mr. Chair, this is the budget that I read, that that Finance 
minister put forth when he brought the budget in. And the 
Premier just said to the public of Saskatchewan that they’re 
fully funding CAIS for this year. What I read in this budget 
book is $98,776,000 for the CAIS program. Will the Premier 
explain to me how $98 million is going to fully fund the CAIS 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite I think 
knows something about the CAIS program. I wonder if he 
would just inform the Chair and all members of the House, 
when do the 2006 applications start coming? When do the 
applications start coming for CAIS 2006? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the Premier 
then right back, when is he going to fund the program? When 
do you fund it? Do you fund it every couple of years, you put in 
two years? How do you fund it? Because it’s not in this budget 
year. Where are you going to get that money? Where are you 
going to show it? 
 
If you come to the last minute next December and have to put it 
in as you’ve done in the last number of years, where do you get 
the money from? Where does that come out of this budget? Are 
you going to wait until you have another deficit budget and 
blame farmers? Where is it going to show up in your budget in 
this budget year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well now, Mr. Chair, we have some, I 
think we have some room for some discussion and debate. He 
talks about when is our next deficit budget. The next deficit 
budget for the province of Saskatchewan would be on that 
unfortunate day that that group ever got back to the Treasury 
Board. That would be when we’d have the next deficit. We’re 
not going to run deficits. We’re running balanced budgets. 
 
Now the question to the member is, when do the applications 
for the 2006 CAIS year come in? Well the answer is, if he 
doesn’t know, they come in beginning next January, next 
January. 
 
CAIS 2005 is fully funded. We made that decision. It was in the 
budget. Now he complains it was in last year’s budget. Well fair 
enough I guess if we wanted to show it in this year’s budget. 

The reality is the dollars are there, and they are moving to the 
hands of producing families in Saskatchewan. That’s the reality. 
The reality is, we are going to work through this year with the 
national government to seek as best as we can to make 
improvements to that program. I believe in this budget alone 
there’s $98 million base funding for CAIS. 
 
There is no doubt about this fact, Mr. Chair. On a per capita 
basis, this province through its government provides support 
through its taxpayers, through government to the farming 
families of Saskatchewan at a rate which is considerably higher 
per capita than any other jurisdiction in Canada, and we’re 
proud to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier doesn’t seem 
to fully understand how the program works, how it’s funded. 
And we’ve got to give up at that point I guess because what 
they’re going to do is, at the last minute they’re going to put 
their money in. And should gas — maybe — and should gas 
and oil prices drop . . . You know what? The Premier knows 
what a deficit budget is; he ran three or four of them the first 
time, the first years he was Premier of this province. 
 
He can spin any little myth he wants. That’s exactly . . . The 
debt of the province of Saskatchewan went up; I don’t know 
what you’d call it if you don’t call it a deficit. And if we were in 
that situation again, the additional money that has to go into the 
CAIS program would have to also increase the debt of the 
province. And that’s the point I’m trying to get through to him. 
And at a time when he could actually help farmers out there, 
when they go talk to their banker, these guys won’t even get to 
the table. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to also talk about something we didn’t get 
the opportunity because we didn’t have the chance to talk to 
SaskWater [Saskatchewan Water Corporation] people or 
possibly even, I’m not sure if it’s under municipal. But, Mr. 
Premier, we have calls coming in now from our villages in the 
province. And the problem is out there in the villages is, we 
have the new water rules put in place where a group comes out 
from municipal government — I believe I’m not sure, it could 
be SaskWater — does an assessment on their water systems . . . 
I’ve got two villages where the population is 50, 60 people, and 
they’ve been handed bills to the tune of 36, $3,700. 
 
Mr. Premier, I don’t know if you’re aware of this, but if you are 
and being that we’re coming to the close of the legislature, 
would you please look into this. Because what you’re going to 
do in essence with these bills is totally decimate our little 
villages and small towns in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member raises some very 
specific questions about SaskWater. I anticipate he would have 
asked these questions when the estimates of SaskWater were 
here. I do not know the detail. I commit to the member we will 
get the detail. I thank him for raising the issue. I commit that I’ll 
work with SaskWater and its ministry and we’ll get a clear 
response to him as soon as possible. 
 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

[20:30] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
the government has grown fond, and we’ve talked about it 
earlier, of the phrase that no one will be left behind. The Throne 
Speech that opened the second session of the twenty-fifth 
legislature says the “. . . province where no one is left behind on 
the path [on the path] to opportunity, a province with an 
unbreakable social fabric . . .” And then, and then we see it 
again, the path to opportunity, and the 2006 spring session 
begins. And we see a reference to the Premier’s commitment 
that no one would be left behind. 
 
Were it only true, Mr. Deputy Chair. Were it only true. The fact 
of the matter is that under his leadership there are many, many 
individuals and many, many groups, many sectors of 
Saskatchewan who are precisely being left behind by this, by 
this particular government. 
 
We raised a number of them, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I would 
argue during the session, I would argue, Mr. Deputy Chair, that 
Val Paterson didn’t feel as though she was the one the Premier 
was talking to when he said he wasn’t going to leave anyone 
behind. I would argue that Paige Hansen and her family didn’t 
really much care for the hollow words from the Premier, that he 
wasn’t going to leave anybody behind. I would imagine that the 
cases we brought forward, I would imagine that the terminal 
cancer patient, Linda Stonehouse, who had to drive to get 
oxygen from emergency, from emergency, from this NDP 
health care system, didn’t much care for the sentiments and the 
platitudes of the Premier when he says that no one will be left 
behind. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, if may say, I would 
expect that two individuals in particular, representing 
unfortunately many more who have, who have cancer right now 
and who would like to be able to access, with the government’s 
help, Avastin — and we’re told by this government that they 
would not be helping them in any way, no copayment and 
certainly no full payment by this NDP government — I think 
frankly they felt precisely the opposite. I think they felt left 
behind by that Premier and by that government. 
 
And not moments ago in these Executive Council estimates, the 
Premier stood up and said, what? He talked about a public 
health care system. You remember? I think members will 
remember that. It was only a few minutes ago. And he talked 
about his vision for health care where the kind of care you get, 
you can receive in the province of Saskatchewan, doesn’t 
depend on how much money you have. That’s what he said. 
 
But in this case, with respect to this drug Avastin, with respect 
to this government’s refusal even to provide a copayment, to 
look at any option, we know that that is precisely the opposite 
of what is happening. We see — under this Premier’s leadership 
— we see two-tier health care, NDP-style, presided over by that 
Premier. And I would ask him this question right now in 
estimates. If he was being truthful when he said, when he said 
that his vision for health care was one where it doesn’t matter 
about whether or not you can afford it or not, you can get the 

care that you need in the province of Saskatchewan, if he meant 
when he said that, what is his explanation to Mr. Loeppky, Bob 
Loeppky in Swift Current, Terry Rak in Saskatoon, and the 
many other cancer patients who would like at least a little help 
with the drug Avastin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the 
Opposition is adept, adept at twisting words, even printed words 
from a Throne Speech — even printed words from a Throne 
Speech. Now I happen to have the Throne Speech here. And 
what the Throne Speech said, what Her Honour read as the 
vision and the goal of this government and this party that I am 
proud to lead, the vision and the goal, “. . . my government 
dreams of a province where no one is left behind on the . . . 
[pathway] to opportunity . . .” 
 
Have we reached that dream? Have we reached that goal? Of 
course we have not. But the difference is this is a government 
and this is a political party that dreams great dreams, that 
dreams no little dreams, that dreams visions, that sets goals to 
the future. No, we have not achieved all of our dreams nor all of 
our goals. Of course we have not. 
 
But the difference is that group of men and women have no 
bold vision, no bold goals for the people of Saskatchewan. 
They’ve only got vision for their own political future, and we 
see that day after day after day. That’s the only vision they 
bring to this legislature, is politics over principle. And the 
people of Saskatchewan see through it. 
 
Yes, we’re proud to set out bold visions. We are proud to dream 
of a province where no one is being left behind on the path of 
opportunity. You bet we’re proud to dream that. And we’re 
labouring to see it become reality, more reality for more people. 
And this budget, Mr. Chair, this budget takes us considerably at 
a distance in reaching that dream and that goal. 
 
The member speaks of this very, very difficult choice that faces 
this government, that faces every provincial government in 
Canada, Mr. Chair, on the level of funding we are able to 
provide for new medical treatment, in this case a new cancer 
treatment that would extend life. It’s not a curative product. 
These are some of the most challenging decisions that must be 
made by government. There is not a province in Canada, Mr. 
Chair, not a province in Canada who has found it able to 
provide full funding for the cancer treatment drug Avastin — 
not a government in Canada. 
 
We know, Mr. Chair, that there may well be 100 more new 
drugs coming. It takes consideration of the resources available, 
where those resources can best be used, Mr. Chair. Now is the 
Leader of the Opposition arguing that each product, each 
product that is brought forward through new technology, 
through new pharmaceuticals, is the opposition leader arguing 
that every product should be approved? We have today in 
Saskatchewan the most comprehensive drug coverage of any 
province in Canada when it comes to cancer-treating drugs, the 
most comprehensive coverage of any province in Canada when 
it comes to cancer-related pharmaceutical products. 
 
Is it the position . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well get up and 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

say that on your feet. Mr. Chair, is it the position of the Leader 
of the Opposition that each new product that comes along 
should automatically be funded? I’d like to know that, Mr. 
Chair. I’d like to know what his plan is for pharmaceutical 
products to health care. 
 
In fact I think there’s a goodly number of people in this 
province who’d like to know his vision for health. They’d like 
to know what plan he has. He stands today in the rotunda and 
says to the journalists, no, no, I’m not going to tell you anything 
about my plan until I’m into an election campaign. That’s 
politic above principle. There’s an opportunity tonight for the 
Leader of the Opposition to talk about his plan. 
 
We wrestle with these difficult decisions. We are taking the 
resources available to us and trying to provide the best possible 
health care we can to the largest number of people, focusing of 
course on the most crucial issues. I invite the Leader of the 
Opposition tonight now to share a little of his plan for health 
before the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the Premier says that his 
government dreams big dreams, that he dreams big dreams for 
the province. What are they? He calls this the wee province, 
coming back from an interprovincial premiers’ meeting. We’re 
the wee province, w-e-e. 
 
When we first gained have province status, as the Leader-Post 
reported, he said, well we’re always going to be, here’s the 
quote, “. . . ‘in and out’ of equalization.” We’re always going to 
rely on federal fiscal welfare from time to time according to 
this. That’s his big dream. That’s his big dream. 
 
Members on that side of the House talk about 900,000 
population from their seats. That’s a big dream. One of the 
members on that side of the House on the issue of population 
growth said, it’s statistically impossible for this province to 
grow even at the meagre national average of 1 per cent. That’s 
not much of a big dream, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
By any fair measure, precisely the opposite is the problem with 
this government. There are no goals, and their plan is one for 
mediocrity. And sadly for the people and the potential of this 
province, it’s coming true under that NDP government. Their 
plan for mediocrity is being realized unfortunately, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
So he can stand up and say that he dreams big dreams, but the 
fact of the matter is when he is outside of this Assembly or not 
needing answers in estimates, he calls us the wee province. And 
I know people that just hate that, and they’re not necessarily 
partisan supporters of any particular party. And I count myself 
among that number because it doesn’t describe my 
Saskatchewan. It does not describe my Saskatchewan. It doesn’t 
describe the Saskatchewan of the people of this province, and 
that’s why there’s such a disconnect with this government. 
 
That’s why the people of Saskatchewan are so disconnected 
with this government. It’s not the people’s fault. It’s how badly 
that Premier and that NDP Party have lost touch with the 
dreams and aspirations of Saskatchewan people. 

But I would bet this in terms of who’s dreaming big dreams. It’s 
all very relative, Mr. Deputy Chair. I think Bob Loeppky is 
dreaming big dreams, and his dreams are probably not nearly as 
big as those that we would dream fortunately in this Assembly 
from the perspective of good health. I think Bob Loeppky is 
dreaming them, and I think Terry Rak is dreaming big dreams. 
Something like maybe 150 more sunrises, or five more months 
with the quality of life, and who knows what can happen in five 
months with respect to other possible treatments for that, for the 
cancer that they have. That’s their dream. 
 
And here they listen, they listen to the Premier if they are 
watching tonight. They would listen in his speeches he’ll talk 
about Tommy Douglas. He’ll evoke the memory of Tommy 
Douglas and say, you know, he believes in a Saskatchewan 
where your wallet shouldn’t dictate the kind of health care you 
get, except that it is. It is in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
does for Terry Rak. It does for Bob Loeppky and the others that 
they represent that were here at this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So I ask the Premier this: how can he with a straight face, how 
can he with a straight face talk about Tommy Douglas, promise 
a health care system where your wallet doesn’t dictate the kind 
of health care you get, and then give an answer as he has given 
on Avastin? How can he say to the people of Consul, 
Saskatchewan, who if they need cancer treatment and have to 
spend a long time in Regina for example to get it at the Blair 
centre, they’re going to have to pay? They will have to pay 
extra to get that treatment here in Regina from the very 
qualified front line from the cancer centre here in Regina. The 
truth of the matter is, if you happen to live here in this great 
city, in the capital city, you don’t have that same cost. So some 
pay and some do not. 
 
And I would like this Premier for once, for once, to put away 
the Tommy Douglas rhetoric and have an honest and frank 
discussion about the state of two-tier medicine that he presides 
over in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we just heard from 
the Leader of the Opposition the same little speech that he goes 
around making to the business community. I’ve heard it a dozen 
times. And it’s just wearing very thin because there’s nothing 
new in what he says. There’s absolutely nothing new in what 
this Leader of the Opposition says. At least when the member 
from Rosetown-Elrose was in the leadership of that party, there 
was something new in what he was saying. There was some 
meat in what he was saying. All we hear from that leader in this 
House and on the platforms outside this House is this same 
tirade of rhetoric. I’m tired of it. In fact I’m told the business 
community is getting tired of it. The province is tired of it. They 
want to hear something more substantive. 
 
I asked the Leader of the Opposition to stand up tonight in 
estimates, share something of his vision, his plan. Not a word, 
Mr. Chair, not a word emanates from his lips about an 
alternative or a plan. 
 
Now it wasn’t this Premier, Mr. Chair, it wasn’t any member on 
this side of the House that invoked the name of Mr. Douglas 
tonight in this debate. But if he wants to debate Mr. Douglas 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

and what Mr. Douglas thinks of the politics of that kind of a 
conservative party, that kind of a right wing party, we can sure 
debate that. 
 
On the very question of drugs, it was that leader of this 
province, it was Mr. Douglas who proposed many, many years 
ago that if we are going to meet the challenges of 
pharmaceuticals, if we are going to meet the very kind of 
challenge we have with Avastin and other new drugs, the only 
conceivable way we can do it is nationally, with a national drug 
plan. 
 
I worked to promote a national drug plan with the former 
government. I will begin to work that same work with the new 
government. No success with the Liberals; maybe we’ll have 
success with the Conservatives. We are not going to be able to 
meet as Canadians the rising costs of pharmaceutical products 
in this nation without a national drug plan. We won’t be able to 
do it, Mr. Chair. Mr. Douglas knew that. He knew that when he 
occupied this desk and said it. 
 
Now if the Leader of the Opposition wants to debate the 
principles of medicare between the Conservative Party and the 
right wing party that he represents and the New Democrats and 
the social democrats of Saskatchewan, we’ll go on any platform 
any day and debate the principles of medicare. I’ll do that for 
sure. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I think if that leader and that party want to 
have a modicum of credibility on health care or on any other 
subject, it’s about time they started sharing with the people of 
Saskatchewan in a genuine way, in a specific way, what are 
their plans, what are their ideas. What are their ideas? They can 
identify the problem quick enough. We recognize problems. 
But what are their solutions? What are their plans? And I tell 
you, when you go in the rotunda and say to a journalist, I’m not 
telling you my plan until I’m forced into an election, that’s not 
good enough. And it’s not credible. 
 
Again I invite the Leader of the Opposition, can he share one 
plan for health care? Can he answer one question about health 
care? Well can he even discuss the one thing that he’s talked 
about, this value-for-money audit? Who is it, Mr. Chair, that he 
would propose should conduct a value-for-money audit of the 
health care workers of Saskatchewan? Maybe he’d be willing to 
at least answer that one specific question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s no answer there. 
So I expect we’ll continue to hear more speeches about how this 
Premier has a vision for health care where the size of your 
wallet doesn’t dictate the kind of care you get, when precisely 
the opposite is happening on his watch. 
 
There’s two-tier health care with respect to geography, where 
you happen to live in Saskatchewan. There’s two tiers with 
respect to cancer drugs in the province of Saskatchewan, drugs 
that the cancer agency says should be funded. So what the 
Premier will give Mr. Loeppky and Mr. Rak, he will tell them 
that his vision is that he doesn’t want to leave them behind, but 
then he’ll do precisely nothing to back up those words with 
respect to their particular concerns. 

[20:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, there are another group of people that are 
currently being left behind by the Premier in the NDP’s plan for 
child care in the province of Saskatchewan unless we can get 
some positive answers to questions here today. The 
Saskatchewan Party supported the previous child care and early 
learning agreement with the federal government but so too do 
we recognize that again in Saskatchewan, especially in smaller 
urban centres, especially in rural Saskatchewan the availability 
of public spaces even under the former federal-provincial plan 
are simply not going to be there. 
 
And so in smaller urban centres and in rural Saskatchewan, as 
was the case for our family at home, for Tami and me, we were 
going to go out and do all the due diligence we need to do and 
find a child care provider that we would believe in and trust and 
feel comfortable with the care of our kids. And we took it very 
seriously, and we did that, and we found someone who did an 
excellent job, who our kids love today though they’ve been out 
of child care for some time. It’s not an institutional child care 
service, not a public space, but a provider nonetheless and an 
excellent provider if you talk to the many, many parents who 
benefited from her service. 
 
And there are so many others across the province in our ridings 
who are providing similar service. There are grandparents that 
are providing that kind of service, and there are parents who 
have one of the spouse, husband or wife, stay at home and 
obviously provide that daily child care. 
 
So what does the Premier have against the federal plan that 
would also recognize the fact that we are a rural and urban 
province, that there needs to be choice with respect to child 
care? What does he have against it? And more to the point, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, why did the Premier vote against our amendment 
during the debate in this Legislative Assembly that recognized: 
 

. . . parents are the best judge of quality child care [these 
are quotes] for their children [and] . . . urge the 
[provincial] government not to discriminate against 
parents who choose to stay at home with their children 
when negotiating agreements with the federal government 
or when implementing provincial child care initiatives . . . 
 

Why would he vote against that initiative? And why does he 
oppose any balance in the system that also includes choice as 
well as interprovincial, federal-provincial agreements for child 
care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Chair, I think what we’re 
beginning to hear more and more on a daily basis is the 
apologists of the national government right across here in this 
Chamber. 
 
Now I want to bring to this discussion a number of facts. We 
have supported, significantly supported child care opportunities 
both in urban and in rural Saskatchewan. In fact the statistics 
that I have before me indicate that in urban Saskatchewan you 
will find 124 centres; in rural Saskatchewan, 41 centres. In 
urban Saskatchewan child care homes, 234; in rural 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

Saskatchewan, 53. Corresponding in some ways to population, 
the number of spaces total in the centres across Saskatchewan, 
5,970; in homes, 2,364. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition cared to research a little or had 
better research over there, he would know that in the 
arrangement that we were negotiating with the federal 
government, where we had achieved a one-year agreement 
anticipating future years, that a goodly bit of that negotiation 
was to provide more home-based day care to meet the needs in 
both rural and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now along comes the new government. And I have said very 
publicly it is quite within the right of the new national 
government to provide the $1,200 payment for families with — 
I’ve supported it, I’ve supported it publicly — that it is 
completely within the right of the new national government to 
provide that kind of support to families with children six and 
under. That’s completely within their right. But I tell you 
what’s not within their right is to rip up agreements across this 
country that were signed, duly signed after many, many months 
of work between the child care communities, between the 
provinces, and between the federal government for the ongoing 
program that we had all agreed to. 
 
If a new government wants to place additional funds into child 
care in a new program, nobody disputes that, and I have 
supported it. What we cannot support is the ripping up of 
agreements made with child care providers, made with parents, 
made with provinces across the country. 
 
Now this group over here seems to think that’s just fine. They 
seem to think this just fine. When the Leader of the Opposition 
was in Ottawa collecting money for his political party I wonder, 
Mr. Chair, did in fact he raise this issue? Did he raise this issue 
of the need to preserve those child care agreements for 
Canadian families, for Saskatchewan families, for child care 
providers, for the children of Canada? Did he raise this issue 
with the Prime Minister? Or did he just say aye, aye captain; I’ll 
go home to Saskatchewan and explain everything you want me 
to explain and support everything you want me to support? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, truthfully I don’t think 
that Premier should be lecturing anybody, anywhere, anytime 
about ripping up agreements. He sat in the cabinet of the 
previous NDP premier, of the NDP government that did what to 
farmers when they could least afford it? They tore it up. 
Unilaterally they ripped up those signed contracts like it was 
nothing. And do you know what, Mr. Deputy Chair? It wasn’t 
with another level of government, those contracts, those were 
with farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. So he 
ought to be careful before he lectures anybody about ripping up 
agreements. 
 
I would also challenge the Premier, then in these estimates to 
explain this to the people of the province, explain why only 250 
jobs have been created with the 40 plus million received from 
the federal government, with the child care money? When we 
asked written questions on this issue, the answer was pretty 
clear. It appears that the government has spent less than 20 per 
cent of the 21.7 million received from the federal government 

for child care last year on child care. 
 
Unless they’ve done it indirectly through some other means, it 
appears that they were happy to take the money from the federal 
government for this agreement, this agreement that now he 
laments its end. But according to our figures — and if we’re 
wrong, I hope he takes the opportunity to explain it — 
according to the answer they gave in written questions, the 
government spent less than 20 per cent of the 21.7 million that 
the federal government gave them for child care on child care. 
On behalf of parents and children in the province, where’s the 
rest of the money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well again, Mr. Chair, this is an 
interesting circumstance when the Minister of Learning was 
here, who is responsible and has oversight of child care, not a 
question was asked about this very issue in those estimates. 
Now isn’t that interesting, Mr. Chair? Is this politic or is it 
principle? It’s politic, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is if the Leader of the Opposition had 
cared to do a little research before he came in here or if he had 
his critic inquire of the minister — which she’s here with all of 
her officials — he would know that this money is being rolled 
out over time. You build capacity. You can’t take it all one day 
and spend it the next. Even though that’s how they operate, I 
know. You get any money, they’ll spend it the next day, just 
like that. We’re building capacity, Mr. Chair. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition again, does he support the 
agreement that was signed between this province and the 
national government, in fact between all provinces and the 
national government? Does he support that agreement? Will he 
stand with us in battling to ensure that agreement remains in 
place? And did he raise this issue when he was in Ottawa 
raising money for the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Just before I . . . 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Excuse me. I apologize to the Leader of 
the Opposition. But just before I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, I want to ask members on both sides of the House 
to please keep the volume of their remarks down. The Leader of 
the Opposition is being interrupted by government members 
during his comments. The Premier is being interrupted by 
members of the opposition during his comments. This is a 
lengthy evening, and both men have to be on their feet a lot. 
And I would ask you to ensure that both can be heard and that 
we keep the volume in the House down. And I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the truth of the matter is that 
this Premier has received money for child care and less than 20 
per cent of it is finding its way to child care. And so the Premier 
talks about a rollout or whatever other spin he wants to put on it 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

today. The fact of the matter is the money is gone . . . where? Is 
it in general revenue? Where is it? This was money for child 
care. 
 
We voted on this side of the House in favour of the motion 
supporting the previous agreement. The Premier was here; he 
knows that’s the case. The issue is two-fold. One, why does the 
Premier seem . . . why did he oppose our amendment that 
recognizes the importance of choice, that recognizes the 
importance of different kinds of child care that need to be 
provided in different parts of the province because we have a 
rural and urban dynamic in Saskatchewan? Why did he vote 
against that? 
 
And secondly, where is the money? Where’s the money the 
federal government did give him for child care? Did it go to the 
General Revenue Fund, and so therefore is it being spent on the 
Minister of Finance’s ads just even today? Did it go into some 
other account at the government? Where is it? How is it going 
to rolled out? How can the people and parents of the province 
expect to see the full amount provided for child care by the 
government actually delivered for child care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . There we’ve just heard another Conservative 
line from Ottawa being delivered by the member of 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. Chair, first of all, apparently the Leader of the Opposition 
didn’t learn when he was working upstairs here during the 
Devine administration — I think he should have learned it when 
he was at this Grant Devine school of economics — he should 
have learned when he worked in this building that in fact every 
dollar that will flow into Saskatchewan from the national 
government will flow into the General Revenue Fund. It is the 
proper way, publicly, to account for the expenditures of 
government. If he’s suggesting that dollars should flow into 
government and not go through the General Revenue Fund, I 
invite him to stand and make the case for that because he will 
be much afoul of the auditor just as he got much afoul of the 
auditor, him and his party, when they were in government 
before. So of course the money flows through the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
The child care money flows to a variety of programs, a variety 
of programs. It’s unfortunate he didn’t take the opportunity 
when he had the Minister of Learning here and all of the 
officials who could speak with great detail about each of these 
programs. It will flow into workers. It will flow into direct 
subsidies. It will flow into dollars for child care centres and the 
capital work, and so on. It flows into a variety of places . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Early learning spaces, I’m reminded 
by the minister. He had an opportunity when the minister and 
her officials were here. We could give him every detail of every 
cent being spent on child care. 
 
The money, Madam Chair, that we are taking from Ottawa, 
receiving from Ottawa, is going into child care. It’s going into 
Saskatchewan’s children. It goes through the General Revenue 
Fund as it should. 
 

Again I ask the member, the Leader of the Opposition, the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, when he was in Ottawa 
raising money for his political cause, did he take that 
opportunity to speak to the Prime Minister of Canada in defence 
of the agreement that was made between the national 
government, this province, and every province in Canada? Did 
he take the opportunity to lobby that government to honour 
those agreements? Did he use that opportunity to lobby that 
government on behalf of child care workers, child care 
providers, the children and families of Saskatchewan? Did he 
do that, Madam Chair? 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, the Premier says well, why didn’t you 
come and ask questions in estimates on this issue? We asked a 
written question. We’re quoting from an answer that we got 
from his minister, the fact that they’ve confirmed they haven’t 
spent the child care money they got from Ottawa. Less than 20 
per cent of it has gone to child care. That’s his answer, not ours. 
I’m asking him to explain it. 
 
The point of this is, his goal he says, is that no one will be left 
behind. And the fact of the matter is we’ve already discussed 
health care patients that are left behind on the longest waiting 
list in the country. Now we’re talking currently about those who 
need child care, parents and the kids themselves, who have been 
left behind from a government prepared to grab that federal 
government money and not provide it for the ends it was 
intended. 
 
Madam Deputy Chair, there is another group. If the Premier 
believes, if the Premier believes that he is going to set out and 
achieve this goal that he says, that no one is left behind, I 
wonder if he will turn his attention to social assistance 
recipients in the province of Saskatchewan who may need 
support to travel for medical care. In the province of 
Saskatchewan, if a social assistance recipient needs to travel for 
medical care, they are given a travel allowance, a kilometre 
allowance of 13 cents a kilometre. That’s if they’re driven by a 
family. That’s if they’re driven by a family. If they need to be 
driven by a non-relative, they do get bumped up to 19 cents. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Chair, the critic for this file, for DCRE 
[Department of Community Resources and Employment], has 
asked this question. We have asked this question of the former 
minister responsible, I think it was two years ago. Her response 
at that time was well, it’s something we’ll monitor and if these 
. . . This was two years ago, mind you, Madam Chair. She said 
this: if the high price of gas continues, then we’re going to have 
to do something about it. 
 
Well it’s two years later and I’m not sure who fills up the 
Premier’s car but whoever it is can tell him that the price of 
gasoline hasn’t gone down since then. It has gone up 
significantly. So in his effort to make sure no one is left behind, 
what will he say then to social assistance recipients who need to 
travel for medical attention and are getting 13 cents a kilometre 
and 19 cents a kilometre depending who drives them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I’ve requested some of 
the detail around the actual travel subsidy, but let me say this 
generally about the budget that this opposition is voting against, 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

has voted against, and I expect will vote against again 
tomorrow. This budget contains the largest single increase for 
our most vulnerable citizens, increase in social assistance rate, 
the largest single increase not in a decade but in a generation, 
Madam Chair. That’s what’s contained in this budget. 
 
[21:00] 
 
This budget contains new resources for housing and the support 
for housing and the provision of housing. This budget lifts our 
neighbours in need in a fashion that has not occurred for a 
generation, Madam Chair. We’re able to do this, we’re able to 
do this because we have a prosperous and a growing economy. 
And it’s our belief that some of that prosperity needs to be 
shared with the most vulnerable among us. 
 
In addition, Madam Chair, we have developed programs. This 
government has developed programs that have moved 
significant numbers of our citizens from a situation of 
dependence on social assistance to a circumstance of 
employment and independence. We have developed programs 
— the transition employment allowance, the social assistance 
program — that have lifted people from dependence to 
independence. These are accomplishments of which we are 
very, very proud, Madam Chair. 
 
And again can you believe an opposition that will stand in its 
place and plead the case for the most vulnerable and then turn 
around and vote against, vote against the most substantive 
increases in social services in a generation? Can you believe, 
can you believe they will stand and vote against it, Madam 
Chair? 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Madam Chair, when the Premier was 
just about to answer I think it was the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote — the minister that got caught up in the SPUDCO 
scandal — who shouted from his seat, well you’re doing 
casework again, Brad, I think is what he said. Absolutely, 
Madam Chair. Absolutely. That’s what we’ve been doing in this 
session. That’s what we’ll continue to do. 
 
That’s what the member for Humboldt will do for the Hansens 
when they call about baby Paige who is screaming in pain and 
can’t get any attention from the health care system. That’s what 
we’ll do with respect to Emily Morley who was waiting to meet 
with an oncologist and can’t get an appointment. You bet. He 
says, casework again. It is casework. For that minister it’s 
casework. For this party, it’s the people of this province, the 
people of this province who pay your way and expect results. 
That’s what it’s about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so if the minister wants to make that point, 
I’ll admit . . . You bet I’ve got someone in mind when I’m 
asking questions about the ability for this government to 
provide travel assistance for social assistance recipients. His 
name is Ted. Ted Andreas is his name and he does require 
every once in a while unfortunately to travel for medical 
attention. And when he does, his family is asked to obviously 
drive him and they do so willingly. But then they are given by 
this government that says they leave no one left behind, they’re 
given an allowance at about 13 cents a kilometre. The question 

to the Premier is, it’s he that has said that’s his goal that no one 
would be left behind. What would he say to Ted? What would 
he say to social assistance recipients who need to travel for 
medical attention? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, if the member opposite, 
the leader or the critic opposite, had bothered to address some 
of these questions when they had opportunity with the ministers 
in their estimates, when the officials of the department were 
here . . . I don’t know why they wouldn’t raise these questions 
— if they’re important questions; I believe they are — why they 
wouldn’t be raised when the minister and the department were 
here. Fair enough. They want to play politic. Fair enough. 
 
Now here’s the fact of the matter. I am just informed by the 
minister and the department concerning travel rates which — 
fair enough — the last increase was in 1997. 1997. In a matter 
of days this minister will be announcing to the stakeholders that 
there will be an immediate increase in travel rates of 4 cents a 
kilometre in the South from 17 cents, or from 13 to 17; or with 
a driver, 22 cents a kilometre. There will be a 6-cent kilometre 
raise in the North to 19 cents, or 24 cents with a driver. 
 
That’s in this budget. That’s in this budget — a significant 
increase in the travel support for people on social assistance. 
And mark my words, that member will get up and vote against 
it tomorrow. Imagine — pleading the cause tonight, voting 
against a solution tomorrow. 
 
And here’s the difference, Madam Chair. This government sees 
that . . . We see the problems. We see the issues that face the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. We take action. We make change. 
And we will defend our plans and our goals. The difference is 
that leader has no plan. What is his plan for social assistance? 
Have we heard anything from that leader or that party about a 
plan for social assistance, about a plan for the most vulnerable? 
 
Well you know what they say? Cut the taxes. They say cut the 
taxes. Well I want to remind members across the way that those 
who are receiving social assistance tonight in our province are 
not paying taxes. They’re not paying taxes. And your great plan 
to cut their taxes will mean zero, zero to the most vulnerable in 
our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What we do, Madam Chair, is to work 
with those individuals, work with their families. We are 
working with the agencies who are on a daily basis serving 
those individuals. You’ll recall, Madam Deputy Chair, you’ll 
recall . . . Members will recall the response to the budget the 
day of the budget when Mr. Peter Gilmer of the Regina 
Anti-Poverty Ministry said this was a very good budget for the 
most vulnerable people in our province; when Mr. Bob Pringle 
indicated — as his work takes him into contact with the most 
vulnerable through the food bank — as Mr. Bob Pringle 
indicated, this budget took a lot of thought. It’s a good budget 
for the most vulnerable in our province. 
 
Tonight the minister informs me that travel rates will be 
increasing for those on social assistance by 4 cents, from 13 to 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

17 cents per kilometre, or 22 cents if you have a driver; from 6 
cents to 19 cents in the North, 24 cents if you have a driver. 
 
Madam Chair, I ask the Leader of the Opposition again, will he 
support this? Will he support this kind of . . . Having raised it 
tonight, will he support this extremely significant improvement 
in travel rates? And if he won’t support it in the budget, why 
not? Why not? And while he’s on his feet, let’s hear a little 
from the Leader of the Opposition about his plan for the most 
vulnerable in our society. 
 
Let’s hear a little more from the Leader of the Opposition than 
he . . . He doesn’t want to talk about health. He doesn’t want to 
talk about the economy. He tells the journalists, you have to 
wait for the election. Well maybe he doesn’t need to wait to an 
election to talk about the most vulnerable, our neighbours in 
need. I ask the Leader of the Opposition to take his place, tell us 
about his plans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Hear, hear. Thank you, Madam Chair. To the 
Premier. I don’t think anybody would deny the importance of 
post-secondary education to a strong and growing economy. 
And one of the hallmarks of this government has been an 
abdication of responsibility in that area until just recently. 
 
We’ve heard complaints from students across the province over 
the years that Saskatchewan’s tuition rates are the highest in 
Western Canada. In fact I think the university student unions in 
both the U of R [University of Regina] and the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] claimed that we had the third 
highest tuition rates in the whole country. 
 
So it comes as no surprise that this government would respond 
to that in the typical fashion of a reply, an approach that fits into 
the hallmark of this government. When it’s forced to do 
something it responds with an exercise that fits into the goal of 
getting itself re-elected. And that really appears to be the case 
once again with the government’s most recently announced 
review of post-secondary education. 
 
Now, Madam Chair, the Premier’s made it clear that it was his 
decision and his alone to reject the option of holding an external 
review of post-secondary education, and to appoint the member 
from Elphinstone to head this review. 
 
Madam Chair, I would ask the Premier why he would have 
taken this extraordinary step, especially when it’s so contrary to 
the previous practice in this province of appointing independent 
and external reviews of the system, such as the DesRosiers 
report and the MacKay report. Could it be, Madam Chair, that 
the Premier doesn’t want another Boughen Commission on his 
hands right before the next election? Could it be that he doesn’t 
want another review that he couldn’t control, another review 
whose recommendations he wouldn’t be able to cherry pick? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well let’s start with the member’s final 
comments. Madam Chair, I was unable to hear his first 

comments. The member from Saskatoon Northwest was 
hollering so I could not hear the member’s first comments. But 
I did hear his latter comments and I will respond to them in 
order. 
 
He speaks, at the end of the day in his comment, about the role 
of MLAs and whether it is my intention somehow through this 
process to direct this MLA. Well I’ll tell you what, Madam 
Chair, I want to assure the people of Saskatchewan that’s not 
how this government caucus works. It’s not like the caucus over 
there, where a member has to resign her seat — has to resign 
her seat — giving us an unnecessary and expensive by-election 
in Weyburn. A member has to resign her seat because she says 
she cannot represent the will of her constituents in that party — 
that she cannot voice, she cannot voice — the concerns of her 
constituents in that party. She is so muzzled by that leader and 
that party that she has to resign her seat. The Leader of the 
Opposition is running an organization there which the former 
member of Weyburn says always puts politics above principle. 
 
Now I want to assure the member of Maple Creek that that’s 
not how it works over here. That may be his experience in that 
caucus, that they are muzzled, controlled by the leader. That for 
sure is not the process over here. 
 
And so, Madam Chair, I have appointed the member of 
Elphinstone — Elphinstone — to conduct with our institutions, 
with students, with the student representative bodies, to 
consider recommendations to improve accessibility, particularly 
financial accessibility for students. 
 
Madam Chair, we have taken the forward-looking step in this 
budget of putting a freeze on undergraduate tuition fees at our 
post-secondary universities. We’ve taken this step. We took it 
last year; we’ve taken it again. We’re going to utilize it this 
time to work with students, we’re going to work with our 
institutions, we’re going to work with families, we’re going to 
work with employers in this province looking at the whole 
question of accessibility to university, accessibility to 
post-secondary education. And I can think of no better 
individual in the province of Saskatchewan to lead that 
consideration and lead that review than the current member of 
Elphinstone — the current member of Elphinstone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, the member of Maple Creek — 
and I’ll come to the member from Swift Current in a moment, 
the Leader of the Opposition — the member of Maple Creek 
says we should have a royal commission. We should have royal 
American commission. 
 
I’ll tell you what, Madam Chair. You know what? If I would 
have chosen to appoint a major review through a commission 
— something like the Bob Rae commission was appointed in 
Ontario — you know what that leader would be saying and that 
member would be saying and all those people would be saying 
over there? What, more study they’d say. We don’t need more 
study. We need action. I agree. I agree. And I have put in place 
a member of this legislature — an able member of this 
legislature — who will bring about action on this file by 
working with students, by working with institutions. We’re very 
clear about where we’re going with post-secondary education. 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

We’re very clear about what’s in this budget in regard to 
post-secondary education. 
 
So again I ask . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well if the critic 
wants to, but the Leader of the Opposition’s now chirping away 
from his seat. He ought to read that book. It would be good 
information for him. The Leader of the Opposition, chirping 
away from his seat, might want to get on his feet now and tell 
us about some of his policy position on post-secondary 
education. Does he have a policy on the training of young 
people in our province? Does he have a policy on 
post-secondary education? 
 
He says to the media, I’m not going to talk about . . . This is 
today in the rotunda. He says to the media, I am not going to 
talk about policy and health care. I’m not going to talk about 
policy in education and employment. He won’t talk about 
policy in social services, one of the most vulnerable. Will he 
stand up tonight and talk about some of his policy when it 
comes to post-secondary education? Do they have an idea? Do 
they have a thought? Well now is the time. Now is the hour. If 
he wants to gain a little bit of credibility with the Saskatchewan 
public, he ought to stand up and talk about his position on 
post-secondary education. What is his position there? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Premier, with the number of 
questions that have come from your side of the House, I would 
say the role reversal is really taking effect here. The fact of the 
matter is, with all the people working in the Premier’s office, 
I’m sure that one lowly researcher would have been able to go 
to our website and look at our policy section and determine for 
himself or herself and for the Premier’s benefit exactly what the 
policy on post-secondary education is on behalf of the official 
opposition. It would seem to me that there’s enough staff in that 
office to accomplish that meagre task. 
 
In fact, Madam Chair, there doesn’t appear to be any other 
reason than to maintain political control for appointing a 
backbench MLA to head a review that will conveniently present 
its final report on the eve of when the next provincial election is 
expected. So can the Premier tell us why he personally made 
the decision to reject the recommendations of his own civil 
servants and choose a review option that is so obviously and 
clearly political in its nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I respect very much the work that’s 
done by the public service. And I respect the many options that 
are brought to my attention. But at the end of the day, I, the 
cabinet, and the caucus of the government will make decisions. 
And we’ve made a decision here. We’ve made a decision to 
appointment a member of this legislature to do this review. 
 
Now this is not unique. This is not the first time. I’ve invited 
members of this legislature — private members and 
government benches — to do work before. I have invited a 
member to do work in terms of sustainable energy, 
conservation, in this province. I invited a member to do work on 
immigration, invited a member to do work on ethanol. Each and 
every one of these initiatives has provided significant public 
policy initiatives and real, tangible benefits. 
 
[21:15] 
 

Now the member from Maple Creek and the member from 
Swift Current — the Leader of the Opposition — sits in his 
chair chirping away now. He says, we want to know something 
about their post-secondary education policy. We should tune in 
to their website because it’s all there. Well if it’s there, why 
don’t they share it with us tonight? Why don’t they have the 
commitment to stand in a legislature and talk about their 
policies? Are they so ashamed of their policies that they won’t 
talk about them publicly? 
 
Now I have tuned up, you know, members, I have tuned up to 
the Sask Party website. I have on occasion gone there looking. I 
went there looking one night to see about the biography of the 
current Leader of the Opposition. And what did I find when I 
went looking for the biography of the current Leader of the 
Opposition? Well I find out he was born in Swift Current. Then 
somehow he got back to Swift Current. But you know what? 
You know what, members? There are seven missing years, 
seven missing years on the Sask Party website concerning the 
biography of the current Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Now I don’t know why they would choose to remove seven 
years from the Leader of the Opposition’s life in terms of his 
biography on the website. But when you do your own research 
outside of that website, you find out those were the very seven 
years the Leader of the Opposition was working in this building 
for the then Devine, Grant Devine government, when he 
worked for a series of three ministers in that government — 
three ministers in that government. 
 
Now why is it you would want to erase that bit of history from 
your biography? Why is that? Maybe the Leader of the 
Opposition would like to explain to this House tonight why it is 
that he does not want people of Saskatchewan to know what he 
was doing in that period of time, those seven years. Perhaps 
he’d like to tell the people of Saskatchewan tonight after he’s 
explained his policy on health care, on the economy, on the 
most vulnerable, on post-secondary education. Let’s not wait 
for the website. Let’s have the debate here in the legislature, 
talk about your policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well as I mentioned earlier, the questions back 
and forth are almost at an equal number. I thought this was the 
Premier’s estimates where he would answer our questions. 
Instead he has more questions for us and fewer answers all the 
time. 
 
For those who are watching via the television or on streaming 
video on the Internet, those who are interested maybe on the 
government side, I’ll give you the address for the Saskatchewan 
Party website: www.skcaucus — that’s c-a-u-c-u-s — .ca. Now 
if the Premier really wants the answers, he can look for himself 
or have one of the many staff people in his office check that 
website out. And they can report back to him, and he’ll know 
all about our post-secondary policy. It’s clear and concise and 
there for everybody to view. 
 
Madam Chair . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Dot-com? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can say it all again. 
 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

Mr. Elhard: — I will: w-w-w-dot-s-k-c-a-u-c-u-s-dot-com. 
Sorry. 
 
Now having said that, I’ve heard the Premier talk quite a bit 
tonight about the tasks that he gave his backbenchers and all the 
recommendations they brought forward. We’ve had some 
representation on the issues like ethanol and crystal meth, and I 
think somebody did a report on immigration and so forth. But 
the fact is, Mr. Premier, all of these appointments really only go 
to prove my point, that on crucial issues like drug addictions 
and now post-secondary education, this government has opted 
to put NDP politics and the re-election of this government 
ahead of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier talks about Project Hope and the work of the 
current Minister of Healthy Living. But as the Premier knows 
full well, his government would never have got to the point of 
appointing that member if it hadn’t been for the pressure 
applied in this House on that issue. The Saskatchewan Party led 
the fight to bring crystal meth to the forefront in this House. 
How else could one explain the Premier’s new-found interest in 
the addictions crisis that we’re experiencing in this province, 
other than the fact that he realized that his government’s 
continued inaction had become a political liability. 
 
Madam Chair, let me remind the Premier of a couple of facts. In 
1993 it was that Premier who, as associate minister of Health, 
closed SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission]. In 1996 it was that Premier who was part of the 
cabinet that closed the Whitespruce youth addiction treatment 
centre in Yorkton. 
 
The commissioner of the Correctional Service of Canada has 
stated that 70 per cent of offenders nationwide have an 
identifiable problem with drugs, alcohol, or both. So is it any 
surprise that Saskatchewan has reached the dubious distinction 
of the country’s crime capital? 
 
So my question to the Premier now is, how can that Premier 
possibly claim that his government-led reviews aren’t simply 
crass politics when the new youth treatment centre promised by 
the Premier in Project Hope will not be operational until 2007? 
And his post-secondary review will not be reported on until the 
fall of 2007. And now the member for Regina Rosemont’s 
review of Saskatchewan’s music industry won’t report until 
June 2007, conveniently the year of the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Chair, you know, the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t seem to want to talk about some of these 
other issues. He’s putting up his critics. Well that’s fair enough. 
 
Now the member of Maple Creek and the Leader of the 
Opposition, and others over there are shouting that you know 
what we should do members, what we should do is tune into 
their website and all will be revealed. Everything is on the 
website. All you need to do, all you need to do is get on their 
website and all will be revealed. 
 
Well I tell you what. I’ve been on the website, I have a copy 
right here. I have a copy right here. And you know what, 
Madam Chair, they talk about a growth agenda. They say the 

have a growth agenda. You go on their website and you type in 
their search engine, you type growth agenda. What do you get? 
Blank. Blank. No results. Nada results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s what you get. You go on the Sask 
Party website and you type in on their search engine, growth 
agenda, and what do you get, Madam Chair? Blank. Zero. They 
have no ideas. They have no policy. They won’t stand in this 
legislature and talk about a policy. 
 
He will not — the Leader of the Opposition — he will not talk 
about policy in health care. He will not talk about policy in the 
economy. He will not talk about policy for the most vulnerable 
in our society. They won’t talk about policy on post-secondary 
education. And then, they have the gall, the gall, when good 
public policy is being delivered, for instance in immigration — 
I’ve never heard the words hardly immigration out of their lips 
— when there is good public policy being delivered, then they 
say it was our idea. It was our idea. They got a website where 
you go on there for their growth agenda and it says zero results. 
Zero results. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan know you put them in 
government, you’ll get zero results. No, no you won’t get zero 
results, you get bad results because we got the record of the 
’80s. We know. 
 
Now in terms of Project Hope, in terms of Project Hope . . . The 
member asks about Project Hope and says, I believe, although 
it’s hard to hear over the member from Wood River, I believe 
the member said that nothing has been done, and nothing has 
been accomplished as a result of the work of the then legislative 
secretary, now Minister of Healthy Living Services, who did 
this work of extremely important public policy work and 
entitled it Project Hope. 
 
The member just stood in his place and said that nothing has 
resulted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well what did you say? What did you 
say? You see, isn’t this an interesting thing, Madam Chair, isn’t 
this an interesting thing. They say one thing when they’re 
sitting down and quite a different thing when they’re standing 
up, one thing when they’re sitting down and quite a different 
thing when they’re standing up. I won’t repeat what I heard the 
member of Kelvington say tonight from her seat. They say one 
thing sitting down and another standing up. 
 
Stand on your feet, member, and say what you’ve said. You 
said that nothing has been accomplished. Well I want to say, I 
want to say, some of that which has been accomplished, I want 
to share some of that which has been accomplished. And again 
we’re talking fact; we’re not talking about the misleading 
activities of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Madam Chair, the partnership has been established with 
Saskatchewan Health and the Prince Albert Grand Council to 
develop a 15-bed facility in Prince Albert. The temporary 
positions, the temporary beds are now in place or soon will be. 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

The beds in Prince Albert, the temporary beds, are now in 
place. Maybe if I could ask the Minister of Healthy Living 
Services to bring me the sheet of paper with all the exact 
numbers because you’re going to hear, you’re going to hear the 
exact numbers. You’re going to hear the exact numbers as 
opposed to, as opposed to the kind of rhetoric we’re getting 
from the Leader of the Opposition and from the critic. Mr. 
Chair, I’m going to wait the exact numbers because I do not 
want to misinform this House. I’m going to wait till the exact 
numbers are brought to me, and I’m going to share those exact 
numbers with this House. 
 
In the meantime, in the meantime, perhaps this critic or the 
Leader of the Opposition, who seems to want his critics to take 
these questions, if the Leader of the Opposition wants to stand, 
that would be good. 
 
Now what about their vision? What about their vision? What 
about their plan for addicted youth in our province? What is 
their plan? What is their . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
the member from Saskatoon says he’d like to answer, perhaps 
he could stand and answer. Some policy discussion, let’s have 
some policy discussion. Let’s have some policy debate. They 
complain about what’s being done, but they do not offer viable 
alternative. I invite the critic, I invite particularly the Leader of 
the Opposition, come to your feet, talk about policy. And when 
I get the detail, the exact numbers, I’ll share those with you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Chair, I accept the challenge 
from the Premier, but we’re going to address that another time. 
I want to tell him though, I want to tell him that the 
Saskatchewan Party’s vision for the economy is so great no 
website will contain it. 
 
Madam Chair, I’d like to raise another issue here this evening. 
I’d like to raise once again the workplace incident that recently 
occurred at the Department of Community Resources. A 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix headline read, “Government workers 
protest conditions.” The article goes on to talk about 70 workers 
who were protesting what they saw as harassment from 
management. I’d like to quote from the article that appeared in 
the paper, Madam Chair. It says here: 
 

. . . management has made the workplace a “toxic 
environment”. “It’s beyond dysfunctional” . . . . “If you 
stand up and challenge this employer you’re black-balled, 
blacklisted” . . . . “You will not get any future 
opportunities or promotions”. 

 
Madam Chair, these quotes are just a symptom of a much larger 
problem. 
 
In the 2005 Saskatchewan public service employees survey less 
than half of those surveyed responded favourably to the 
following statement, and it said: “All in all my Department is 
effectively managed and well-run.” 
 
Well, Madam Chair, the question to the Premier is, what is he 
doing to ensure that government workers are being treated fairly 
and with respect? What is he doing to ensure workers’ concerns 
are heard and acted upon? What is he doing to provide real 

leadership for the public service in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No website — what did he say? — no 
website large enough to hold the Saskatchewan Party plan. No 
credible website would host it. 
 
I want to share, Madam Chair, in a serious way, I want to share 
with members activities that have occurred already under the 
leadership of the Minister of Healthy Services under Project 
Hope. It was on February 10 of this year, 2006, that six interim 
youth stabilization beds in Saskatoon were announced, and they 
were made available for use on February 13. We’re hoping that 
the permanent facility will be in place much earlier than the 
target date. 
 
’06 in Prince Albert in the Parkland RHA [regional health 
authority], the six interim beds have been put in place until the 
permanent facility is finalized, and we are working with the 
Prince Albert Grand Council. Regina Qu’Appelle Regional 
Health Authority continues to do work on two major projects in 
the South — the drug treatment court and a brief detox 
homelessness shelter. 
 
We have put in place the prevention and education directorate 
that was put in place on October 31, 2005. And the primary 
focus of the past three months was to put together the national 
conference — which the minister and Saskatchewan hosted — a 
national conference in best practices in addiction treatment and 
prevention. That Moving Forward conference brought people 
from right across the nation, right across the nation. I was 
pleased to be part of that conference. It was held in Saskatoon, 
January 30 to February 1. It was a sold-out conference and 
brought people from right across the country. Very well 
received. 
 
We committed in 2005, in December, we announced our 
addictions research Chair as committed by Project Hope. We 
announced our addictions research Chair at the University of 
Saskatchewan. The university is currently doing the recruiting 
for that position. 
 
[21:30] 
 
A number, a large number of the health promotion and 
prevention positions that Project Hope is sponsoring, given to 
each health region, they’re now in place. This creates a network 
of quality, qualified individuals across the province dedicated to 
the prevention of substance abuse, promotion of mental health. 
 
We have just been joined in the Department of Health under the 
auspices of Project Hope with a team of five implementation 
consultants who have recently joined the department. Over the 
next two years these consultants, at the centre of government, 
will work with each of our RHAs to ensure that all of the 
Project Hope initiatives are fully, fully implemented. One of 
those of consultants is now our provincial coordinator and that 
is in partnership with the Canadian Centre for Substance Abuse 
to promote local, multi-sectoral drug strategies in and across the 
province. 
 
We have, as members in this legislature will well know, we 
have now passed The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act, passed in the fall of 2005 and now 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

implemented. And the permanent location for secure beds for 
youth detained under this Act will be built into the new unit in 
Saskatoon, the new stabilization unit. The exact number of 
those beds, this information tells me, has not been determined. 
The interim six-bed facility in Regina at the Paul Dojack Centre 
opened on April 1, 2006, the very same day the Act was 
proclaimed. The day the Act was proclaimed the facility was 
available. 
 
Let me talk about the budget, Madam Chair. Let me talk about 
the budget for Project Hope and for addictions treatment that 
these people are voting against, that the opposition is voting 
against. In this budget, the contribution to Project Hope is $13.3 
million from the Department of Health, with an additional 1.5 
million being contributed by other departments, in addition to 
the $3.1 million in support of The Youth Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act. That is a significant commitment of public 
resources to the young people of our province, to those who are 
struggling with addictions. 
 
Funding in 2005 included 10 million of new annual funding to 
the 4.7 million increase in the 2005-06 budget. Madam Chair, 
this represents a 60 per cent increase in substance abuse 
prevention and treatment funding — a 60 per cent increase. 
 
Now I want to go back, I want to go back to May 1 in 2005. As 
a result of the interim report of the then legislative secretary, 
now Minister of Healthy Living Services effective May 1, a 
year ago, Saskatchewan Health enhanced the HealthLine. 
That’s a confidential health information telephone advice line 
managed by the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, providing 
specialized addictions counselling on a 24-hour basis for 
families and for abusers. You will recall there was a print and 
radio publicity campaign that accompanied the event. 
 
Last year Saskatchewan Learning developed, distributed 
addiction information packages right throughout the school 
system across Saskatchewan, information on Sask Learning’s 
website. 
 
Last year the Meth Watch program, aimed at preventing the use 
of the common household products and the cold medicines, was 
put in place in partnership with the pharmacies. We were able, 
Madam Chair, to raise this issue with other premiers — the 
tracking of crystal meth — we did it at the Western Premiers’ 
Conference. We hosted the Western leaders here in the 
province. We hosted that meeting here that brought people from 
across Western Canada and from the great state of North 
Dakota. We shared best practices; we learned from each other. 
 
Madam Chair, significant work has already been accomplished 
in a very, very short period of time. And the need is now. 
We’ve recognized it — the need is now. When we look at the 
implication of addictions on our communities, on our families, 
on our young people, we understand the importance of the work 
that the Minister of Healthy Living Services is doing, that the 
work that Project Hope is doing. But perhaps even more 
importantly, the work that citizens across Saskatchewan are 
doing in their communities with their people in programs — the 
counsellors, the trained people, the volunteers — people who 
are pulling together to tackle this very, very significant issue as 
it affects our communities and affects our young people. 
 

Project Hope is under way. We are very proud of the budgeted 
amounts that we are able to put to this work. Those dollars are 
in this budget. Will the opposition vote against those dollars as 
well when a vote comes tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Chair, that’s a tremendous conversion 
speech from the man who closed the Whitespruce youth 
addiction treatment centre as part of the cabinet in 1996. And 
three years earlier was the associate minister of Health who 
closed ADAC [alcohol and drug abuse commission]. I am 
amazed at the conversion. But not a word was said about the 
public service. I wonder why, Madam Chair. 
 
You know, the fact of the matter is that he wouldn’t want to 
address the issues related to the public service because this 
government gets a badly failing grade in the most recent survey 
of the public service that was published this spring. 
 
In fact, under leadership and direction, the best mark that the 
government got was 45 per cent. And that was in answer to the 
question: “All in all, my Department is effectively managed and 
well-run.” 
 
Madam Chair, it goes downhill from there — 42 per cent for 
having strategic goals, 26 per cent for “My Department will act 
on many of the issues identified . . . [in the] survey.” The public 
service has no confidence in this Premier or this government. 
And even less people responded favourably to the suggestion 
that “My Department . . . [acted] on concerns identified . . . [in] 
the last employee survey in 2003.” 
 
Will the Premier tell us what he’s done to address the glaring 
problems revealed in this survey among public servants in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m aware that some of these issues were 
discussed, particularly the situation in Saskatoon that the 
member referred to in his earlier question. I apologize; I took 
my place before dealing with this issue. 
 
I understand that some of these issues were raised with the 
minister of Social Services. I am informed that there are 
processes in place, including the grievance process, and 
processes in place in the Saskatoon circumstances of Social 
Services to deal with the stress that is raised in that situation. 
 
I am also aware that we have initiated this process of consulting 
with our public servants through this survey process to 
understand what they’re seeing and feeling. Each of the deputy 
ministers have been charged to work with their departments, to 
work with their public servants in trying to find remedies where 
there are issues that require remedy because we take very 
seriously the very important work that the public service does in 
this province. 
 
We are very proud of our public servants in this province. And 
we have worked, I would argue, very well with the public 
service of Saskatchewan. We’ve never taken a position, as your 
party did, of establishing hit lists and that sort of thing. We’ve 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

negotiated always in good faith with our public servants. We’ve 
respected their rights under contractual agreements. We respect 
the rights of our most senior public servants. When senior 
public servants and others are criticized on an almost daily basis 
by members of your caucus, we will stand behind the integrity 
and the professionalism of our public servants. 
 
When we find there are issues in the workplace that are required 
to be dealt with, with the leadership of my deputy, the senior 
deputies, with other levels of management, we are 
endeavouring to find a solution to those issues. The Minister of 
the Public Service Commission, responsible for the public 
service, takes these issues very, very seriously. When there are 
specific issues in a given work site, we adhere very closely to 
the processes, whether it be under contract or other processes 
established. 
 
Appreciate the question. Appreciate that there are issues that we 
need to improve with our public service as they do. Overall we 
have a very high-quality public service in this province, and 
we’re very, very proud of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Chair, I’m really pleased that the 
Premier had just mentioned people that were left behind and 
people that they were dealing this in this province because I’m 
going to talk about some children that were very vulnerable, 
that we talked about a number of years ago in a public policy 
meeting, something that was very important, a committee that 
was set up to go across the province and talk about children 
who were vulnerable. And there was a report made that had 49 
recommendations in it. And I’ve tried through estimates this 
session to talk about this report in a number of committees. 
 
The one that I thought was most obvious that we should talk 
about it in is Healthy Living because this report is talking about 
the sexual exploitation and abuse of children in the sex trade. 
And I felt strongly that this government would feel this is an 
issue that was very important to a government that deals with 
children and who continues to say that no one is left behind. 
 
Well I was very disappointed, Mr. Premier, through you, 
Madam Chairman, to find out that this government has now left 
this whole issue with the Department of Justice. What this book 
was doing, what the people on the committee were talking 
about, that when we’re talking about children who are in the sex 
trade, they are there not because they want to be there. They are 
there because they are forced to from a lifestyle. 
 
And we had a number of committee members go across the 
province, and in 2002 we had 49 recommendations brought 
forward. I believe the Minister of Justice told me in estimates 
the other day that out of those 49 recommendations, the 
government has dealt with 42 of them. So I’ve looked at these, 
and I’ve talked to people who were witnesses during the 
committee meetings. And we looked at it very in-depth in the 
last while and thought how could they actually say that 42 of 
these recommendations had been dealt with when there are at 
least 29 of them that people are still bemoaning the fact that we 
haven’t dealt with it as a committee and as a government. 

Recommendations like minimum mandatory fines, like new 
provincial legislation that would be protecting children from 
johns and pimps. The recommendation no. 6 that would cause 
the Government of Saskatchewan to publish the names and 
pictures of all those convicted of offences involving the sexual 
abuse and/or exploitation of a child. 
 
How about the one where the police services within the 
province would take a zero tolerance approach and fully apply 
all municipal, provincial, and federal laws? How about the 
recommendation that the Attorney General would create a 
five-member, special police unit reporting directly to the 
Attorney General? Then we have the recommendations no. 14 
and 15 that talk about contacting and requesting the federal 
government to amend the Criminal Code to increase the age of 
consent from 14 to 16 years. 
 
And yet when I asked the Minister of Justice the other night in 
the House about this, asked him if he would approve that, if he 
would agree with that, his feet were firmly on both of the fence, 
Mr. Premier. There was no answer. In order to have said you 
dealt with that issue, that the government dealt with this issue, 
means he would have had to correspond with the federal 
government and say, yes I do agree that the age of consent 
should be raised to 16 years. And yet the Minister of Justice 
would not say that he would deal with that. 
 
At the same time this committee recommended that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would amend the Criminal Code 
to ensure that persons convicted of sexual offences would 
receive minimum mandatory sentences. And this is not said. We 
have not heard that being said. 
 
The committee recommended that every child on the street at 
risk of being sexually abused should be guaranteed the right to 
services in a timely manner. We should talk about providing 
resources to fully address the education and social needs of 
children not in school. And then we have talked about the 
province-wide tracking attendance to monitor and facilitate 
school attendance for kids of 16 years in age and under. 
 
I’m going to stop there for a minute, Madam Speaker, because I 
think that there’s some information that the government needs 
to know and maybe that the people in the province need to 
know. Did you know that 15.9 per cent of sexually abused 
children drop out of school, 55.2 per cent of sexually abused 
children are truant, 45.5 per cent of child victims of the sex 
trade drop out of school, and 77 per cent of child victims of the 
sex trade are truant? 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, when we’re talking about a 
tracking system to ensure that our children are in school, it has 
to raise red flags. That if we’ve got 1,500 kids out of school in 
the city of Saskatoon alone, you have to wonder if there’s 
concerns. It’s not just an education issue, it’s a social issue. 
 
We’re wondering what’s happening to those kids at home. And 
I don’t think this government is fully aware that we are leaving 
a whole pile of children behind. The most vulnerable children in 
our society are being left behind by a government who says 
they are going to accept these recommendations. 
 
One of the recommendations that I feel very strongly about is 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

the fact that we needed to have a safe place for children who are 
being exploited that maybe didn’t feel at the time that they 
wanted to go into a safe house. We did this. Last year this 
government did pass a law about children who needed 
involuntary treatment. They agreed it was fine for children who 
had an addiction, but we’re not saying it’s okay for kids who 
have been abused on the street through the sex trade. 
 
We’ve got two different sets of laws going on here, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. There are recommendation after 
recommendation that have not been dealt with by this 
government, and when we . . . I dare to say that there are a large 
number of vulnerable children in this province left behind. How 
can this government say that they’ve implemented 42 out of 49 
of the recommendations when there is obviously at least 29 of 
them hasn’t been dealt with? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[21:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Madam Chair. And I thank 
the member for raising this very, very important issue. And I 
know that she has had discussions about this issue with I think 
the Minister of Justice, the Attorney General; and the Minister 
of DCRE; and Health as well. 
 
And therefore to her very early point in her presentation when 
she says that she is concerned that the Department of Justice 
may be taking the lead, I think she does understand that some 
department has to take the lead. If everybody’s in charge, no 
one is. Some department has to take the lead. But obviously 
because of her questioning of these other departments, the other 
departments are very much involved. 
 
I’m also told that in the Standing Committee on Human 
Services, both the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 
Community Resources has agreed to provide to committee and 
to the member a report of all of the actions taken, a detailed 
report of all of the actions taken in response of the 49 
recommendations that were made by the special committee. 
 
I am pleased to report tonight to the House that significant 
actions have been taken, that in fact through work of I think 
essentially the Department of Community Resources, there 
have in fact been significantly enhanced outreach, prevention, 
and crisis intervention services including safe houses that are 
being operated by First Nations both in Saskatoon and in 
Regina. I’m informed tonight that now 41 spaces in the 
specialized residential and group home programs are now being 
prioritized for the sexually exploited young people who will 
find their way off the streets. 
 
Regional forums have been created. And I think this is such an 
extremely important, valuable thing to do. Regional forums 
have been created to enhance service coordination for sexually 
exploited youth in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. What 
in essence this means is that we’re bringing teams of people 
together, teams of people to deal with that young individual 
who is trying to escape the streets. That is such an important 
thing, to bring people together. Not to take the young person 
and tell them they need to find all these various routes and 
services, but to bring the team together, to work together with 

that young person. I think it’s so important. 
 
Of course there are, through Justice, new police investigative 
tools, and there are extremely strengthened protocols when it 
comes to prosecution. We’ve developed new offender 
intervention programs in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 
including what I think is a very effective program, the Vehicle 
Impoundment against Sexual Exploitation, the VISE, and the 
johns school programs. 
 
In addition, of course, we’ve passed a very significant 
legislation, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act. 
We can shut down some of these places if they’re being used 
for illegal activities, whether it’s in the drug trade or the sex 
trade. 
 
We’ve been conducting a very significant province-wide 
education campaign. And we’re doing all that baseline research 
that’s essential if you’re going to plan and develop programs, in 
addition to all the work of course we’re doing through Project 
Hope and trying to deal with some of the addictions. 
 
The member raises the issue that’s been discussed recently in 
this legislature, the issue of the tracking of those students who 
are not in school. Very, very significant work has been 
completed by the ministry of Learning in putting that system 
together. And on this the member and I, I think, can come to a 
real agreement here. 
 
The children who are not in school, whatever the reason, be it 
family circumstance, be it the nature of the educational 
opportunity that doesn’t work for them or they don’t work for 
it, whatever the reason that children are not in school, spells 
trouble — trouble for that child, trouble for the family, trouble 
for the neighbourhood, trouble for the future. 
 
The more that we can do to engage and encourage all of our 
children to be part of a learning experience, to be regularly in 
school will benefit not only that child, it will benefit our 
province to the future. On this the member and I couldn’t be 
more in agreement. 
 
Significant work has been done, I know in my own city of 
Saskatoon, towards understanding the tracking and finding the 
children and following them. That system, I think — I’m 
informed by the Minister of Learning — is virtually ready to 
become a province-wide system. We heard that the other day in 
the question period. 
 
But on the point that the member makes, this is a very 
significant point. It is of deep concern. It should be of deep 
concern to we in government, to all legislators, when we have 
this number of children regularly not in school. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, the problem with being in this legislature and 
getting answers from the people that, when we ask the question, 
the people give us the answers and then . . . [inaudible] . . . is 
that we don’t always get the answers that we need to hear. We 
get the answers we want to hear. It’s sort of like the emperor 
with no clothes scenario. 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

But the people on the committee that I’ve been talking to, the 
ones that were witnesses at that time in 2002, are saying that 
there is not a big difference. There is much work needed to be 
done. The First Nations people that I have talked to said that 
there is not a large improvement. 
 
My question to you, it’s the same question that’s going to be 
given to you in the next short while by the Women’s 
Commission of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations]. Will your government reconvene this committee and 
find out what is really happening to the children on the streets? 
And find out if there’s really any improvement or if it’s just 
hearing what we want to hear and not what the children are 
learning when they’re living their lives out on the street. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I know the standing 
committee of this legislature has had this discussion. The 
standing committee of this legislature has indicated to the 
member . . . The ministers in the company of that committee 
has indicated to that member and to the committee that they 
would be bringing back a full report, a full report to that 
committee of the detailed work that has occurred in relationship 
to the recommendations of that earlier work. 
 
I’m not about to start ordering up any other committees while 
that process is in place. The member asks for that in estimates. 
The ministers are more than willing to do just that. Let us 
review the work that has been completed. That report will come 
to the committee and it will then become, I think, a matter of 
debate in the committee if other things need to be done. 
 
I wish the member would at least give the ministers the 
opportunity when they’ve agreed to do this, to bring the full 
report. Because without question, Mr. Chair, there is 
substantive work that has been done. I don’t know if the 
member wants to present the notion that nothing has been done. 
Substantive work has been done. 
 
And I’m speaking to law enforcement officers, and they tell me 
that the trade of youth sex trade on the streets in our own city of 
Saskatoon is considerably diminished. They’re seeing some real 
activity change as a result of the work that’s being done here. 
 
So let’s have the ministers report to the committee. Let’s have 
the member have a good dialogue. And let’s not suggest, let’s 
not imply that nothing’s being done. Very significant work is 
being done. 
 
Is there more? Fair enough, there may well be more that needs 
to be done. But let’s not imply that nothing’s being done. 
Substantive work is being done and there has been dramatic — 
I would argue — very dramatic result on the streets and in the 
lives of young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have some 
questions for the Premier with respect to his commitment that 
no one should be left behind. Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s interesting 
that under this Premier’s economic policies, or lack thereof, the 
province itself, our economy is being left behind. 
 
Here’s a good example, here’s a good example. The provinces 
of British Columbia and Alberta in 2003 . . . In 2003 the 
provinces of British Columbia and Alberta recognizing the huge 
opportunity of regional co-operation within Canada, 
recognizing the shift in political and economic influence that is 
happening in our country from Central Canada to Western 
Canada, recognizing the fact that those two provinces are 
significant suppliers of energy in all of its forms to an 
energy-starved continent and an energy-starved world, 
recognizing that they had more in common than separated them, 
recognizing that there was great synergy for their two 
economies and the opportunity to reduce barriers to growth and 
create jobs for their people, did what, Mr. Deputy Chair? They 
began to meet to talk about the possibility of an interprovincial 
trade agreement. 
 
Now if you, if you want, Mr. Deputy Chair, to measure a 
government’s understanding of how you might create a growth 
agenda, how you might foster growth and encouragement, I 
think one test would be whether that government understands 
the potential and the power of interprovincial co-operation 
because of all the synergies I’ve just listed. 
 
Here we are in the province, the great producer of energy, 
non-renewable and renewable sources, that we are right now . . . 
in its raw form, unfortunately in the case of uranium. Here we 
are with the oil that we have, the second most in the Dominion 
of Canada — the Premier does the same list that I use — third 
most natural gas, third of the world’s supply of uranium. The 
list goes on and on and on . . . And a real chance for this 
province to take a leadership role within the new West, a 
significant chance in 2003 for the province to do that, were they 
only to join with Alberta and BC. 
 
Now the Premier has said amazingly, well he didn’t know 
anything about it. Well is he listening at all at the Western 
Premiers’ Conference table? Is he actually at the table? Is he 
aware from his minister responsible for Intergovernmental 
Affairs? Are his officials with respect to Intergovernmental 
Affairs completely unaware that this is going on? That these 
discussions have been happening since 2003? I don’t think they 
were unaware. I have more faith in that Premier’s officials I 
guess than he does. I think they knew full well what was going 
on in Alberta and BC. 
 
And you know why I think that, Mr. Deputy Chair? Because if 
you ask the Premier of Alberta, if you ask the officials in those 
provinces, they’re happy to tell you. And they’re happy to say, 
isn’t it a bad thing that the province of Saskatchewan with all 
that it has going for it has made no attempt to come to that 
table? That’s what they say. 
 
You can find it out. If the opposition can find it out with 
obviously fewer resources than the entire Government of 
Saskatchewan that these discussions are happening, and further 
that Saskatchewan would be welcomed at the table to come and 
start discussing these things, if we can find it out, surely the 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

Premier, surely the Premier or someone in the cabinet, someone 
in the government could find that out. But they did not. 
 
And so what did we miss out on, Mr. Deputy Chair? Well the 
announcement happened about three weeks ago. They talk 
about the creation of a 7.5 million-person marketplace in the 
second largest economic region in Canada created by the accord 
that the premiers of Alberta and British Columbia signed. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada says the deal will create 
78,000 new jobs in BC alone. The Conference Board of Canada 
says there is a potential for an increase of $4.8 billion in real 
GDP [gross domestic product]. They’re working to harmonize 
standards. They’re working to reduce barriers to growth. 
Different professional associations have weighed in on the issue 
and said this is a positive thing. Obviously those in the 
economies have weighed in and believe it’s a positive thing as 
well. 
 
So the question to the Premier is this: why did he miss out on 
this opportunity? How could he miss out on this opportunity for 
Saskatchewan to be a leading role? And there is a big dream — 
and one that’s achievable if he’s serious about that — to be a 
leading partner in a brand new West. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I appreciate that the Leader of the 
Opposition has been very, very supportive of officials in 
Intergovernmental Affairs here. Because I’m going to share 
with him exactly the information that these officials provided to 
me. But I’m going to begin by saying this, he wants to know if 
I’m at the Western Premiers’ Conference table. 
 
Well I spent a very good bit of time this afternoon in 
conversation with the Premier of Alberta, in conversation with 
Ralph Klein about the Western premiers’ meeting upcoming in 
Gimli. I’m not sure the last time that the Leader of the 
Opposition spoke to any of the other Western premiers where 
he, I’m sure, has regular contact with the Premier of Manitoba, 
the Premier of Alberta, the Premier of British Columbia, the 
Premier of the Territories. I’m sure he has. He speaks with such 
authority in this House. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, did we . . . are we aware of what 
Alberta and British Columbia have been doing in terms of 
interprovincial trade? You bet. Because it was the Council of 
the Federation, premiers gathered together, that asked these two 
provinces to do this very work. It was all of the premiers in 
Canada who got together. 
 
Well, the member shakes his head. On what authority does he 
understand this is not the case? It was the Council of the 
Federation that invited the premiers of Alberta and British 
Columbia to lead this discussion. That is the fact of the matter. 
 
Now I will read for the Leader of the Opposition, since he is 
very supportive of the officials, he indicates he . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh now he’s shouting from his seat that he’s 
angry. Well let him get on his feet and be angry all he wants. 
Because it won’t change the facts of matter. 
 
Now I will read for the Leader of the Opposition the advice 

from the officials of the department of Saskatchewan. Perhaps 
if the Leader of the Opposition is interested in the answer to this 
question, he could be quiet for a moment. Now thank you very 
much, Mr. Chair. I will now share with the Leader of the 
Opposition, who puts good trust in our officials as I do, the 
following notes about the Alberta-British Columbia trade issue. 
 
[22:00] 
 
In 2004 the Council of the Federation directed internal trade 
ministers to conduct a comprehensive two-year review and 
renovation of the Agreement on Internal Trade or AIT. As part 
of that council process, internal trade ministers asked Alberta 
and British Columbia to come forward with two models for 
addressing the gaps and exemptions in the current coverage of 
the AIT. We asked Alberta to do this work with British 
Columbia. Alberta and BC [British Columbia] have chosen to 
go public with one of the models, the preferred model they 
recommend, approach, before tabling both models with the 
internal trade ministers and ultimately with the premiers and the 
Council of the Federation. 
 
Now we’re going to Gimli as Western leaders. We are going to 
be discussing this plan as Western leaders. It was very 
intentional on the part of Alberta and British Columbia not to 
involve the engagement of our officials, our departments, as 
they worked through this. We’re going to Gimli to discuss this 
issue. I do not know why the Leader of the Opposition does not 
trust the officials of Saskatchewan, does not understand that the 
Council of the Federation asked for this work to be done. That 
work will be reported in Gimli. We will be all discussing it in 
Gimli, and ultimately we will be discussing it at the Council of 
the Federation. 
 
Now what is behind this? Because he starts off this little spiel 
talking about how the economy of Saskatchewan is not 
prospering. How can he stand credibly on any platform in 
Saskatchewan, including his bench in the legislature, and say 
that the economy of Saskatchewan is not prospering when we 
have record levels of growth, when the headlines that are in the 
daily papers are headlines just like this one “Boom times 
ahead,” Mr. Chair? That’s the kind of headline he denies. When 
the headlines in the local papers are saying “Life is very good 
here,” when the headlines in the papers are saying, Mr. Chair 
. . . look, note this one, “Konecranes hooks on to Sask. 
economy.” 
 
Let me just quote this to the Leader of the Opposition. I guess 
he does not agree, he does not agree with the leadership of 
Konecranes who recently established a presence here in Regina, 
here in Saskatchewan. I’m just going to quote the newspaper 
article that announced this very happy development: 
 

Saskatchewan’s friendly, inviting attitude and booming 
economy has drawn the world’s largest crane service 
company to Regina to set up shop. 
 
“All economic indicators are positive,” said Jim Leighton, 
a spokesman for Konecranes . . . 

 
All economic indicators are positive that Konecranes has 
chosen to come to this province because, quote, “of the 
booming economy” because of our “friendly, inviting attitude.” 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

He says, the representative of Konecranes, Mr. Jim Leighton: 
“He said the decision to make the move to Saskatchewan had a 
lot to do with the healthy, booming economy in the province 
. . .” Note the words — healthy, booming economy in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — He said we found the people in Regina, 
we found the people in Saskatchewan were accommodating. 
“That’s what Saskatchewan does . . .” he says. “It’s the way all 
provinces should be . . .” That’s what he says about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition doesn’t agree. He says this 
economy is not prospering. He says we’ve got the wrong 
attitude here. That’s not what these leading investors are saying. 
Only the Saskatchewan Party, only the negative Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party says this kind of thing. And he says it on 
platforms in the province. And worse, he says it on platforms 
outside of the province. 
 
He says the economy of Saskatchewan is not prospering. I refer 
him again to what’s happening right here with student 
employment in this province this summer, this summer right 
here at one of the student employment centres — the career 
centre here — the career centre which works at finding 
university students summer employment that suits their field of 
study. Get this, Mr. Chair. One youth employment centre in this 
province, just one of them, has more than 2,000 job postings. In 
one employment centre, 2,000 job postings. And the leader of 
that centre, Mr. Kevin Bolen says: “The job market is so hot 
this summer, Bolen said he’ll guarantee [guarantee] that 
students will land a job within 24 hours of visiting the career 
centre.” Twenty-four hours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition says this 
economy is not prospering. Does the Leader of the Opposition 
ever read a business page in this province? Did he read the 
headlines of Husky Oil’s commitment to $2.3 billion of 
investment in the Lloydminster Upgrader? 
 
Now I had the opportunity, along with the Minister of Industry 
and Resources, to travel to Hong Kong, to travel to China, and 
travel to Japan. Well in Hong Kong we had the great privilege 
of sitting across the table from Mr. Li Ka-shing, the owner of 
Husky Oil. We talked about the economic potential of 
Saskatchewan, the energy potential of Saskatchewan. We talked 
about Lloydminster. We talked about Husky’s investment in 
ethanol at Lloydminster. We talked about expansion of the 
upgrader and we talked about potential future other economic 
developments. 
 
Several weeks later, several weeks later, Mr. Li Ka-shing, 
Husky Oil, Mr. John Lau, a great friend of this province, 
announces $2.3 billion expansion. And the Leader of the 
Opposition says that the economy of Saskatchewan’s not 
prospering, that there’s no investment in Saskatchewan, that 
there’s something wrong with the brand, he says. Well I don’t 
know what’s wrong with a brand that attracts $2.3 billion in 
private sector investment. 

I wonder if he reads the newspapers at all. Does he read the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix where the headline says, “Saskatoon 
good for business,” good for business. The study has ranked 
Saskatoon as the number one most competitive place to set up a 
new enterprise, the number one place. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition crabs and complains at all 
times. But what will he not do? What will he not do? He will 
not talk about his own economic policies. The journalists asked 
him here today in the rotunda, will you talk about your policy? 
Would you talk about your plan? You’re good at complaining; 
would you talk about your plan? He said, I won’t. He refuses. 
He refuses to talk about his plan. He says you’ve got to wait 
until the next election. You’ve got to wait until I’m in some 
kind of a political campaign before I’ll talk about my new plan. 
 
Well again I invite the Leader of the Opposition tonight in this 
legislature — as I have time and time again tonight — come to 
his feet, come to his feet and talk about his plan, talk about his 
plan. He can criticize. He can get angry in his seat and angry on 
his feet. But I tell you, Mr. Chair, he will not talk about his 
plan. And why is that? 
 
If he wants to be credible, if he wants to look credible as a 
leader of an opposition in Saskatchewan, he ought to be willing 
to talk about his plan, to talk about it with the journalists, to talk 
about it in this legislature, to talk about it on platforms. He 
ought to do that, Mr. Chair. He ought not say in his cavalier 
fashion to the voters of Saskatchewan, well just wait until the 
next election and I’ll tell you what I have in store for you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s an 
amazing answer. I mean most of it was nonsense. But it’s an 
amazing answer when he was actually on point on the 
BC-Alberta accord. 
 
If you can believe it, Mr. Deputy Chair, he highlights the 
process. He says the Council of the Federation requests these 
two provinces to do it. What he doesn’t add, what he doesn’t 
say is whether or not then he — who I assume was at the 
meeting of the Council of the Federation — said you know 
what, the province of Saskatchewan should be at that table as 
well. The province of Saskatchewan should be there as a part of 
this accord, not Johnny-come-lately, not maybe we’ll get to it if 
we work out into a national deal that also has to find the 
synergy between the Newfoundland economy and the 
Saskatchewan economy and the BC economy and the Alberta 
economy. That’s ridiculous. It’s absolutely ridiculous. 
 
And the Premier wants to know, what’s the difference between 
him and myself? What’s the difference between his party’s 
economic vision and our party’s economic vision? We believe 
this province should be leading the West. We believe we should 
be at this table. We believe we should be negotiating these 
kinds of interprovincial agreements. We believe that there is an 
amazing opportunity coming for Western Canada and for this 
province to fulfill its potential. 
 
But not if, not if we have a Premier who thinks we’re just the 
wee province and we’re always going to be in and out of 
equalization. Not if we have a Premier who has this plan for 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

mediocrity, who has no goals, no specific goals set that he 
would be able to even report to his colleagues — the Premier of 
Alberta and the Premier of BC. 
 
Maybe that’s why he didn’t want to go to the table. Maybe he 
was embarrassed. He’s got nothing to talk about. He doesn’t 
have a specific target for jobs. He doesn’t have a specific target 
for population. And maybe somehow he would have to explain 
to those premiers why this province, so blessed as it is — more 
so than Manitoba, equally as blessed as any other province in 
the country — would trail every other Western partner. 
 
Even the new job numbers the Premier references, I again 
repeat that the province of Manitoba with far fewer resources 
than ours created jobs at three times the rate — three times the 
rate — as this NDP’s woeful, moribund economic plan. 
 
And the fact that he can read the clippings that he has read, that 
he can talk about Husky, that he can talk about any other 
economic development in the province, the fact that he can do 
that is most assuredly happening despite his government, not 
because of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It is happening in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, because of all of the opportunity that’s here, because of 
the human resources we have, because we have the second most 
amount of oil in the province of Saskatchewan, because there 
wasn’t war in Iraq, because natural gas prices have been strong, 
because other commodity prices have been strong. 
 
They have not happened because this government toyed with 
most available hours legislation and sent a chill over the 
economy, Mr. Deputy Chair. Those events that he was pointing 
to have not happened because of the business communities’ 
contention and worry that that government is prepared to 
interfere with labour relations in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It does not happen, Mr. Deputy Chair, because amazingly this 
Premier sat on his hands at the Council of the Federation when 
the single greatest economic opportunity in terms of 
interprovincial trade, he let it pass right by, Mr. Deputy Chair. It 
hasn’t happened because of that leadership. 
 
That growth is happening and we welcome it. Although we’re 
nowhere near the potential of this province, that growth is 
happening, not because of that Premier but despite that Premier. 
It’s because of the benefits and the resources of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s because of our people. 
 
Imagine if you will, Mr. Deputy Chair, is there any more — I 
would say — strong or determined people in the country than 
the two people that we often talk about in this legislature. 
Saskatchewan farmers, who have to put up with that 
government, who have to put up with that government cutting 
the Agriculture budget and cutting crop insurance in the middle 
of an ag crisis. Talk about hardy people. 
 
The other group are the men and the women of this province 
that have to create jobs, that are entrepreneurs because they’re 
up against this group, Mr. Deputy Chair. They’ve been up 
against this group for far too long. 
 

Well the Minister of Learning says that we’re appalling, that 
I’m appalling. I’ll tell you what’s appalling, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
That minister, when she was the Labour minister, trying to 
force down the throats of universities and municipalities and 
business, most available hours legislation. That is what is 
appalling. Oh and she’s nodding her head. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — She’s nodding her head. Do you know why, Mr. 
Deputy Chair? Because they’re waiting for their chance to do it 
again. They’re waiting for their chance to bring forward that 
legislation. 
 
And the member that’s laughing the loudest, the member for . . . 
What’s she the member of . . . No, in the corner, in the corner. 
The member for Regina Walsh Acres laughs at that, laughs at 
the notion that this government may well if given another 
chance, heaven forbid, try to bring back most available hours 
legislation, government-directed hours legislation. What did she 
do when the vote came before this House? She voted again in 
favour of most available hours legislation. Didn’t you? Kind of 
forgot about that maybe before you started giggling at the back 
of the room. 
 
There’s the minister of Labour, the former minister of Labour 
again wanting to enter the debate from her chair. She’ll have 
plenty of time to do it. 
 
But I would say this. The fact that there is growth in this 
province, the fact that there is any kind of economic activity is 
happening despite the cold chill that blew over the economy 
when that minister rose at the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour] convention and promised most available hours 
legislation, when in the election campaign, when in the election 
campaign that preceded it, the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan promised the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce 
. . . 
 
What did they say? If you vote for us, oh just vote for us, the 
NDP. We’re really the friends of business. And if you vote for 
us, they’ll be no major labour changes. We promise. We 
promise. That’s what the Premier said. And so what happened 
when that minister stood up at SFL? What did she do? She tried 
to introduce major labour changes, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Frankly, that is the kind of action we see from this NDP 
government. That’s what we’ve seen. We’ve seen the 
Government of Saskatchewan compete against small-business 
men and women. We’ve seen that, Mr. Deputy Chair. We have 
seen them try to introduce ridiculous labour legislation in this 
province that would have hurt part-time workers. That sent a 
chill over the economy. Time after time and now most . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I apologize to the member. Order, 
members. The volume in the Chamber is getting too loud, and 
government members are interrupting the Leader of the 
Opposition to the point where I cannot hear him, so I would ask 
for order. And I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So amazingly a 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

few minutes ago the Premier’s answer as to why he wasn’t at 
the table with the Premier of BC and the Premier of Alberta 
making sure that Saskatchewan is at the vanguard of the new 
West, the reason is as he said, well all of the other premiers, 
they asked BC and Alberta to do it. That’s what he said. That’s 
his answer. Did he stand up at that Council of the Federation 
meeting or since when he has found out about the progress that 
was being made? Did he ask those governments if he could 
come to the table? No he didn’t. 
 
We know that he didn’t. There’s been no such request made. 
The Premier of Alberta has confirmed that. We’ll meet again. 
We’ll meet again, and we’ll find out from the officials in British 
Columbia whether or not the Premier now, at least after we’ve 
raised the questions, has made any effort to come to that table. I 
would suggest to you unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Chair, that we 
know the answer. We know the answer to the question. 
 
Now well we have another point, we have another point for the 
Premier to ponder. The Premier’s case to Ottawa with respect to 
equalization goes something like this. That it isn’t fair . . . Goes 
something like this. His case to Ottawa for a better equalization 
deal goes something like this, and we would agree with this as 
well, Mr. Deputy Chair. You ought not to penalize the province 
of Saskatchewan for having fossil fuels, for having 
non-renewable resources. That’s basically the case that we 
would make. It’s the case Atlantic Canada made. It’s the case 
that we would make as well. He’s saying don’t penalize 
Saskatchewan because we have non-renewable resources 
through the equalization formula. 
 
And yet, Mr. Deputy Chair, he is prepared to do exactly and 
precisely that to rural Saskatchewan, to the parts of this 
province that are — what? — that are the sources of 
non-renewable resources. Because what does he ask of them, 
Mr. Deputy Chair? While he’s saying to Ottawa treat us fairly, 
don’t discriminate just because we have non-renewable 
resources, what does he do to the regions of the province like 
southeast Saskatchewan, like the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who have oil and gas? He says, oh no, you have oil and 
gas, so you’re going to have a 50 per cent property tax hike. No, 
no, you have oil and gas; you’re going to have teacher cuts. 
You’ve got oil and gas, he says to southeast Saskatchewan, so 
we’re going to close your schools. You’ve got oil and gas, so 
we refuse to fix your roads. You’ve got oil and gas. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, isn’t that hypocrisy? Isn’t that the definition of 
hypocrisy? 
 
And I don’t need to ascribe it to anyone, I’m not doing that. I’m 
asking what the members of this committee . . . what the 
definition of hypocrisy is? Isn’t it when you have one standard 
for someone else, like say the federal Government of Canada 
with respect to equalization, but then you apply a completely 
different standard to the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy? Isn’t 
that what hypocrisy is? And could that be the reason why at the 
Premier’s fundraising dinner in Weyburn they had to cancel 48 
hours before because I think they’d only sold six tickets, 
because the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy are fed up with that 
kind of double standard. 
 
I’ll tell you one other thing, Mr. Deputy Chair, we raised it with 
that . . . well he’s not there any more. We raised it with the 
Minister Responsible for Highways earlier in the day. I did 

myself and the member for Cypress Hills. The same is 
happening in southwest Saskatchewan. We see the NDP double 
standard. That’s what we see. We see the double standard of 
saying well, to Ottawa, don’t penalize us because we have oil 
and gas. But what are they saying to southwest Saskatchewan? 
My hon. colleague knows very well. They say you’re going to 
look at a massive tax hike because you’ve got oil and gas. 
We’re going to increase your property tax. That’s what they 
say. 
 
They’re going to say with respect to Highway 32 between the 
No. 1 and Leader . . . and if you drive by it you’ll see pump 
jacks and compressor stations as far as the eye can see, pouring 
royalties into this government, but you know what though, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, do you know what the government says? Build 
your own roads. They’re actually asking the RM [rural 
municipality], they’re asking the RM to build Highway 32, to 
throw in. 
 
They don’t mind cashing the cheques, the oil and gas royalty 
cheques from Weyburn, from Swift Current, from 
Lloydminster. They don’t mind cashing the resource surcharge 
cheques from all of the places that have potash mines and 
uranium mines. They don’t mind cashing the cheques from 
northern Saskatchewan. But what they forget is to re-invest 
back in those areas. They forget that the NDP double standard 
is just patently unfair for those areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it may be why they can’t 
attract flies to their fundraising dinner in Weyburn. I think the 
people there have had enough. I think the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy are sick of the double standard. They’re 
sick of the condition of Highway No. 8. I think they nicknamed 
it the road to Bagdad because the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy consider all the royalty cheques, all the money that’s 
being put into the provincial coffers . . . Highway 35’s another 
one. Highway 35 is another one. 
 
They’re fed up, Mr. Deputy Chair, and we haven’t heard any 
answers from the Premier today. What we’ve heard is that there 
are no goals. We’ve heard no reasonable explanation as to why 
all these different groups — individual patients, health care 
providers like nurses, teachers, property taxpayers, children — 
why they’re being left behind by a government that says we’re 
not going to leave you behind. I think the people of the province 
would say, stop making those promises because whenever you 
promise something, the actual opposite happens. So maybe we 
should ask them actually, Mr. Deputy Chair, to promise not to 
call an election immediately. Maybe they would and people in 
the province would get the relief they so wish to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The Premier is going to have an opportunity, I 
believe soon and very soon. It’s up to him when he’s going to 
call, when he’s going to call the provincial election. It’s up to 
him. But when he calls the next election, the by-election in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, he’s going to have explain to the people 
of Weyburn-Big Muddy why he’s prepared to cash all their 
royalty cheques, why he’s happy to do that for his own budget 
purposes, why he’s happy to cash their royalty cheques to fund 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

things like, oh, like an advertising campaign for the Minister of 
Finance, at a half million dollars. And he’ll have to explain to 
the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, why he has this double 
standard, why Ottawa shouldn’t penalize us for having oil and 
gas, but why the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy should be so 
penalized. 
 
And I think he’s going to have a rough time of it, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I think he’s going to have a difficult time explaining a 
double standard. I think any politician regardless of their 
political stripe, regardless of their ideology, if they are so 
exposed in terms of having such a double standard, I think 
they’re going to have a tough time explaining it, especially to 
the region, to the people where that double standard hurts the 
most. And it hurts the most to those areas. 
 
You know I know what another constituent of Cypress Hills 
had to say to the Deputy Premier at SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association], and I would offer it to the 
Premier as I get to my question soon and very soon, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I think it was one of the councillors that said to the 
Deputy Premier at SUMA with respect to their approach to 
southwest Saskatchewan, this notion that they’ve cashed the oil 
and gas cheques, but don’t even fix the roads. He said, even the, 
he said, the Romans pillaged and plundered, I think he said this, 
but at least they left behind good roads. I think that’s what he 
said to you. I think that’s what he said to you. And if you don’t 
remember, we’ll phone him up; I’m sure he’s prepared to repeat 
it to you. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s what the 
Premier’s going to hear in Weyburn-Big Muddy. That’s what 
the Premier’s going to hear in Weyburn-Big Muddy. And so the 
question to the Premier, and so the question to the Premier, is 
how he can, how he can support having such a double standard? 
 
How can he look the Prime Minister dead in the eye, how can 
he look, how can he look the Prime Minister dead in the eye, 
and say, don’t penalize us because we have oil and gas? And 
yet his Minister of Finance in the budget can say the same thing 
to the school divisions in southeast Saskatchewan, in southwest 
Saskatchewan, in Sunrise School Division, in 63 of the 81 
school divisions, who are saying don’t penalize us because we 
have resources, because we have a commercial assessment. We 
didn’t put the oil and gas there, Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s what 
they would say. 
 
The Premier would use that same argument in Ottawa. We 
didn’t put the oil and gas there. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Deputy Chair, is this, as we get to the 
question. The bottom line is they have to explain to the people 
of the province what they’re doing with respect to this double 
standard. Significantly, they’ll also have to explain why the 
no-one-left-behind words that appear on every press release 
seem to be more about rhetoric, more about messaging than 
they are about action, as we have seen, as we have detailed. 
 
I recently met with the president of the Pleasant Hill 
neighbourhood association in the Premier’s old riding and he 
feels that that inner city’s being left behind on important issues 
in terms of safety in that neighbourhood. They have specific 
questions. They have suggestions with respect to SCAN [safer 

communities and neighbourhoods] that they think would 
improve the Act. But they feel that their questions of this, of 
their MLA, the Premier, and the Minister of Justice fall on deaf 
ears, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the Premier continually says that nobody is 
being left behind when quite the opposite is true. Farmers are 
being left behind. Rural property tax owners are being left 
behind. Teachers are being left behind. Nurses are being left 
behind. People like Emily Morley were left behind. Baby Paige 
was left behind by this government and had to flee to the 
Stollery Children’s Hospital. It seems that the only people that 
aren’t left behind are the members of the government caucus, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. They’ve all got jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They all have jobs. They all have jobs that pay 
them extra money. There’s no one left behind in the NDP . . . 
Whoa. Wait a minute. There is one. There is one MLA that has 
been left behind in the NDP caucus. The member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers . . . Well I don’t want the Premier to 
leave. He should be here to answer questions. The member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers has been left behind. He’s the only one 
that’s not getting extra pay in the caucus. 
 
So let me finally get to the question, Mr. Deputy Chair. Let me 
get to the question. The member for Saskatchewan Rivers 
hopefully is not being left behind. Let me get to the question. 
 
In light of the fact, in light of the fact that this Premier has 
admitted he has no goals with respect to population, with 
respect to job growth, with respect to nurses, with respect to 
post-secondary waiting lists; in light of the fact that he’s 
admitted he’s got no goals; in light of the fact that he has said 
his entire reason for being the Premier is that no one would be 
left behind and yet we’ve detailed all these different groups that 
have been left behind; in light of the fact that his vision of 
Saskatchewan is that of a wee province that’ll always be in and 
out of equalization; in light of the fact that he lacks enough 
vision even to get to the table with Alberta and BC and 
negotiate Saskatchewan’s leading role in the new West; in light 
of all of that, in light of this double standard that he has on 
equalization respecting the non-renewable resources, Mr. 
Deputy Chair; in light of that, although he might be getting 
ready to call the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election, he hasn’t 
found the courage to do it yet — and so there is still time to 
answer this next question properly. Will he please call a general 
election in the province of Saskatchewan immediately so we 
can get the government that we deserve? Will he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it is not lost on 
members of this House and I’m sure not lost on . . . and I’m 
sure those large numbers of people who will be watching this 
debate at home tonight, not lost on them either. 
 
There’s two old tricks in politics and legislative debate. I tell 
you if you can’t make a point, you get all your members to start 
hollering and shouting from their seats to drown out any good 
debate. And the other thing you do if you’re a legislative 
debater and you do not want . . . You see, they’re yelling and 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

shouting from their seats . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the . . . A few moments ago 
I called order to protect the rights of the Leader of the 
Opposition. And I’d ask now for members of the opposition to 
please calm down so that the Premier can be heard. Order. 
Order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There’s exactly my point, Deputy Chair. 
If they don’t want good debate, they’ll shout and holler from 
their seats to try and drown it out. And the other old trick is — 
everybody’s seen it in the legislature before — if you can’t 
make a good argument that you know will be rebutted, you 
speak till the clock runs out. And we’ve just had an example of 
that here tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’ve reached the appointed time. 
When you know you can’t rebut, you speak till the clock runs 
out. You send your House Leader over to negotiate a 
two-minute close of debate. Well fair enough. Because you 
know what? You know what? And I’d love to debate what the 
Leader of the Opposition was just advancing. He’s advancing a 
theory that those regions of our province, those communities of 
our province that are privileged to work with oil and natural gas 
should get the benefits from those oil and natural gas. 
 
I’d like the Leader of the Opposition to explain to his bench 
mate from Canora how it is that all the resources that come 
from oil and gas, none of them should flow to Canora, none of 
them should flow there; none of them should flow to La Ronge; 
none of them should flow to Moose Jaw. That’s his position. 
Well I tell you that’s not the position of this government. We 
believe in the whole province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The whole people of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Chair, this budget speaks to the whole people of 
Saskatchewan and to the people of Saskatchewan’s future — to 
the future of our young people; to the future of growth of 
industry and activity economic in this province; to the growth 
and activity among our educational institutions to provide new 
opportunities for our young people. This budget speaks to the 
most vulnerable in our society. And those men and women 
stand in their place and vote against it. They vote against it as a 
result of that kind of vote, Mr. Chair. Come that next provincial 
election, people in Saskatchewan will be voting against them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[22:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I am proud to support the government of 
this budget. I am proud of the work of the Executive Council. 
Now before I take my chair, Mr. Chair, I want to thank, I want 
to thank those officials from Executive Council who have been 
here tonight, whose expertise we have not required to draw on 
too frequently tonight. 
 
But when I thank the deputy minister to the Premier, and the 
senior people in Executive Council, as I thank them I am 

thanking through them each and every public servant in the 
province of Saskatchewan, in the government side, in the 
Crown side, and in the community level, I am thanking those 
men and women who provide the public services for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are blessed in this province with a tremendous public 
service extending the good work of government in a real, 
tangible way to the people of Saskatchewan. I know the hours 
of work that these individuals put in in service of the public in 
Executive Council. I know the work that’s done by 
management across this province and I know full well, I know 
full well the gift of labour that is given to the people of 
Saskatchewan from its public servants. In thanking the deputy 
to the Premier, I thank every public servant in the province of 
Saskatchewan and I thank the members for the debate tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise and 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That motion is carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have been requested by our 
committee to rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the Government House Leader that 
this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:34.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Wall ......................................................................................................................................................................1735, 1750, 1763 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1744 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1746 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1756 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1761 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 




