
















































Hansard: April 19, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 42A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1211 
 April 19, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the start of another 
week I present the petition on behalf of constituents from the 
area of Highway 32, the communities that run along Highway 
32 from Leader to Cabri. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today’s petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals from the 
community of Sceptre and Leader. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
for timely cancer treatment in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to give cancer patients timely access 
to medical treatment. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has over 700 names behind it. It’s just 
been collected over the weekend, so in a short time well over 
700 names have been put on this petition. And I know there are 
hundreds more coming in each day, and I’m sure we’ll get very 
familiar with this petition. The petitioners on these sheets are 
mainly from the Meath Park-Prince Albert area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to deliver a 
petition regarding the timely cancer treatment in Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to give cancer patients timely access 
to medical treatments. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from the Maidstone area. Thank 

you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have several pages again 
today of citizens concerned of the safety of Highway No. 5. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Englefeld, 
Saskatoon, Meacham, Wadena, Buchanan, Martensville, 
Prud’homme, Kelvington, Humboldt; Calgary, Alberta; and 
Winkler, Manitoba. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition from citizens who are concerned about safe 
driving conditions on Highway No. 3. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of residents from 
across Saskatchewan that are concerned that Saskatchewan is 
the only province besides PEI [Prince Edward Island] that does 
not have a dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources before the next election to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, and 
Silverspring in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition for 
timely cancer treatment in Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to give cancer patients timely access 
to medical treatments. 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorders. I will read briefly from 
the petition, Mr. Speaker. It talks about: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon recommendations 
made by the Government of Saskatchewan caucus 
committee on human services. Among those 
recommendations are: to coordinate among the 
departments of Health, Learning, and Community 
Resources and Employment, with input from stakeholders, 
to formulate a provincial comprehensive autism spectrum 
disorders treatment program, and to continue to provide 
intensive behavioural intervention and other therapies for 
as long as an individual’s lead medical professions deems 
it to be required. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by good citizens from Saskatoon. I so 
present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 5, 7, 8, 64, 67, 638, 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Property Management: 
did management of the department have established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002? 

 
And I give notice I shall on day no. 47 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Property Management: how did 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002? 
 
And to the Minister of Property Management: does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2002? If so, what is the nature 

of this activity? 
 
To the Minister of Property Management: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitor of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2002? 
 
To the Minister of Property Management: is management 
of the department aware of any allegations of fraud or 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2002, such as information received from employees, 
former employees, customers, clients, suppliers, or others? 
If so, what is the nature of the activity? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 2001. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: with whom did the 
minister and his officials meet with concerning the 
veterinary medical Act, Bill No. 28? At what dates and 
times did these meetings take place? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that on day no. 47 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
is management of the department aware of any allegations 
of fraud or other illegal activity within the department or 
its agencies in the year 2002, such as information received 
from employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question to the same minister for 
the year 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
what did management of the department find as a result of 
its monitor of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2002? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question to the same minister for 
the year 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 47 I will ask the 
government the following question: 
 

Again to the Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan: did management of the department have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002? 
 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question to the same 
minister for the year 2001. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I shall also give notice that I shall on day no. 
47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
how did management of the department monitor any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002? 

 
And I have a similar question for the year 2001. And, finally, 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
does management of the department have any knowledge 
of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within 
the department during the year 2002? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, finally and again I also have a question — a 
similar question — to the same minister for the year 2001. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Students to Test Marketing Strategy in China 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For the 
last two years the University of Regina’s Faculty of Business 
Administration has been sponsoring a competition for 
fourth-year students entitled Bridges to International Practice. 
 
This competition is a particularly good example of a very 
positive partnership between the university and the business 
community, and it provides students with an opportunity to gain 
valuable practical experience of the real-world business 
environment. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the challenge for students was to 
develop marketing strategies to help Hypor Canada, one of the 
world’s leading suppliers of swine genetics, to expand its 
operations in China. 
 
Team proposals were assessed by a panel of judges representing 
the Business Admin faculty, Hypor, and the Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners of this year’s Bridges to International 
Practice are Jocelyn Lanoie, Treena Amyotte, and Krista Loydl. 
And I’m pleased to say that Krista, in addition to her studies, 
has also been working at the Saskatchewan New Democratic 
Party office — just another New Democrat with a great head for 
business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The three winners will be travelling to China on behalf of 
Hypor to test their marketing strategy first-hand. They will not 
only receive course credit work for what they do in China, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m sure the experience will stay with them for the 

rest of their careers. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Jocelyn, Treena, 
and Krista on their achievement and to acknowledge the 
University of Regina Faculty of Business Administration and 
Hypor Canada for providing students with this very valuable 
learning opportunity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Citizens Fight Floods in Northeast Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as all 
members are well aware, this past weekend northeast 
Saskatchewan has been again devastated by flooding as a result 
of spring thaw. The Carrot River has been running at five times 
its normal rate of flow and has spilled over its banks, flooding 
farmers’ fields and people’s homes. Mr. Speaker, this flooding 
has also forced over 1,000 residents from Red Earth First 
Nation from their homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’d like to ask all members of the 
Assembly to congratulate the Red Earth First Nation band; their 
chief, Miller Nowakayas; The Prince Albert Grand Council; and 
the emergency crews that they assembled to deal with the flood 
waters and the great job they did over this past weekend. 
Volunteers worked tirelessly to erect sandbag barriers to stem 
the rising water and their work contributed to the protection of a 
number of their homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should also recognize the cities of Saskatoon 
and Prince Albert for doing their best to accommodate residents 
of Red Earth during this difficult time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall Porcupine Plain and Arborfield were both 
hit very hard with heavy rains that flooded much crop land. 
They are again hit hard this spring with spring runoff, ruining 
bridges and roads and chasing people from their homes. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the point I want to make here today is that I 
believe and I truly want to recognize and congratulate the 
people of northeast Saskatchewan for their strong-willed 
community mindedness and their resilience in times of, tough 
times such as this spring’s flood. And I’d like them to know that 
we are thinking of them here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Telecommunicator of the Year 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week was emergency communicators week in Saskatchewan — 
a national event honouring the many Saskatchewan 
professionals who help to provide emergency assistance by 
responding to emergency telephone calls, dispatching 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

emergency personnel, and helping people in emergencies to 
stay calm, competent, and confident that help is on the way. Mr. 
Speaker, they are 911 operators and other emergency service 
dispatchers from police, fire, and emergency medical services 
who handle emergency calls all over Saskatchewan. 
 
As part of the week’s activities, Mr. Speaker, Rhonda 
Chalupiak, a telecommunications officer with the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] divisional operational 
communications centre in Regina was named Saskatchewan 
Telecommunicator of the Year. 
 
She was selected by her peers for outstanding dedication to her 
work and for being an excellent communicator, exhibiting 
sound judgment, calm, and courage every day. Ms. Chalupiak 
will represent Saskatchewan at a national event later this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Corrections and Public Safety had 
the privilege of attending the evening and presenting the award. 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, the minister is still talking 
about what a wonderful evening it was and what a great time he 
had. Quote: “One of the funnest events ever” is, I think, how he 
put it. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in congratulating all of the province’s emergency 
communications professionals, in particular Rhonda Chalupiak, 
Saskatchewan’s Telecommunicator of the Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Congratulations to Volunteers 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. National 
Volunteer Week and on behalf of the official opposition, it’s an 
honour to stand in this Assembly today to recognize the men, 
women, youth, and children across Saskatchewan who 
contribute to the well-being of this province through their 
community volunteers. 
 
Saskatchewan is Canada’s volunteer capital. Each year 323,000 
Saskatchewan residents volunteer an average of 154 hours each 
to better their neighbourhoods and communities, whether it’s 
through the more than 5,000 incorporated charities in our 
province, the 12,000 culture and recreation organizations, and 
countless CBOs [community-based organization] who are on 
the front line delivering health and human services to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan volunteers continually 
demonstrate an energy and passion for their communities which 
is fundamental to who we are as a province and a people. 
 
To the businesses who support volunteer organizations both 
financially and personally, to service clubs around this province 
such as Kiwanis, Progress, Rotary, Kinsmen, Care and Share, 
and many, many more, Mr. Speaker, volunteers are what make 
this province the great place it is to live. And I ask all members 
to join me in congratulating all volunteers in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 

Assiniboia Farmer Receives Organic Farming Award 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Organic Crop Improvement Association international with 
offices in Canada, the US [United States], Latin America, Asia, 
and Europe is one of the world’s foremost organic 
organizations. And it has created an award, the Outstanding 
Organic Farmer of the Year award, to recognize individuals 
who excel in cropping and livestock practice, who are 
responsible stewards of the natural environment, and who are 
committed to the organic community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the OCIA [Organic Crop Improvement 
Association] international award for excellence in organic 
farming went to Dwayne Woolhouse who, along with his wife 
and four kids, farms just south of Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Woolhouses are mixed farmers, running bison 
on hilly land and raising them as naturally as possible. They use 
a crop rotation based on cereals, legumes, and green manures, 
careful soil building and a diversity of cash crops. Mr. 
Woolhouse uses a wide variety of techniques for weed control 
including crop rotation, increased seeding rates, and delayed 
seeding, but he’s also developed innovative new weed control 
machinery. 
 
As is so often the case, Mr. Woolhouse’s stewardship extends 
into the community. He has been active as a 4-H and Scout 
leader, and as a volunteer at the town library and museum. And 
he has served on local, provincial, and international committees 
to help regulate, improve, and promote organic agriculture. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. Woolhouse 
on this award. It is clearly well deserved. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Minister’s Trip to Fort McMurray 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday our office received an interesting news release from 
the government, and it reads: “Minister and Saskatoon group 
explore business opportunities in Fort McMurray.” 
 
While it’s encouraging to see someone from the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government finally get out of their offices to 
help Saskatchewan’s economy prosper, it’s a case of too little, 
too late. The minister’s trip to Fort McMurray comes almost 
three months to the day after the Saskatchewan Party leader, 
Leader of the Opposition and members of the Saskatchewan 
Party went to Fort McMurray. At that time the Minister of 
Industry and Resources said this, and I quote: 
 

“It’s fine for a politician to fly to Fort McMurray for the 
day, but we’ve been more interested in working with 
individual businesses in Saskatoon and other places in 
Saskatchewan to get them interested in going to Fort 
McMurray.” 

 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

And that was in the . . . February 1 in the The StarPhoenix. 
 
Apparently the minister disagreed and disliked our idea so much 
that he decided to copy it for himself. The minister did not want to 
imitate his own leader, so he decided to copy our leader. This 
proves that the tired, worn out, old NDP government just plays lip 
service to securing Saskatchewan’s economic prosperity. They’re 
out of ideas, and are an anchor around the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
You can add the minister’s trip to Fort McMurray as just one more 
example of a good idea from the Saskatchewan Party that the NDP 
has taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Students Named Energy Ambassadors 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last fall I had the great pleasure to work alongside 
about 160 volunteers helping some low-income Moose Jaw 
residents get their homes ready for winter. Improvements 
included preparing windows and doors for winter, installing a 
working smoke detector, putting in low-flow shower heads and 
faucet aerators, and installing an Energy Star programmable 
thermostat. 
 
It’s all part of an energy conservation initiative called Share the 
Warmth, a project coordinated in Moose Jaw by a team of 
architectural technology students from our SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
campus in partnership with SaskEnergy, Moose Jaw Canadian 
Tire, and other community groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that these SIAST students are 
among 39 students from across Canada who have been named 
as winners of this year’s Energy Ambassadors competition. 
Energy Ambassadors is an annual competition sponsored by 
Natural Resources Canada, and it focuses on the role of energy 
efficiency in reducing consumption and conserving energy and 
recognizes and rewards undergraduate post-secondary students 
for developing practical solutions and innovative technology to 
reduce energy consumption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Share the Warmth was one of only 20 projects 
across the country to be recognized, and I ask that all our 
members would please join me in congratulating the student 
coordinators of the Share the Warmth project on winning this 
prestigious award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

December Saskatoon lost yet another oncologist, this one to 
British Columbia. My question to the minister: has this position 
been filled? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think as you and other members are aware, recruiting of 
oncologists is an international challenge. Mr. Speaker, 
oncologists are in significant demand. The Saskatoon Health 
Region and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency have been 
seeking two oncologists for the city of Saskatoon and area. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m happy to say that one oncologist has been 
recruited, will be starting in September, and recruitment efforts 
are underway to bring in the second one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the number of 
oncology positions that remain vacant in the Saskatoon area, 
can he tell this Assembly what the average wait time is for a 
cancer patient who is seeking an oncologist visit for the first 
time in the Saskatoon health care region? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatoon Health Region, as I indicated, has a shortage of two 
oncologists. One has been recruited and recruitment efforts are 
under way for the second. The optimum wait time from 
physician referral to oncologist seeing was about 9.5 weeks, 
Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon Health Region and the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency are working diligently to ensure 
that that wait time is addressed and does not increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Emily Morley of 
Meath Park is 57 years old. In January of this year she found a 
lump in her lymph node. Emily waited one month for a biopsy 
which confirmed it was a secondary cancer. She waited another 
month for a CT [computerized tomography] scan to find the 
source. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that it is confirmed that she has cancer, Emily 
is being forced to wait three months or longer for her first visit 
to an oncologist. This is absolutely unacceptable. Cancer 
doesn’t wait. 
 
Why is the NDP government forcing patients to wait three 
months or longer for an initial visit to an oncologist? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

New Democratic Party government, as the member opposite 
would suggest, is not responsible for long waiting times when 
oncologists are not available within a community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the latest budget that this government brought 
down added an additional 17 per cent of dollars available to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency which includes dollars for 
recruitment. Also, Mr. Speaker, last year the budget increased 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s funding by 15 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is very concerned about the wait 
times between physician referral and being seen by an 
oncologist. Mr. Speaker, we would like to ensure that those wait 
times are reduced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, last week that Health minister 
stood in the rotunda and said he’s ultimately responsible for the 
health care provided in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think all of us as MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] should put ourselves in 
the shoe of Emily. She knows she has cancer. She doesn’t know 
the source. She’s been told that she has to wait over three 
months for her first visit to an oncologist before treatment can 
even be started. 
 
Emily would like to know where she stands. Her family who 
are in the gallery today also would like to know where Emily 
stands. Will the minister commit to committing to sending her 
out of province if he cannot provide timely treatment in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government is committed as a first priority to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency. We have provided additional money in each of 
the last two years and are assisting the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency with their recruitment efforts. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I might add that several years ago this 
government and the representative ministers of Health at that 
time recognized some of the challenges that physicians and 
patients have with receiving timely care and put in place quality 
of care coordinators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very first line of authority with regards to 
addressing wait times are the quality of care coordinators. I 
would hope that the member opposite, when he learned of this 
case, directed the individual to the quality of care coordinator 
because that’s where action takes place first, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Emily was too 
weak to make the trip here to the legislature today. But she was 
not too weak to put her feelings down on paper, her feelings 
about the state of cancer care under this NDP government. And 
here’s a quote from Emily: 
 

How many people, diagnosed with some form of cancer, 
are awaiting an appointment with an oncologist . . . of 
whom there are few [of] in Saskatchewan, while the 
finance minister spends a half million dollars on an 
advertizing campaign . . . 

 
Why does this government seem to think it’s a higher priority 
about self-promotion and blowing its own horn about the 
budget and not giving people of this province, especially cancer 
patients, the timely care they need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
sympathize with the individual in question. I can’t imagine 
what it is like to be waiting a diagnosis and a referral to an 
oncologist. Mr. Speaker, I share that concern and am doing all 
that we can within our power to ensure that there are 
oncologists in the province who can do the work that needs to 
be done. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this budget does put an additional $10.3 
million into the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to be able to do 
the work that needs to be done, indicating the commitment that 
this government has to cancer patients and their families 
throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Emily and her family know they are dealing with a very serious 
illness. Right now they have no idea what they are dealing with 
or what their options are. Not only is Emily fighting for her life; 
she is also fighting the health care system. The family fears that 
without immediate attention, Emily might not live long enough 
to make her first visit to an oncologist, which is over three 
months away. Mr. Speaker, Emily writes, and I quote, “How 
long do we wait, dying, while the NDP government plays God 
with our lives?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this minister cannot guarantee timely care in 
this province, will he look at other options like sending her out 
of province so timely care can be given? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan Health has reciprocal agreements with other 
provinces, and, Mr. Speaker, we will utilize those references out 
of province when the individual’s physicians and quality of care 
coordinators reach agreement on the inability to meet emergent 
care. But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region has 
initiated a number of procedures to ensure that cases that 
require immediate care, when brought to the attention of the 
quality of care coordinators, are dealt with in an efficient and 
relatively fast manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just had the opportunity recently to take a look at 
the National Cancer Institute of Canada 2004 statistics reporting 
that Saskatchewan has one of the lowest cancer death rates in 
the country. And the most recent cancer society cancer 
statistics, Mr. Speaker, indicate that Saskatchewan women have 
the lowest lung cancer mortality rate in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Recovery of Stolen Funds 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week Evelyn Hynes, 
a former Department of Community Resources employee, was 
charged with one count of fraud over $5,000. Mr. Speaker, as 
I’m sure you’ll remember, Hynes was the Saskatoon woman 
who was manager in charge of dispensing emergency welfare 
payments. She was fired by the NDP government after $1 
million was found to have been stolen from some of the poorest 
of the poor. The Provincial Auditor says it was a sophisticated 
fraud that involved the creation of 16 fictitious welfare clients 
who required emergency payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us what action is now being 
taken to recover the money that was taken? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as soon as we learned of the problem, this 
government acted and acted very quickly. We looked at all the 
cases that came to our attention. We suspended the employee 
involved and eventually terminated the employee. We referred 
the matter to the RCMP. We notified the Provincial 
Comptroller and the Provincial Auditor, and of course the 
RCMP investigation began. Mr. Speaker, we implemented new 
controls to ensure that this type of activity does not happen 
again — the controls certainly around handling cheques, the 
segregation of all duties for employees — and we also 
implemented the government-wide policy of employee criminal 
record checks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we acted very quickly. And all I can tell the 
member opposite is to allow the courts and the RCMP to 
continue that work. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the issue now is about recovery 
of the funds. The Saskatchewan Party raised this issue during 
last fall’s sitting of the legislature. The former minister of 
Community Resources told this Assembly, quote: 
 

This matter was turned over to the RCMP. They are still 
conducting their investigation, and so we will not be in a 
position to take further steps until they’ve decided what 
charges to lay. 

 
She also had this to say to CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] news about recovering the money that was taken, 
quote, “I know it is the intent of our department to claim in 
every way we can once there’s an actual charge laid.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, an actual charge has now been laid. Can the new 
minister now tell us what is being done to recover this amount 
of taxpayers’ dollar that has now been taken from the poorest of 
the poor, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 
matter. And I think it’s important, as that member would 
understand, is to allow the court process to unfold and allow the 
evidence to come forth and allow the court system itself to 
make a determination of guilt versus non-guilt. Following that 
process, then of course we will do all that we can, and we’ll 
certainly stand by the previous minister’s commitment to do all 
we can to protect Saskatchewan taxpayers’ interests. 
 
And I’m sure the member knows the process involved. And I 
reiterate that we must allow the RCMP and the courts to deal 
with the matter as quickly and efficiently as we can, and we 
cannot get involved until the time comes for a verdict to be 
read. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will know that 
there’s a significant difference between criminal and civil 
responsibility. The criminal process is now under way. The 
charge has been laid. The question that we now have for this 
government is, what steps are they taking by way of civil 
remedies to recover this sum of money? 
 
The previous minister had indicated that she was going to take 
steps once charges were laid. Charges have been laid. Now we 
look to this minister to see what is going to happen by way of 
similar remedies to try and recover this sum of taxpayers’ 
dollars that has gone missing — over $1 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, if any member across the 
way understands how this works, it would be the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast . . . well if anyone does. Mr. Speaker, 
while this criminal matter is proceeding, there won’t be any 
civil action. The member from Saskatoon Southeast should 
appreciate that. He should also appreciate that there is the 
ability within the criminal court to make orders in respect to 
compensation and restitution, but that is up to the court to 
decide. 
 
But while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, this member, the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast had earlier alleged that the 
prosecutors in this case were in the process of either covering 
up or at least slowing down this matter. And I wonder if he 
would like to take this opportunity to withdraw the remarks and 
apologize to the prosecutors involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can throw things 
back, whatever he likes. But right now we have a province that 
is short $1 million of taxpayers’ money, and the citizens of this 
province want to know what that minister and what that 
government is going to do about it. 
 
Evelyn Hynes had a previous fraud conviction and spent time in 
jail in another province. The NDP government knew nothing of 
this until the CBC uncovered the prior conviction. After much 
pressure from the opposition and public, the NDP finally 
introduced retroactive criminal record checks for current 
employees dealing with money or children. 
 
There’s only one catch, Mr. Speaker. The government has given 
a five-year window in which these retroactive checks have to be 
done. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the government 
giving five years? Isn’t that the amount of time needed to get an 
official pardon? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this happening, and why can’t we do the 
criminal record checks now? Why can’t we get on with dealing 
with recovery? Why can’t we deal with getting on with some 
basic competence from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
member opposite is that we have the most comprehensive 
criminal record check policy in Canada. I can also tell the 
member opposite that we have done over 560 criminal record 
checks since we implemented the policy in the fall, Mr. 
Speaker. What I can also tell the member opposite is that there 
are individuals within the public service that have come forward 
and voluntarily provided criminal record checks for the 
positions that they hold. 
 

What I can also tell the member opposite — and he must 
understand this — that we have given the public service an 
opportunity to get criminal record checks. We’ve given them 
the opportunity to do this over a five-year period. And no other 
place in the country, Mr. Speaker, is retroactively making 
people do criminal record checks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Changes to Education Funding 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing a 
lot about this budget on TV and radio thanks to ads financed by 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, but we’re not hearing about the 
property tax hikes hidden in the budget. Perhaps it’s because, 
Mr. Speaker, as the former Finance minister said, it’s unpopular 
to talk about taxes at election time. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the residents of Weyburn would 
like to know if they’re facing a property tax hike. The South 
East Cornerstone School Division had its operating grant cut by 
56 per cent. That’s $5.6 million gone with the stroke of the 
Finance minister’s pen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why she did not tell the 
people of Weyburn and Saskatchewan why there are hidden 
property tax hikes in the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, consistent with the 
commitment that this government made in May 2004, we’ve 
seen a number of significant changes in the operating grant for 
the ’06-07 year. And that really results in a simpler, more 
transparent, more equitable funding for our education system. 
Mr. Speaker, this has been worked through over the last number 
of years. 
 
And yes, there has been some differences in the foundation 
operating grant, mainly because of the zero-grant boards that 
have been moved into larger divisions. Mr. Speaker, this 
provides for more equitable funding and consistent services 
across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post there’s 
an article on the property tax hikes facing the Southeast. The 
headline reads, “Southeast mill rate increases likely.” It goes on 
to say that the South East Cornerstone School Division will 
receive about $4.2 million from the province, with taxpayers 
having to make up the difference of the $70-million operating 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a massive difference here, and 
it falls on the taxpayers in and around Weyburn. Don Rempel, 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

the director of education for the South East Cornerstone’s 
School Division says, “mill rate increases of 50 per cent are 
possible” in the rural area around Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how this differences are 
going to be made up and who will bear this outrageous drop in 
funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also 
has to take into consideration that there was three zero-grant 
boards formerly in the Estevan-Weyburn area. And this is a 
result of the high assessment with the oil and gas, the pipelines, 
the various other resource areas that are contained within this 
division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this process has been worked through. The 
divisions have been consulted. They were well aware of the 
changes that were taking place. So when the member says that 
it was some kind of hidden agenda, he is totally inaccurate. Mr. 
Speaker, the zero-grant boards and the move to the 
amalgamated divisions provides for more equitable system and 
better services right across Saskatchewan for all students. 
 
And another issue, Mr. Speaker, the foundation operating grants 
fluctuate on a year-to-year basis depending on assessment and 
also enrolment declines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier stood in Birch 
Hills, Saskatchewan, just over a month ago and said at the time 
that he was providing, quote, “. . . education property tax relief 
that fulfils the province’s commitment to farmers and farm 
families.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, is this commitment going to be sucked up 
by increased mill rates in this province due to this government’s 
incompetent management of amalgamation? Another case that 
the left hand doesn’t know what the extreme left hand is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier explain that hidden property 
tax increases in this budget somehow fulfill tax relief to farm 
families around Weyburn? What is the Premier going to do 
about his commitment? Taking these extra monies out of farm 
families around Weyburn and justify them by the incompetence 
of this amalgamation process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
seems to have a bit of a short-term memory and seems to have 
forgotten that there was $67 million that was put towards 
property tax reduction for agricultural property in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, traditionally there are fluctuations within the 
foundation operating grant. But previously there were 
zero-grant boards, and three of those boards are now within the 
Cornerstone School Division in the southeast corner of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that does have an effect on the 
school division, but it also speaks to the high assessment in the 
area in the property values to the oil and gas, to the coal 
resources in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are still working towards that equity within the 
systems right across Saskatchewan, that there should be 
regional pooling and better services delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, 
considering that the government, the NDP government has 
approximately $1 billion windfall from gas and oil and 
considering that the price of a barrel of oil today is $11 higher 
than the budget accounted for and considering that there’s a 
$154 million shortfall for the CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization] program, will the Minister of Agriculture 
commit today to fully fund the CAIS program for Saskatchewan 
farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as our history will show, every year that we have been in the 
CAIS program, we have fully funded that program. 
 
What we have done in this past year is to commit to ’04 and ’05 
funding in the same year. We moved the agenda ahead about 
six months, Mr. Speaker, and in this budget we have clearly 
indicated that we will be providing the base funding according 
to the agreement with the federal government. And there is little 
doubt in my mind that when we get to the third quarter, as 
things are unfolding today — which I will again repeat is six 
months ahead of agenda — when we get to that third quarter, I 
have little doubt that we’ll be fully funding the CAIS program. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to know exactly where in the budget that 
money shows up. Where is that money coming from? Because I 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

looked all through the budget, and I couldn’t find that 154 
million anywhere. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, additional, on top of that cut, there was a $12 
million cut to crop insurance in a year when farmers are right 
up against the wall, don’t have money to put this crop in, and 
that NDP government sees fit to cut about $166 million from 
the agriculture budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why don’t they just put it upfront? They’ve got an excess of 
gas and oil money. They have the ability to put that money 
upfront this year and not wait for the eleventh hour. Will he do 
the right thing? Commit to farmers that he will fully fund CAIS, 
and they might be able to get an operating loan from the banks, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, very clearly we have funded CAIS fully over the 
years. Mr. Speaker, we have come to the table far beyond CAIS 
funding for the province — $700 million last year in full 
funding in support of agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have spent any resource 
revenues that we have received in this province many, many 
times over. They continue to do that. What I want to know is, 
where were they when it came down to the crunch, when we 
were going down to meet with the federal government, with 
agricultural producers? Where were they when we were going 
down asking for the $575 million to help farmers through this 
year? Where were they? Sitting here, Mr. Speaker. Too bad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 887 to 892 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 887 to 892 inclusive have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative Development 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today as the Minister Responsible for Information 
Technology in the government to move second reading of An 

Act to amend The Economic and Co-operative Development 
Act. 
 
As part of its mandate, the Information Technology Office is 
consolidating IT [information technology] services across 
government, creating an IT service partnership of departments 
and agencies. The Act that is before the Assembly today will 
provide the authority to do that through The Economic and 
Co-operative Development Act. 
 
When a department or agency voluntarily agrees to join the 
partnership, the ITO [Information Technology Office] becomes 
responsible for all of that agency’s IT organization and 
functions. This includes helpdesk services, network 
management, equipment acquisition, and application 
development. The individual departments retain control of their 
own IT budgets, and the ITO then provides IT services to these 
departments on a chargeback or a cost-recovery basis. 
 
To date, Mr. Speaker, 16 executive government departments 
and agencies have joined the ITO service partnership. This 
includes major departments such as Agriculture and Food, 
Learning, Finance, Industry and Resources, and most recently 
Environment. The remaining departments are expected to join 
the partnership by the spring of 2007. 
 
The amendments that are being contemplated today through 
The Economic and Co-operative Development Act will simply 
give the ITO the legal authority to provide and charge for the IT 
and related services it provides to public agencies that are not 
part of the executive government. There are a number of 
agencies, boards, and commissions that currently receive IT 
services from executive government departments. 
 
As a result of consolidation, the ITO has inherited some of 
these historic relationships and service delivery agreements. 
These organizations may decide to continue that relationship 
with the current department as it joins the ITO partnership, and 
as such we require additional authority under this Act to allow 
us to move forward with those consolidations. This amendment 
will simply allow us to add these to the partnership agreement 
by regulation on a case-by-case basis. As such I would move 
the second reading of An Act to amend The Economic and 
Co-operative Development Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Information Technology that Bill No. 53, The 
Economic and Co-operative Development Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on second reading on Bill No. 53, An Act 
to amend The Economic and Co-operative Development Act. 
Mr. Speaker, in this day of information technology it is 
extremely important that the government uses its resources as 
efficiently as possible. And certainly the concept of making 
available the services of the Information Technology Office or 
ITO is an effort that is worthwhile and probably deserves 
consideration. 
 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

Mr. Speaker, as we move forward it seems that in the world of 
information technology, as we strive to have this technology 
available across government, across businesses and other 
agencies, there has to be the expertise to make sure that this 
technology continues to function and operate properly. 
Certainly government and government agencies have become 
very dependent upon this technology and I think all of us 
understand how critical it is when our own systems fail, even 
for a short time, that this technology is available to be looked 
after and serviced properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition there are all kinds of hazards that exist 
in the technological world with potential viruses and things of 
that nature that can infect the technology and make the systems 
susceptible to these kind of attacks. And as a result whole 
departments and agencies can end up with their technology 
failing them and the availability of the service is severely 
jeopardized as a result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on first blush this seems to be legislation that is 
appropriate to improving the availability of the informational 
technology office services across greater government agencies 
and other agencies outside of government and that it is 
appropriate that if these services are provided that there is a 
mechanism for them to charge for these services. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to speaking to people in 
the technological field to make sure that this is an efficient way 
of using our resources and doesn’t inordinately impose itself on 
the private sector who provide the services on a routine basis. 
And we look forward to consulting with the stakeholders in this 
regard and in order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading on Bill 53 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my brief 
remarks I’ll be moving second reading of The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
I have a great appreciation for the importance of the Meewasin 
Valley and the whole urban park system. Mr. Speaker, the 
Meewasin Valley Authority has added greatly to the quality of 
life in Saskatoon and enjoys broad support from the people of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Now The Meewasin Valley Authority Act has not been updated 
since 1998. The amendments are intended to better assist the 
Meewasin Valley Authority in fulfilling its mandate to protect 
the environment and heritage resources of the South 
Saskatchewan River Valley within and adjacent to the city of 

Saskatoon. 
 
With the support of the city of Saskatoon, the University of 
Saskatchewan, and the Government of Saskatchewan, 
Meewasin undertakes programs and projects in river valley 
education development and conservation. By creating 
opportunities for public awareness and enjoyment, Meewasin 
strives to increase understanding and to ensure a vibrant and 
healthy river valley. The park offers year-round recreation and 
sightseeing opportunities for everyone from cycling and 
walking to cross-country skiing and picnicking. 
 
Currently the Act exempts any provincial Crown lands from the 
MVA [Meewasin Valley Authority] if they were occupied or in 
use at the coming into force of the Act. The amendments before 
us will allow most of that land to become subject to the Act. 
Also, lands owned by the Meewasin Valley Authority will 
become subject to the Act as well. This addition of 
approximately 2 kilometres of riverbank land means an 
additional level of protection along the shoreline of the South 
Saskatchewan River. 
 
Protection of natural and heritage resources in the valley is one 
of Meewasin’s primary goals. With these amendments, the 
government is reconfirming its commitment to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority and enabling it to meet its goals more 
thoroughly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation that Bill 
No. 52, The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to make comments 
on this Bill. The Meewasin Valley Authority has had a proud 
history in Saskatoon and makes the riverbank in Saskatoon 
more of a jewel than it was before. It’s one of the few things 
that brightens an otherwise bland landscape in our province. 
And I was born and raised in this province and I’ve had a great 
appreciation for all of the landscape in this province, but in 
particular when you have something as nice as the riverbank 
where it flows through Saskatoon, it’s absolutely essential it be 
preserved and protected and beautified for generations to come. 
 
Meewasin Valley has done an outstanding job over the last 
number of years and are now dealing with the changes that are 
necessary by the south downtown development, and are 
working to have outside amphitheatres, the move of the 
Persephone Theatre to that area. And we’re pleased to see that 
steps are taking place. 
 
We’ve had only a very brief opportunity to look at this Bill, and 
we’ll want to do some consultation with stakeholders and 
members of the public to ensure that it meets its ongoing 
purpose of supporting the original goals and mandate of the 
Meewasin Valley Authority. It looks like it’s something that we 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

would want to support, but we will of course want to go through 
the consultation process. Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that the debate on second reading of Bill 
52 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s provincial 
parks system is important to me and to Saskatchewan people. 
There’s no doubt that we take a great deal of pride in our 
provincial parks. Parks allow residents and non-residents to 
enjoy Saskatchewan’s many natural environments and 
participate in outdoor activities. 
 
The 2,161 cottage leases are an integral part of Saskatchewan’s 
provincial parks and the department has a long history and 
tradition of good relationships with cottage owners and their 
association. The government has been in discussions with the 
provincial park cabin owners association over the last 18 
months to resolve the issue of a new cottage fee structure. The 
working group had the opportunity to express their thoughts and 
views during discussions. This has led to a desire to reconfigure 
park cottage fees from the current system to a two-part fee 
consisting of a service fee and a land lease fee. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The amendments before us will provide the following: first, 
setting a framework for a new fee structure for Saskatchewan 
provincial parks cottages, whereby cottage owners will be 
charged annual fees comprised of a service fee that will be 
determined in a manner prescribed in regulation and a land 
lease fee that will be determined in a manner prescribed in 
regulation for the land that is the subject matter of the lease. It 
will also provide authority to set by minister’s order the rate of 
distribution of the service cost to cottage leases based upon 
permanent or seasonal occupancy of the cottage lot. 
 
It will provide authority to make regulations allowing for 
appeals of any values upon which annual park cottage fees are 
based. And it will create a measure to limit action that may be 
taken against the government for past fees relative to the 
Supreme Court’s Eurig decision, notwithstanding any appeals 
that are made pursuant to the regulation, as well as provide for 
retroactivity of regulations to April 1 of the fiscal year in which 
the regulation is assented to. 
 
The amendments also make minor changes of a housekeeping 
nature, such as the recognition of privately owned cottage lots 
at Greig Lake north subdivision in Meadow Lake Provincial 
Park which were erroneously designated parkland, when such a 
designation cannot apply to private property, and corrections to 

boundary errors discovered through the digital mapping of 
Meadow Lake and Makwa Lake provincial parks. 
 
In general, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will establish the 
authority to determine by regulation the details of annual fees 
for provincial park cottages taking into consideration the results 
of discussions with the Saskatchewan Provincial Park Cabin 
Owners Association. The amendments also provide authority to 
establish by regulation the appeal process for the 2004 and 2005 
cottage fees that were based upon assessed land and building 
values as promised to park cottage lessees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 48, The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on second reading of Bill No. 48, an Act 
to amend . . . The Parks Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, there really are two parts 
to this Act that are of greater and lesser significance. Of lesser 
significance is the part that corrects the boundary definitions of 
Meadow Lake Park and Makwa Lake Provincial Park to 
appropriately make sure that the definitions of the boundaries 
are appropriate. And while it no doubt makes some significant 
difference to the property holders at Greg Lake resort, this I 
think is a matter of common sense and should certainly proceed 
without interruption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other parts of this piece of legislation 
though that are going to require some significant amount of 
consultation. The minister has indicated that a significant part in 
the legislation is it changes the way the annual fees are 
calculated and payable for recreational leases in our provincial 
parks. Mr. Speaker, I think people who have properties, who 
lease property in our provincial parks and have cottages on 
these properties, are going to be very interested in how this 
recalculation of fees is going to occur. 
 
As I see the Bill, it talks about a number of sort of subsets to 
what has been a single annual fee for use of recreational 
property. The service fee is one component of this which is set 
and determined by the minister in accordance with regulations. 
So basically the minister can set these resignations and fees in 
such manner as he sees fit. And I do not hesitate to guess that 
it’s going to result in an increase in fees. 
 
There’s going to be a land lease fee determined by the minister 
in accordance with regulations as a separate component of this 
general annual fee. And then it also says that “The annual fee 
required by this section is in addition to any other fees payable 
pursuant to the recreational lease.” So all of this can be on top 
of fees that are currently set in these provincial parks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear that we are going to have 
to exercise our due diligence in this regard and talk to people 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

who have recreational properties in our provincial parks and see 
if they have been consulted in the preparation of this legislation, 
and what exactly is going to be the anticipated outcome of these 
changes in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t a lengthy piece of legislation. There are 
only seven clauses in this Bill. However I think you can see that 
there’s a potential very serious significance that’s going to 
happen as a result of these proposed amendments to The Parks 
Act. And in order for this consultation to occur, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 48 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise and move second reading of The Reclaimed Industrial Sites 
Act. This legislation serves several purposes, all of them 
consistent with the goal of building a green and prosperous 
economy for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Act establishes a uniform legal framework for returning 
Crown land held under surface lease back to the province when 
mining activities have been completed. This includes full 
decommissioning and reclamation of the site to acceptable 
standards. It establishes clear custodial responsibility for 
long-term monitoring and management. It also specifies the 
legal, financial, and administrative arrangements whereby the 
province will accept this responsibility and establishes an 
institutional control registry. The registry will be administered 
by our Department of Industry and Resources. Its overarching 
purpose will be to maintain a comprehensive record of all 
decommissioned and reclaimed mine and mill sites on 
provincial Crown land. 
 
The Act also enables establishment of an institutional control 
monitoring and maintenance fund along with an institutional 
control unforeseen events fund. Lastly it provides 
regulation-making powers in support of the Act on an as needed 
basis. 
 
This legislation will be of benefit to the industry. It is also a 
positive step for other stakeholders. The public and 
neighbouring communities have every right to be assured that 
there are clear lines of responsibility for a given mine site once 
the operator is gone. The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act gives 
them that assurance. 
 
It’s important to note this legislation was jointly developed by 
our Department of Industry and Resources, by Saskatchewan 
Environment, and Saskatchewan Northern Affairs at industry’s 
request. The Act is not news to industry or unwelcome by 

industry. It was developed with their input and advice every 
step of the way. 
 
It’s also important to note the legislation does not expand the 
regulatory regime within which our mining industry operates, 
but simply brings those rules into clearer focus. This is 
something industry welcomes. In addition, the Act reflects input 
from other stakeholders such as the local environmental quality 
committee in northern Saskatchewan. And because some of 
these sites will no doubt be uranium mine sites, the Canadian 
Nuclear Safety Commission was kept fully advised on the 
progress of the legislation and supports its development. 
 
It took several years, Mr. Speaker, for the process of discussion 
and consultation to bring us to where we are today. However 
that process does not stop with the passage of this legislation. 
The open door policy that helped bring the Act into being will 
continue through the implementation phase in the years ahead. 
 
This legislation addresses a clear industry need, specifying the 
final responsibilities mining companies have to meet before 
they can be released from their obligations on leased mine sites 
on Crown lands. 
 
Much of Saskatchewan’s mineral treasure house is in the North. 
This Act reassures northern residents that decommissioned 
mine sites will be properly managed in perpetuity. It therefore 
speaks to additional public priorities of protecting our 
environment and protecting human health and safety. 
 
It’s also another step towards an improved investment climate 
for Saskatchewan. Industry of any kind, including the mining 
industry, values clarity. What they cannot abide is uncertainty 
in the rules under which they operate. 
 
It’s fair to say this is an area where we’re building on strength. 
Saskatchewan’s investment climate for mining is already 
perceived as very positive. In March of this year the Fraser 
Institute released its annual survey of mining companies, the 
purpose of which is to rate the policy attractiveness and mineral 
potential of mining jurisdictions in North America and 
internationally. Sixty-four different jurisdictions were surveyed 
in 2006. This included nine Canadian provinces and the three 
territories. 
 
Saskatchewan was ranked seventh out of 64 on the policy 
potential index and fourth among provinces. This index 
provides a measure of how attractive policies are and rates 
things such as regulation and taxation. 
 
Our province is ranked 12th out of the 64 and third among 
provinces on the current mineral potential index. This measures 
whether or not a jurisdiction’s mineral potential under the 
current policy environment encourages further activity. One 
executive was quoted as saying, quote: “Saskatchewan is a 
mining province and government is willing to work with 
exploration companies to encourage new investment.” 
 
This suggests industry’s perception of Saskatchewan’s 
regulatory regime was already fairly positive. The Reclaimed 
Industrial Sites Act can only make it better. I say this because 
Saskatchewan is the first province in Canada to have developed 
legislation of this kind. 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

Mining is one of Saskatchewan’s largest industries. And with 
agriculture, it is tied only behind oil and natural gas. Our 
mining industry accounts for an estimated 6 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product and last year recorded 
record sales of $3.5 billion. The mining sector contributes over 
$200 million in direct revenue to the province every year. It 
supports 20,000 jobs, including almost 2,000 jobs in northern 
Saskatchewan. The industry contributes $2 billion annually in 
wages along with the purchase of goods and services. 
 
Does mining matter to Saskatchewan? Yes. Does the 
environment matter to Saskatchewan? Yes of course. We’re 
committed to responsible environmental management of our 
non-renewable resources including our mineral resources. This 
legislation contributes to continued sustainable development of 
our mining industry. It is another tangible step towards building 
a green and prosperous economy. Lastly, it is a positive 
example of business, government, and other stakeholders 
working together towards this common goal. 
 
I will be pleased to answer questions concerning the Act when 
it is discussed in Committee of the Whole. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of The Reclaimed Industrial 
Sites Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 55, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites 
Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak on second reading of Bill No. 55, An Act 
Respecting the Monitoring and Maintenance of Industrial Sites 
After Reclamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this piece of legislation certainly is 
indeed potentially very important to the well-being and the 
future of our province. Mr. Speaker, as we have industrial sites, 
particularly mining sites, developing in our province, I think it 
is only responsible that we make sure that there are a clear set 
of guidelines and rules set out for the industry so that they know 
what their responsibilities are when they develop these 
opportunities, and that it is well thought out and well developed 
in terms of all aspects of this legislation. Mr. Speaker, I am 
encouraged to hear the minister state very emphatically in his 
remarks that industry was widely and broadly consulted in 
terms of the development of this specific legislation, and I think 
that that is very important. 
 
[14:45] 
 
In looking over the legislation, I think there certainly seem to be 
a number of steps that are reasoned and balanced in terms of 
establishing funds that are set up in order to allow the minister, 
if need be, to exercise his responsibility to reclaim a site in an 
environmentally appropriate way, and that I think is very good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on first blush in looking over this Bill while I 
heard the minister say there was a great deal of consultation in 
developing the legislation, I was unable to quickly see a 
mechanism that ensures that ongoing consultation is going to be 

demanded. I note that the end of five years there is going to be a 
review to make sure that the funds that have been established in 
establishing the approvals for developing a site are going to be 
reviewed to make sure that they are adequate to deal with the 
minister’s responsibility in terms of reclaiming sites, and I think 
that that is worthwhile. But I think it’s also important to make 
sure that industry is consulted in a meaningful way on an 
ongoing basis as this legislation is implemented and goes 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also note on the final clause of the Bill under 
coming into force that the Act comes into force on 
proclamation. And I think that there needs to be something a 
little more specific in terms of commitment by the government 
to say and define when this is going to happen because as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, proclamation is something that really 
occurs at the pleasure of the minister and the government. And 
therefore I think industry is going to want to know exactly when 
this is going to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in principle it looks like this legislation is very 
important and that there has been a significant amount of work 
put into it. We certainly as well, as the official opposition as 
part of our responsibility of scrutiny, will want to speak to the 
industry stakeholders to make sure that this legislation in fact 
lives up to the expectations that they had and the consultations 
that occurred between themselves and government. And in 
order to allow this to happen, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 55 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 is new 
legislation that will replace The Residential Tenancies Act 
currently in force in Saskatchewan. This legislation will update 
and modernize our residential tenancy legislation and clarify the 
rights and obligations of landlords and tenants in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Act was enacted in 1973. Although 
amendments have been made to the Act on several occasions, 
the general scope and operation of the 1973 Act remain intact. 
 
In the meantime, there have been significant changes in the 
rental marketplace that need to be addressed. The experience of 
the Rentalsman in dealing with residential tenancy disputes has 
also identified areas where change is required. Changes have 
occurred, not just within the nature of the rental marketplace 
itself, but also in the reasonable expectations that landlords and 
tenants have regarding residential tenancies. 
 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

The need for new legislation has been heightened by new 
legislation in other jurisdictions. New residential tenancies 
legislation was enacted in Alberta and British Columbia in 
2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be remembered that this legislation deals 
only with residential tenancies. Commercial leases and other 
rental properties that are used for business are not encompassed 
by this legislation. 
 
Residential tenancy legislation in Saskatchewan has always 
sought to maintain the necessary balance between a tenant’s 
need for secure and affordable accommodations and a 
landlord’s reasonable and legitimate expectation of profit from 
their rental properties. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will not only 
maintain that balance but it will enhance the position of both 
tenants and landlords by lending clarity and predictability to the 
legal relationships with each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new legislation employs modern language 
that will be more readily understood by landlords and tenants. 
This approach is particularly important in the context of 
residential tenancies legislation where landlords and tenants 
often enter into tenancy agreements and generally seek to 
resolve their disputes without the benefit of legal advice. 
 
Part I of the Act sets out the definitions that are critical to the 
operation of the Act. The term landlord has been expanded to 
ensure that persons exercising a landlord’s rights will also be 
bound by the provisions in the Act, the regulations, and the 
tenancy agreement. 
 
In addition, a distinction is made in the Act between residential 
property and rental units. Typically rental units are apartments 
and residential properties, the building or land on which the 
units are located. 
 
Part I also defines a service or facility by itemizing the various 
appliances, furnishings and utilities often provided in the 
context of residential tenancy in one, easy-to-understand list. 
This list will assist landlords and tenants in identifying services 
or facilities that become part of a rental agreement. 
 
As is the case under the current legislation, a landlord who 
wishes to reduce the services or facilities provided to an 
existing tenant will be required to obtain their consent to the 
reduction. Failing that, the landlord must obtain an order from 
the director of residential tenancies. The director will determine 
whether to allow the reduction in services or facilities, and if so, 
the conditions under which the reduction can take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a definition of standard conditions is also 
introduced in the new legislation. A list of the standard 
conditions will be prescribed in the regulations as terms that 
apply to every tenancy agreement. These terms, which will 
reflect provisions found in the substantive provisions of the Act, 
outline the core set of undertakings made by the landlord and 
tenant under a tenancy agreement. The inclusion of these terms 
in a single, easy-to-understand list in the regulations will 
provide landlords and tenants with easy reference to their basic 
rights and duties. 
 
Part I also outlines the scope of the Act. Several changes have 

been made to the scope of the current Act. First, the geographic 
restriction contained in the current Act is eliminated. The 
present Act restricts the operation of the Act to the rental of 
residential premises in a city, town, village, or hamlet. An order 
under the current Act extends the operation of the legislation to 
mobile home sites within a 5-mile radius of a city, town, 
village, or hamlet. Mr. Speaker, the government believes that 
the protection of the Act needs to be extended to tenants in rural 
areas as well. 
 
It should also be noted that the inclusion of these tenancies 
under the legislation will allow landlords in rural areas to evict 
tenants by using the cost-effective remedies under the Act, and 
without having to incur the cost of obtaining a court order under 
The Landlord and Tenant Act as is currently the case. 
Residential tenancies in rural areas where living 
accommodations are rented along with land or buildings used 
for agricultural purposes will continue to be excluded from the 
operation of the Act, as are all tenancies where living 
accommodations and business premises are rented under a 
single agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has conducted extensive 
consultations regarding the tenancies that have historically been 
excluded from residential tenancy legislation. It has been 
determined that although many existing exemptions will be 
maintained, it would be more appropriate for specific 
exemptions to be contained in the regulations. 
 
For example, the new legislation removes the existing blanket 
exemption for room and board arrangements. As a general 
matter there is no sound policy reason for depriving tenants of 
the protection of the Act simply because they receive meals as 
part of their arrangement with the landlord. For the same reason 
the Bill does not contain a general exemption of all tenants who 
share a portion of the living accommodations with their 
landlord. 
 
However the government recognizes that there are situations 
where room and board arrangements as well as situations where 
tenants share living accommodations with their landlord that for 
various reasons need to be excluded from the operation of the 
Act. Exempts include housing provided by organizations such 
as the Salvation Army, dormitories operated by educational 
institutions, or situations where a tenant receives care or 
treatment from a landlord with whom they share 
accommodations. 
 
In the place of general blanket exemptions, regulations under 
the Act will exempt specific tenancy agreements that do not 
reasonably fall within the ambit of this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new legislation will also follow the legislation 
recently enacted in other jurisdictions by applying to vacation 
and hotel and motel accommodation where the term of the 
tenancy exceeds six months. In those cases the hotel rooms, 
cabins, and lodges are clearly being used as living 
accommodations as opposed to temporary accommodations 
associated with vacation or travel. Traditional exemptions for 
hospitals, health centres, personal care homes, psychiatric and 
rehabilitative care facilities have also been maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part I of the Act also contains several provisions 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

that stipulate the manner in which the Act will be applied. 
Examples include a provision that will continue to prohibit 
landlords and tenants from contracting out of provisions of the 
Act. Another section confirms that landlords are now able to 
seize a tenant’s goods for nonpayment of rent or any other 
breach of a residential tenancy agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part II contains the administrative provisions of 
the Act. The Office of the Rentalsman under the current Act 
will become the office of residential tenancies, and the 
Rentalsman will become the director of residential tenancies. 
This change reflects current drafting protocols and is consistent 
with provisions in other regulatory legislation in Saskatchewan 
and across Canada. Although the name has changed, the 
responsibilities of the director in the new Act will be largely 
those currently performed by the Rentalsman. However, the 
proposed provisions will now facilitate a public education 
function for the director. 
 
Part III of the Act outlines the necessary elements of a tenancy 
agreement, including the creation of the agreement, the 
provisions regarding security deposits, and the terms that will 
become part of a tenancy agreement. It provides that standard 
conditions will become part of each tenancy agreement whether 
or not the agreement is in writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a provision in this part will prohibit landlords 
from imposing application or processing fees. Although this is a 
practice seldom used by landlords in Saskatchewan, it is 
nevertheless a potentially abusive and unfair practice that is 
prohibited in several other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, landlords under the new legislation will continue 
to be able to collect security deposits from their tenants. 
Tenants will continue to be able to pay security deposits in two 
instalments — one-half at the time the agreement is entered 
into, and the balance within two months of taking possession of 
the rental unit. Landlords will continue to be required to hold 
security deposits in trust for tenants and to repay those deposits 
with interest to tenants at the end of the tenancy agreement 
unless they can demonstrate to the director that as a result of 
damage caused by the tenant to the rental unit they should be 
entitled to retain the deposit or a portion thereof. 
 
Mr. Speaker, existing tenant protections are carried forward in 
the new legislation. Prohibitions remain in place against the 
collection of future rent and the use of acceleration clauses that 
make the balance of rent payable under a tenancy agreement 
immediately payable where the tenant is in default of any term 
of the agreement. A new provision specifically confirms the 
tenant’s obligation to pay rent as it becomes due, and landlords 
will be obliged to provide a receipt to tenants who pay their 
rents in cash. 
 
The new legislation will contain specific rules regarding a 
landlord’s right to enter the rental unit. In order to reduce the 
many disputes that have arisen under the current legislation, the 
new legislation outlines in detail the notice that must be given 
by the landlord in different circumstances. The new provisions 
strike a fair and reasonable balance between a tenant’s right to 
privacy with the landlord’s legitimate need to enter the rental 
unit under certain circumstances. 
 

Mr. Speaker, other provisions in this part will lend 
predictability and certainty to matters that have given rise to 
disputes in the past. The legislation contains prohibitions 
against either the landlords or tenants changing locks to a rental 
unit without the other’s consent. Also included is a provision 
that outlines the obligations of the landlord to maintain the 
rental unit and the residential property in a good state of repair 
and fit for habitation, use, and enjoyment by the tenant in 
compliance with health, safety, and housing standards required 
by law. 
 
Tenants must also maintain reasonable health, cleanliness, and 
sanitary standards in the rental unit and repair any damage to 
the unit that they have caused. The prohibition against 
subletting without the landlord’s consent is carried over from 
the existing Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new legislation also contains a provision that 
sets out tenants’ obligations at the end of a tenancy. The tenant 
must leave the rental unit reasonably clean and undamaged 
except for reasonable wear and tear. Although this provision 
coincides with everyone’s reasonable expectations of tenants, 
the inclusion of these duties in the Act will assist tenants and 
landlords in better understanding of their obligations should a 
disagreement arise. 
 
The provisions relating to the notice required for rent increases 
have been carried forward from the existing legislation. 
Landlords will continue to be required to provide a minimum of 
three months notice of rent increase. However an additional 
provision allows for a longer period of notice for rental 
increases for mobile home sites to be prescribed in the 
regulations. The current provisions sometimes work a hardship 
in the case of owner-occupied mobile home. Mobile homes are 
very expensive to move, and significant increase in rent can be 
devastating to tenants who cannot afford the increase and do not 
have the financial resources to move in a short period of time. 
This has led in some cases to a forced sale of a tenant’s mobile 
home, often for much less than market value. 
 
Part V of the Act outlines the circumstances under which the 
tenancies can be ended. Although the Rentalsman has generally 
relied on precedents established in court decisions that have . . . 
[inaudible] . . . in some restrictions on a landlord’s ability to 
evict, the current Act does not require that the landlord 
demonstrate a valid reason for terminating a tenancy. As a 
result certain landlords have sought to terminate tenancies for 
inequitable reasons or for reasons extraneous to the tenancy 
agreement. The new legislation follows the lead of legislation in 
British Columbia and Alberta by requiring that landlords 
provide reasons for termination of the tenancy that are based 
upon the provisions outlined in the Act. 
 
Under the new legislation, tenancies can be terminated by 
appropriate notice being given by the tenant or by a landlord’s 
notice for non-payment of the rent. A landlord can also provide 
notice of termination of the tenancy for cause where a tenant 
has not fulfilled the obligations under the tenancy agreement or 
engaged in misconduct or neglect of the property. Although the 
reasons outlined in the new legislation in this regard do not 
differ widely from the statutory conditions in the existing Act 
and the common law precedents currently used by the 
Rentalsman in making determinations, these provisions 



April 19, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

nevertheless provide a concise and easily understood guide. 
 
One new provision in this regard applies to landlords who have 
tenants in their principal residence, typically a rental suite in 
their basement. The Bill provides that a tenant who smokes in 
contravention of a written notice from their landlord cannot be 
evicted without further notice. Specific provisions deal with the 
termination of tenancies for tenants employed by their landlord, 
as well as new provision detailing circumstances under which a 
landlord is entitled to terminate a tenancy due to the plans the 
landlord has for the use of the property. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Although these provisions again outline circumstances 
generally accepted as valid reasons for termination of a tenancy, 
the new legislation once again provides clarity and 
predictability to an area that has given rise to many disputes. 
The specific reasons for termination under this section include 
the sale or demolition of the property; conversion to 
condominiums, a housing co-operative, or non-residential use; 
renovations requiring vacancy of the rental unit; or rental of the 
unit to a close family member or friend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new termination provisions will lend more 
certainty and predictability for both tenants and landlords 
regarding the termination of tenancies. Currently there is some 
question as to whether the Act requires landlords to provide a 
warning to tenants in breach of certain statutory duties e.g., to 
refrain from creating a nuisance or disturbance to others in 
adjacent residential premises. Landlords have expressed 
difficulty with tenants who, having received a warning, create 
further nuisance and disturbance prior to vacating the premises. 
 
The amendments will make it clear to both parties the 
circumstances under which no warning is needed for 
termination of the tenancy. The director has the discretionary 
authority under the proposed legislation to terminate a tenancy 
under any circumstances where it is just and equitable. The 
experience of the Rentalsman has been that the circumstances 
under which an application for termination of a tenancy are so 
diverse and varied that it would be impossible to expressly 
provide for all the scenarios under which tenancies should 
reasonably be terminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new legislation provides the tenant with the 
right to dispute a notice to terminate and provides the director 
with the ability to award compensation to a tenant who has 
suffered a loss as a result of a landlord who has provided notice 
that was not made in good faith. An example would be a 
situation where a landlord terminates a tenancy on the basis that 
the property is to be demolished but then rents the property to 
another tenant. 
 
Part VI of the Bill contains a dispute resolution mechanism 
under the proposed legislation. It is taken, with some 
modification, from the current Act. However under the 
proposed legislation, the director of residential tenancies will 
have exclusive jurisdiction to hear disputes. Under the current 
legislation, the Rentalsman and the Court of Queen’s Bench 
have concurrent jurisdiction over residential tenancy disputes. 
Historically this provision was felt necessary due to the 
jurisdictional limitations of the Rentalsman regarding issues 

involving the title to land. However subsequent case law has 
removed those concerns. 
 
All residential tenancy disputes will now be heard at first 
instance by the director, subject to the monetary limit on the 
amount claimed which will be contained in the regulations. A 
new provision will allow for the director to correct or clarify a 
decision or order where an obvious typographical, grammatical, 
or arithmetic error has been made, where there’s been an 
inadvertent omission in the order or the decision or order 
requires clarification. The provision will allow the matter to be 
resolved without having parties incur the expense and delay 
inherent in an appeal to the court. 
 
Part VII of the Act outlines offences and penalties under the 
Act. The penalties are carried forward from the existing 
legislation. Individuals found guilty of a summary conviction 
offence under this section are subject to a fine not exceeding 
$500 and six months imprisonment and $1,000 in the case of a 
corporation. Directors of corporations who participate or 
acquiesce in an offence may be subject to fine of $500 and six 
months incarceration. 
 
The provisions continue the authority for the court to order a 
convicted individual or corporation to pay compensation to 
someone who has suffered loss or damage as a result of their 
actions in addition to any other penalty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the enactment of a new residential tenancies Act 
will modernize the law relating to residential tenancies in 
Saskatchewan. This Bill offers landlords as well as tenants 
more clarity in understanding their respective rights and 
obligations, and both tenants and landlords will be afforded 
more certainty and predictability in making decisions regarding 
tenancies. 
 
This legislation will strike the important balance between the 
needs of tenants for safe, secure, and affordable living 
accommodations with a legitimate need for landlords to obtain 
reasonable profits from their rental properties. In so doing, this 
legislation will help maintain a viable and profitable residential 
housing industry in Saskatchewan that will benefit landlords 
and tenants alike. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 
reading of The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that the Bill No. 56, The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill 56, an Act Respecting Residential Tenancies and 
making consequential amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a very, very lengthy Bill as you see, and it has obviously a 
lot of items in it and the minister stated many categories and 
areas where the Bill is trying to address. Some of the major 
points I believe is that concerning the creation and dissolution 
of tenancy agreements, rent increases, rights of tenants, 
landlords, ending a tenancy, order of possession of a rental unit, 
applications, arbitrations, proceedings and orders. That just 
touches the highlights of the many categories, Mr. Speaker, that 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2006 

this Bill speaks to. 
 
Some of the other items I understand that’s in the Bill, is it’s 
going to replace the Office of the Rentalsman with a new 
director and office of residential tenancies. And also the Act 
provides a more expanded and specific list of clauses attaching 
the landlords to tenants and particularly covering the end of any 
agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously with this length of a Bill and the 
process that we do in the legislature, the Saskatchewan Party 
will be speaking to the stakeholders concerning this Bill. And 
we are going to do our research and meet with the various 
groups that this Bill will affect and we will certainly do our 
homework. And so at this time I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 56 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Residential Tenancies Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Residential 
Tenancies Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Residential Tenancies Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. Speaker, The Residential Tenancies 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2006 contains amendments 
made necessary by The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 
Although the majority of the consequential amendments are 
contained in that Act itself, the amendments to The 
Co-operatives Act, 1996 are bilingual and form a separate Bill. 
 
The Co-operatives Act, 1996 allows a housing co-operative to 
make an application to the Rentalsman for an order of 
possession of a housing unit if a person’s membership in the 
co-operative has been terminated. In addition the housing 
co-operative can apply to the Rentalsman for an order 
authorizing it to dispose goods abandoned by a former member 
of the co-operative. The amendments will replace references to 
The Residential Tenancies Act and the Rentalsman with 
references to The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 and the 
director of residential tenancies or a hearing officer under the 
new Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 57, The Residential Tenancies Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again 

to rise and speak to Bill 57, An Act respecting consequential 
amendments resulting from the enactment of The Residential 
Tenancies Act. And, as the minister pointed out, the major 
points are because of the introduction of The Residential 
Tenancies Act, 2006 and the new provisions in that Act 
replacing the Office of the Rentalsman with the new office of 
residential tenancies and the Rentalsman with the director of 
residential tenancies. 
 
This Act consequently amends sections of The Co-operatives 
Act which are affected by the new legislation. Certainly these 
— Bill 56 and 57 — really go hand in hand, and when the 
official opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, when we will be 
discussing this with the stakeholders, as well with the affected 
groups and we will certainly, I’m sure, have questions in the 
future concerning both of these Bills. So at this time, I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
the debate on second reading of Bill No. 57 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work of the policy field committees on the Economy, as well as 
on Crown and Central Agencies, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:10.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1212 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1212 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1212 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1212 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1212 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Students to Test Marketing Strategy in China 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1213 
 Citizens Fight Floods in Northeast Saskatchewan 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1213 
 Saskatchewan’s Telecommunicator of the Year 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1213 
 Congratulations to Volunteers 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1214 
 Assiniboia Farmer Receives Organic Farming Award 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1214 
 Minister’s Trip to Fort McMurray 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1214 
 Students Named Energy Ambassadors 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Time for Cancer Care 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
 Recovery of Stolen Funds 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
 Changes to Education Funding 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1219 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1219 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1220 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1220 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1220 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1220 
 Bill No. 52 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2006 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
 Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1222 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1222 
 



 

 Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
 Bill No. 56 — The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1224 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1227 
 Bill No. 57 — The Residential Tenancies Consequential Amendment Act, 2006/ 
 Loi de 2006 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1228 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1228 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


