


















































Hansard: April 27, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 48A  THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1395 
 April 27, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
rise again today to present a petition on behalf of individuals 
from the community of Saskatoon that are concerned about the 
availability or the non-availability, possibly, of a children’s 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this coming year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
residents of the province concerned with the need for pediatric 
patient care on an improved basis in the province. The prayer of 
their petition is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all the petitioners today for whom I have the 
honour to rise are from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today on behalf of 
people who are concerned about Highway No. 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Invermay, 
Kuroki, Wadena, and Margo. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition requesting allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. These people believe that 
children are the heart of our communities and deserve the finest 
health care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the city of 
Saskatoon. I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of adequate 
health care facilities for our children. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding funding for a provincial children’s hospital. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And I’m presenting this on behalf of . . . the signatures are all 
from Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition that deals with the lack of a children’s hospital here in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I am pleased to be able to present this on behalf of the citizens 
of Saskatoon who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will join my 
seatmate in presenting a petition of citizens that would like to 
see a children’s hospital in Saskatoon. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Outlook and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Saskatoon who are concerned 
about the lack of a provincial children’s hospital in their city. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today also to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this 
province requesting allocation of funding for a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
again rise and present a petition from citizens who would like a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of residents from across 
Saskatchewan that are concerned that Saskatchewan and PEI 
[Prince Edward Island] are the only provinces that do not have a 
dedicated children’s hospital. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners live in Erindale, Arbor Creek, and 
Sutherland in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens that are concerned that there is a very 
distinct lack of action from the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government on some of their hospital commitments, 
specifically the children’s hospital. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens from Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise to read a petition pertaining to the desire for a children’s 
hospital in Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House again today to present a petition requesting funding 
allocation for a provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I 
will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by concerned and troubled 
voters from Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, finally 
I won’t be the last person to present a petition from this side 
today. And I am happy to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
who are concerned about the lack of a children’s hospital in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Dundurn and Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
petition finds its defence in two ice-blue eyes on the front page 
of yesterday’s Star-Phoenix. And I read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to implement an allocation of financial 
resources in this year’s budget to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from the city of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition previously 
tabled, an addition to that has been reviewed and pursuant to 
rule 14(7) is hereby read and received as addendum to sessional 
paper no. 644. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 
the committee to report Bills No. 33 without amendment and 
Bill No. 34 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 33 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It should be considered in committee . . . I 
want to have this leave to waive consideration in Committee of 
the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister wishes to request leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 33 be now moved a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — Once again I recognize the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I got a little bit ahead 
of myself there, but I’m instructed by the committee to report 
Bill No. 34 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 34 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of the . . . Whole of Bill 34. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of the Environment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 
2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 34 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: what is the time frame for 
cancellation of a forest management agreement, FMA, if it 
is unused or the company awarded the FMA ceases 
operation? 
 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: what is the process for a 
company to receive a forest management agreement from 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day 53 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: does Beauval Forest 
Industries hold a Saskatchewan forest management 
agreement? And if so, how long have they had it? 

 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 53 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: does Northwest 
Communities Wood Products hold a forest management 
agreement? And if so, how long have they had it? 

 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: is there any money in this 
year’s budget allocated to construction for a new hospital 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

in Watrous? And if not, when will this government 
commit to fully fund the Watrous hospital? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many alarm 
and security service dealers were operating in 
Saskatchewan in 2002? 
 

I have the same question, Mr. Speaker, for 2003, 2004, and 
2005. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many direct 
seller’s licences were issued to alarm and security service 
dealers province-wide in 2002? 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for 2003, 
2004, 2005. 
 
In addition, I give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how much does 
it cost to purchase a direct seller’s licence for selling alarm 
and security services? 

 
In addition, I give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
security companies operating in Saskatchewan are 
required to purchase a direct seller’s licence, and what 
companies are they? 
 

In addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
independent SaskTel SecurTek dealers have purchased a 
direct seller’s licence? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
independent SaskTel SecurTek dealers are required to 
purchase a direct seller’s licence? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
Saskatchewan security dealers are exempt from purchasing 
a direct seller’s licence, and which ones are they? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Provincial Secretary. 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to the House delegates to the 
Conference on Commonwealth Honours and Awards who, Mr. 
Speaker, are seated this afternoon in your gallery. 
 
This conference is the first of its kind ever to be held anywhere. 
It is co-sponsored by the honours and awards secretariats of the 
provinces of Ontario and Saskatchewan. The program began 
last night with a reception offered by the province of Ontario, 
and it was my privilege to officially open the conference this 
morning at Government House. There were two sessions there 
this morning and then a luncheon offered by yourself, Mr. 
Speaker. There are two more sessions this afternoon here in the 
Legislative Building, and the conference continues until noon 
on Saturday. 
 
Some of the topics being discussed are the current status of 
Canada’s national honours; the honours of the United Kingdom, 
Australia, New Zealand, Antigua and Barbuda, and South 
Africa; and the issues of honours in federal states; and 
procedures for the selection and presentation of honours. 
 
The conference has attracted 45 delegates from 10 different 
jurisdictions. And while there are too many to be introduced 
individually, I would like to acknowledge some, and I would 
ask them to simply give us a wave as I introduce them. 
 
The conference’s Co-Chairs are Rachele Dabraio, director of 
the citizenship branch in the Ontario Ministry of Citizen and 
Immigration; and a familiar face to us all, Dr. Michael Jackson, 
secretary to the Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council. 
From the United Kingdom, Mr. Stanley Martin, who is a former 
diplomat, now chairman of the Royal Over-Seas League in 
London and commander of the Royal Victorian Order; and Mr. 
Rafal Heydel-Mankoo, who is deputy editor of Burke’s Peerage 
in London. 
 
From the Republic of South Africa, Mr. Mandla Feni, secretary 
of national orders in the Office of the President of South Africa. 
From Antigua and Barbuda, Mrs. Valerie Smith who is 
secretary-general of honours and Mrs. Jean-Marie Grant who is 
assistant secretary of honours in the office of the Governor 
General of Antigua and Barbuda. And pleased that we have 
with us as well, from Ottawa, representatives of the office of the 
Governor General of Canada, the Department of Canadian 
Heritage, the Department of National Defence, and the Order of 
St. John. 
 
Five provincial honours programs are also represented here as 
well that of Saskatchewan — those of the provinces of Quebec, 
Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia. I’d like to 
say that all the delegates are very pleased to have come to the 
capital of our province for the conference. And we’re very 
pleased to have you here. They’ve said to you, Mr. Speaker, 
myself earlier, their pleasure in being here. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we have a long history of support for the 
institution of the Commonwealth, and it is good to see the start 
of a network of Commonwealth honours and awards and 
beginning here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This topic is of great interest to us. Saskatchewan now has four 
honours of the provincial Crown: the Saskatchewan Order of 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

Merit, the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal which we all know 
will be presented in these chambers on Monday of next week, 
the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal, and the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. And we also strongly support 
Canada’s national honours in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour for Saskatchewan to host 
this unique conference, and we wish the delegates good 
discussions, a pleasant stay in our province. And I will ask all 
my honourable colleagues, Mr. Speaker, and yourself to extend 
all of them a very, very warm welcome to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I want to join the minister in 
welcoming the delegates from the first ever conference on 
Commonwealth awards and honours to this Assembly. I 
understand that they do have a very aggressive agenda, and I am 
sure it will be a very productive conference. And I hope they all 
enjoy their stay in our Queen city, and I hope all their travels on 
their return home are safe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly two guests who are seated in your 
gallery today, Mr. Chad Nilson and his wife, Amy. I had the 
pleasure of working with Chad last summer, and I want to 
welcome him back to Saskatchewan and to Regina. Amy, you 
as well. 
 
Chad is a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] candidate and instructor 
of public policy at the University of New Orleans. Amy is a 
social worker in Prince Albert. His current area of research 
deals with the effect of political institutions on drug policies in 
Canada, the Netherlands, Australia, and the United States. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it has been an interesting time for 
Chad. He was introduced to some southern hospitality in New 
Orleans when mother nature or father nature came calling on 
that community, and he had to leave in a rather sudden hurry. 
He left behind much of his work and some of his books and his 
library that he’d amassed, but we’re glad to see that Chad made 
it back to Saskatchewan. We’re glad to see he’s working here in 
Saskatchewan, and we welcome him to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature two 
constituents of mine who are in the front row of the east gallery. 

The first is Joceline Schreimer who is a Saskatoon city police 
officer. She has been very active in doing drug prevention work 
in our schools and elsewhere in Saskatoon. Some time ago she 
took me on an all-night ride along in the police car, and it was 
an interesting and educational experience and would urge all 
members to avail themselves of that type of opportunity. 
 
With her today is her husband, Gerry Schreimer. Gerry is the 
director of operations for MD Ambulance, and he also took me 
for a ride along in the ambulance which was once again another 
educational, interesting opportunity. And I would like to 
congratulate Gerry because he is down today to receive a 
provincial Exemplary Service Medal which will be presented 
later on today at Government House. And I’d like to welcome 
both of them to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I have two introductions that I would like to make 
while I’m on my feet. I would like to begin by introducing to 
you and to members of the legislature 25 grade 10 students 
from Winston Knoll Collegiate. These students live in Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley constituency, and a few of them live in the 
Walsh Acres constituency. And so we welcome them to the 
legislature along with their teacher, Ms. Lock, and I appreciated 
that I had opportunity to meet with them briefly before the 
session. And I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And the second welcome that I would 
like all to join me in is to the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 
Association Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in the west gallery today — and I would 
ask them just to wave as I introduce them, please — Dr. John 
Ayres who is the president, and John has a mixed-animal 
practice in Rosthern; Dr. Larry Hanson, and Larry has a mixed 
practice in the Regina area; Dr. Kenn Wood, a large-animal 
practice in Ebenezer, east central Saskatchewan; Lorelei 
Petreny from the Moosomin area; Curt Hagele, and Curt is the 
registrar for the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association; 
and Ms. Sharon Murray who is with the SVMA [Saskatchewan 
Veterinary Medical Association] as well. And they are 
accompanied here today by Dr. Rob Kerr who is our provincial 
veterinarian, and they are here for their regular meeting. 
 
I had the privilege of having lunch with them today and have 
been working with them on a number of items as we seek to 
move forward The Veterinarians Act. And we’re pleased to 
welcome them here to the House today. I ask others to join me 
in welcoming them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

the Minister of Agriculture in welcoming the vet medicine 
council here to their legislature. 
 
We certainly have been very active speaking to this group and 
other groups about the vet medicine Bill, and we’d just like to 
say that we value the veterinary association and the practising 
members in the province. They’re a fundamental part of our 
livestock industry and a very important part of our livestock 
industry that we certainly appreciate the work they’ve done. 
And certainly with the whole BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] issue, they’ve proven very valuable and 
ever-increasing need for veterinarians in Saskatchewan to assist 
in the cross-border trade of beef. 
 
Please join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the 
honour and the pleasure on this occasion of introducing a 
constituent of mine, David Karwacki, who’s sitting in the east 
gallery. If he chose to sit in the west gallery more often, I might 
introduce him more often, but I often don’t know that he’s here 
till after he’s already arrived. 
 
Mr. Karwacki continues to make a contribution to the province 
of Saskatchewan in both business and in politics. I actively look 
forward to his pronouncements in either area. He is a man of 
considerable intelligence and integrity and only a few mistaken 
notions, Mr. Speaker, and I hope all members of the legislature 
will welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 15 
grade 5 and 6 students from the Yellow Grass School sitting in 
the east gallery. Accompanying them are their teacher, Jane 
Peters, as well as Eric Dorsch who is the bus driver and gets 
them here safe and sound and I’m sure back home safe and 
sound. 
 
Yellow Grass used to be in my constituency for the first four 
years that I was a member, and then through redistribution I 
unfortunately lost the great community of Yellow Grass. But 
it’s certainly real close to where I was born and raised, and I’ve 
spent many an hour in Yellow Grass, whether it was in the rink 
or in the school. I’d like to welcome them here to their 
Assembly and ask all members to join me in welcoming them 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
members of the legislature two of my constituents that have 
travelled from Saskatoon to Regina to observe the proceedings. 
I’d like to welcome George and Jackie Christiansen who have 
recently moved to Saskatchewan from Alberta. They were 
former Albertans, lifelong Albertans. They’re making a 
tremendous contribution in the city of Saskatoon through their 
church at Bethel United Church and also at the Saskatoon Food 
Bank. 
 
I hope that they enjoy the proceedings this afternoon, and I do 
indeed, on behalf of all members, want to welcome you both to 
Saskatchewan and to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon’s On Stage Players 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of 
attending Wednesday Night Live, an evening of theatre created 
and performed by Saskatoon’s On Stage Players. 
 
This talented group of young writers and actors are taking part 
in the Performing Arts Program for Youth, a partnership 
between the provincial government, Family Service Saskatoon, 
Calder Centre, and Nutana Collegiate. Since 1998, this program 
has provided over 200 young people the opportunity to 
experience the challenges and rewards that are part of the 
theatrical performing experience. 
 
The evening got off to an excellent beginning with a 
guitar-drum piece written and performed by Charles Henderson 
and Shane Taypotat and accompanied by Richard Dube. 
 
The dramatic sketches were written by Cy Gerard, Desiree 
Samuals, and a constituent of mine, Mr. Speaker, Kristen 
Bennet, who I particularly want to thank for her very kind and 
funny introduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, On Stage Players also include Alana Quewezance, 
Laura Kudluk, Tyler Johnston, Jessica Taypotat, Jodi Kaye, 
Matt Marinelli and Nicole Jones. 
 
Saskatoon actor Tim Hildebrand edited and directed the 
sketches, and Danny Rousseau of La Troupe du Jour has been 
working with the players on drumming and other percussion 
instruments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I especially want to thank Zoe Teed of Family 
Service Saskatoon for her ongoing support of this program and 
all the volunteers and business partners who have contributed so 
much to providing these young people this valuable opportunity 
to learn both performing skills and life skills. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

National Medical Laboratory Week 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week is National Medical Laboratory Week. Medical laboratory 
professionals comprise the third largest group of health care 
professionals. They are crucial in early diagnosis and treatment. 
They are responsible for tests that diagnose patients and identify 
outbreaks. As new strains of viruses develop, these health care 
professionals play a very important role in the delivery of health 
care for detection and prevention. 
 
Oftentimes they operate under extreme pressure to turn around 
tests on a timely manner. But unfortunately, like many of the 
health care professionals, they are short of human resources, yet 
they know how accurate the analysis must be in these crucial 
tests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party acknowledges the work 
these health care professionals do and the contribution to health 
care in this province. We applaud their effort, and we recognize 
that in their line of work at times they are exposed to biohazards 
which may jeopardize their own health and well-being. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the Canadian Society for Medical Laboratory Science, the 
certifying body for medical laboratory technologists, and the 
medical laboratory assistants, for creating a high professional 
standard, and also to recognize the important work that medical 
laboratory technologists do as a key member of the health care 
team. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 

Campbell Collegiate Hosts Charity Concert Fundraiser 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Tonight the students at Campbell Collegiate in Regina are 
organizing their second annual charity concert. The tradition 
began last year with the very successful Campbell ceilidh. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the concert is expected to be even 
bigger. The event will feature even more young Saskatchewan 
artists, namely the rock bank Chemical Horizon, the folk singer 
Kyrie Kristmanson, and the Marshall Burns Band, who I am 
told are all quite popular. 
 
All the proceeds from this concert will in fact go to Free the 
Children. Free the Children of course is a rather important 
charity. It was founded by 12-year-old Craig Kielburger back in 
1995. Young Craig gathered 11 school friends together and 
began lobbying against child labour. Mr. Speaker, Free the 
Children has grown to become a large network dedicated to 
protesting child labour, supporting the building of elementary 
schools, and providing clean water and basic health care to 
children in communities in more than 45 different countries. 
Recently Mr. Kielburger was awarded the Children’s Nobel 
Prize for his outstanding humanitarian efforts. 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the Assembly to 
join with me in congratulating Campbell Collegiate for their 
organizing this charitable event on behalf of Free the Children. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Estevan Celebrates Women of Today 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the pleasure of attending the eighth annual 
Women of Today Awards in Estevan sponsored by SaskPower 
and Quota International of Estevan. 
 
Funds raised through this luncheon, attended by over 300 
people at the Beefeater Plaza, will support the violence 
intervention program and also the placement of sound field FM 
[frequency modulation] systems within Estevan’s schools. And, 
Mr. Speaker, these systems allow students to hear more clearly 
and consistently. 
 
Recipients of the awards were as follows. For the Ida Peterson 
Memorial Award for Outstanding Entrepreneur, Mary Le 
Blanc; for the SaskPower Award for Outstanding Contribution 
to the Workplace was Jane McMurtry. The Shirley Orsted 
Memorial Award for Young Woman of Today went to Samara 
Bush. And the SaskTel Award for Outstanding Contribution to 
the Community went to Gail Shirley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate and thank all the recipients 
and nominees for their commitment to our community, and they 
are all winners. Appreciation is extended to MC [master of 
ceremonies] Roxy Blackmore, guest speaker, Judy White from 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, and to all the 
sponsors, Mr. Speaker. And finally and on a personal note, I 
would also like to thank Loving Touch Florist. The girls there 
supplied me with a corsage, so I thank them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Hockey Team 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a few short 
days the Saskatchewan Aboriginal hockey team will be 
travelling to Kahnawá:ke, Quebec where they’ll be competing 
in the National Aboriginal Hockey Championships from April 
30 to May 6. Mr. Speaker, this tournament is hosted by the 
Mohawk First Nations of Kahnawá:ke, just 10 kilometres south 
of Montreal, on the banks of the St. Lawrence River. 
 
The hockey championships will see players predominantly 
between the ages of 14 to 18 from across the country. The 
Saskatchewan team was chosen during various talent 
identification camps held throughout the province in the fall. 
Both the male and female Saskatchewan teams won bronze 
medal at last year’s national hockey tournament, an event 
sanctioned by Hockey Canada. 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

The National Aboriginal Hockey Championship provides a 
forum for young First Nations, Inuit, and Métis hockey players 
from within each of the 13 provinces and territories in Canada 
to compete at an elite level. Mr. Speaker, the event will help 
foster cultural unity and pride and celebrate the athletic abilities 
of Aboriginal athletes from across the country. 
 
There’s a pep rally planned for the Saskatchewan team to be 
held at the Ramada Hotel in Saskatoon today, April 27. Mr. 
Speaker, I would invite all members of the Assembly to join 
with me in congratulating the players of the Saskatchewan 
Aboriginal hockey team for earning the right to represent 
Saskatchewan and in wishing them the very best of luck at this 
year’s hockey championships in Quebec. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Funding for Soil Conservation Association 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with concern 
today about the future of the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 
Association. This excellent organization provides our farm 
community with valuable soil conservation programs and 
current scientific data that is a valuable resource for 
Saskatchewan. The past three years the SSCA [Saskatchewan 
Soil Conservation Association] has received funding from a 
number of sources including the federal and provincial 
governments. 
 
Now this government used to fully fund this but the past three 
years have consistently cut back to less than $50,000 a year, a 
mere pittance compared to the Finance minister’s campaign 
leadership that he’s doing on the back of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. Now this program which runs in various province 
already receives the lowest amount of provincial support in 
Canada. 
 
But now guess what? In a year with a $1 billion surplus, they’ve 
completely cut the soil conservation group off effective April 1, 
2006. Why? Because this government could care less about the 
needs of our struggling farmers. They don’t care whether our 
soil is conserved. They don’t care about their green and 
prosperous economy which they talk about. It’s just another cut 
to rural Saskatchewan while even the federal government has 
extended its funding well into 2006. This is just another 
example of how the NDP government treats Saskatchewan and 
the rural communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
Celebrates 60 Years 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this month marks the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company’s 60th year of service. 
And over the course of the last six decades Saskatchewan has 
seen many changes and STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company] has changed and evolved right along with it, playing 
a vital role in our development and becoming an integral part of 
the province’s social fabric along the way. 
 
Every year STC travels millions of miles to provide 
Saskatchewan residents with commuter and passenger services, 
charters, and express parcel delivery. The company provides a 
vital link between the north and south, Mr. Speaker, and 
between urban and rural areas. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, STC carried over 267,000 passengers 
over 3 million miles to and from 275 communities in the 
province. The company also carried about 2 million pieces of 
freight over the course of the year, mostly to rural communities. 
During the month of July alone, STC carried 50,000 pieces of 
farm machinery to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC provides a necessary, quality service to 
Saskatchewan people, helping to meet the needs of those who 
otherwise may be limited in their ability to travel. About 
one-quarter of STC riders are made up of seniors and another 
quarter are students. More than 50 per cent of STC riders have 
incomes below $20,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of STC. Over the years it has played 
a positive role in Saskatchewan socially, economically, and 
now with the latest testing of biodiesel fuel additives, 
environmentally. And I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating STC for 60 years of great service to the people 
of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Development of Biofuels Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are two very 
significant challenges in Canada and in our province right now 
that actually may present quite an opportunity for our province 
and our country. Those two factors of course are increasing 
concern, rightfully so, over environmental issues in our country 
and our province; and the second one is the agriculture crisis 
currently facing Saskatchewan and the country. 
 
Now is the time then, Mr. Speaker, for this province to lead in 
terms of a national biofuels strategy. Today the Saskatchewan 
Party is proposing such a biofuels strategy both for the national 
government and here in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
includes things like a national biofuels strategy and mandate 
that puts a priority on direct producer participation in the 
industry. It includes provincial new growth tax incentives the 
likes of which we proposed in our economic plan a year ago 
that would apply as well to this industry. It includes reducing 
barriers to growth like cogeneration in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a commitment to work with local governments 
to invest in the infrastructure required, investment and labour 
force development, and the government leading by example in 
its own fuel consumption. 
 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier today: will he support in principle 
the biofuels strategy put forward by the official opposition 
Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to answer 
the question on behalf of the government this afternoon. And 
I’m very pleased also, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Leader of the 
Opposition state that he’s just returned, I expect, from a visit 
with our federal friends in Ottawa which is an important piece. 
 
In order to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government — the 
Minister of Agriculture, I have, the Minister of Industry and 
Resources — have had numerous conversations with the federal 
government for months now, Mr. Speaker. In the next couple of 
days, Mr. Speaker, I am travelling to Ottawa. I’m travelling to 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, with a group of proponents who want to 
put together in Saskatchewan a plan, a strategy about how we 
build out the biodiesel fuel or how we build out the renewable 
fuels in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we think that there is a tremendous opportunity here. And 
there are four areas of which we’re expecting that we’re going 
to get some result with the federal government on. And we’ll be 
making that presentation and can speak more to it in the next 
question, Mr. Speaker, if the leader so wishes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The leader does 
wish, actually. The Saskatchewan Party would like to talk about 
this, the potential of this industry, the bridge that we know it 
can build between rural and urban Canada in terms of 
environmental concerns and a brand new generation of farm 
programs, farm initiatives in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think it’s important for this province to lead on 
this issue. We think we can lead the country. We think that our 
standards, Mr. Speaker, our standards for the mandated blend 
should even be higher than what the federal parties currently — 
the federal Conservatives and the federal Liberals — are talking 
about. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is calling for a national mandate of 10 
per cent ethanol blend by 2010 and 5 per cent biodiesel blend 
by 2010. On those two counts, with respect to our work with the 
federal government, does the Premier support that blend rate, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I am really pleased that the 
Leader of the Opposition is reading our material that we’ve 
been putting out with the producer groups across the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 

And I’m really pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
who are responsible for this file, we’ve been able to keep them 
fully informed and abreast of what it is that we’re doing, and 
the leader is simply articulating that today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we lead the country, Mr. Speaker, on biofuels. Mr. 
Speaker, we lead the country. We have today a mandate in this 
province which exceeds the 5 per cent that the federal 
government’s talking about, both on the ethanol piece. And we 
have production in this province today, Mr. Speaker, that is 
greater than most other parts of the country, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
leading the nation. 
 
And so today for the Leader of the Opposition to be standing up 
and suggesting for a minute that somehow we should be 
developing a strategy, what the Leader of the Opposition should 
be doing is reviewing the policies that we have in Saskatchewan 
today, the industry that’s working in Saskatchewan today, and 
also assisting where he can, when he can, the need for a broader 
Saskatchewan policy and a Western Canadian policy which 
we’re a proponent of today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points. One, with 
respect to the current provincial ethanol mandate, I think the 
public record will show that it was the Saskatchewan Party 
again that led on the issue and the government implemented this 
particular measure. 
 
The second point I would say is that in the Deputy Premier’s 
first answer he admitted that they’re still at the discussion stage 
— and I guess fair enough. We’d like to talk very specifically 
about some ideas. Part of our biodiesel strategy that we’re 
proposing today are new growth tax incentives. The ethanol, the 
biodiesel industry will be very capitally intensive. And right 
now, notwithstanding the implementation of Vicq, well down 
the road we have capital taxes currently as high as anywhere on 
the continent — higher, some would say. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the question is this. Our strategy sees the 
immediate elimination of the corporate capital tax for ethanol 
and biodiesel, the immediate elimination. In addition to that, 
new growth tax incentives with respect to PST [provincial sales 
tax] application to these industries. Will the government adopt 
that element of our strategy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it looks like the 
opposition leader is looking for yet another opportunity to vote 
on the budget. Because we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite have already voted against the $18 million 
incentive that we’ve provided additionally for ethanol 
development in this province. They voted against it. 
 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

And so for the Leader of the Opposition today to be standing up 
and talking to us about tax changes, Mr. Speaker, he is already 
on record about voting against that. And I’m hoping, Mr. 
Speaker, that when he visited his political friends in Ottawa that 
he said to them that he voted against it, Mr. Speaker. And that 
in fact the tax packages of which we’re working on today with 
the proponents is exactly where we want to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And beyond that, Mr. Speaker, we want to also have within our 
policy in Saskatchewan a suggestion that there will be a 
Saskatchewan fuel . . . producer supply and also public 
ownership, Mr. Speaker, by the producers. Those will be two 
key pieces, Mr. Speaker, in our work with the federal 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the Deputy Premier knows 
while he’s playing politics with this — I hope he knows, I hope 
he understands — that what was passed in the NDP budget does 
not address the capital tax issue that would be faced by current 
facilities or greenfield projects that we need to start up right 
now. We’re talking about a new growth tax incentive 
immediately in the province of Saskatchewan for the industry. 
 
The other measure this government could take that’s in our plan 
is to reduce the barriers to growth that affect this industry and 
others — for example, the willingness on the part of the 
government to allow cogeneration. They wouldn’t do it for 
Weyerhaeuser until there was a dire problem in Prince Albert. 
 
Will they now proactively say to this industry that a part of their 
plan is to allow for cogeneration by biofuel facilities in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, he just needs to review the Hansard in terms of how 
their opposition party voted as it relates to the issues in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker, because they voted against the $18 
million. Also the member opposite should know that there is . . . 
The capital corporate tax has already been removed on all new 
development as of July 1. And the member should know that, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m hoping he says that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we already have in this province 13.5 million 
litres that’s being provided out of Lanigan. We already have 25 
million litres of ethanol that’s being provided out of Weyburn. 
We have a major project, Mr. Speaker, of which the Minister of 
Industry and Resources has been working very closely with the 
Lloydminster folks. And we expect to have, Mr. Speaker, this 
year, the full commitment of ethanol required for this province. 
 
And so for the Leader of the Opposition to wake up today and 
say, you know what, we should be doing ethanol in the province 
in a more significant way — he should spend a little more time 
looking at the policies of Saskatchewan as opposed to trying to 

take credit for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, some of the other elements of our 
plan include a government, a provincial government, that would 
partner with local municipalities. Because when this industry 
develops like we believe it can in our province, there are going 
to be significant infrastructure demands in rural Saskatchewan 
where these plants will be located in addition to other places in 
the province. 
 
We are proposing interest-free bridge financing for 
municipalities who need to provide that infrastructure to those 
plants to work with municipalities who want to see these 
developments happen in their area. I’d like the Deputy 
Premier’s comment on that. 
 
We’re proposing a research Chair at our universities on the 
issue of research and development in biofuels. We’re proposing 
an investment in labour skills development for this specific 
industry, Mr. Speaker. We’re advocating that this government 
. . . We’re going to be doing it soon in an actual trip to Ottawa, 
where we’re advocating for the government to support — the 
federal government to support as the US [United States] 
government has — equity loan guarantees for producers to 
invest in the industry so they are integrated. 
 
On these elements — municipal partnership, labour skills 
development, R&D [research and development] — is the 
government there yet? We’ll send across our plan and we’ll be 
happy if they adopt it. Will they do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I wouldn’t 
have expected to hear from the Leader of the Opposition. I 
wouldn’t have expected to hear from the Leader of the 
Opposition that there needs to be some consideration for equity 
participation, Mr. Speaker, because you see, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly, that’s exactly what proponents are asking for today in 
the development of the ethanol industry and the biodiesel 
industry. That’s exactly what they’re asking for today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s exactly what the proponents were asking for, Mr. 
Speaker, in previous work that was done in developing ethanol 
in Saskatchewan, of which those members, Mr. Speaker, led by 
the member from Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker . . . And 
yesterday listen to some of the stuff he was talking about in 
committee, where he too was talking about equity, Mr. Speaker. 
So you’ve got a flip-flop on the opposition that says one day we 
should be investing and the next day we shouldn’t be investing. 
 
Why don’t you pull out that old policy of yours, Enterprise 
Saskatchewan, and let’s really see what Enterprise 
Saskatchewan says about public investment in building and 
industry in Saskatchewan. And why don’t you get on board on 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

the right page on this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Assistance for Farmers in the Porcupine Plain Area 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this month a dozen farm women 
travelled to their legislature from the RM [rural municipality] of 
Porcupine to tell the Premier and the Ag minister the 
seriousness of the disaster in their area. 
 
Last fall they received a downpour of 17 inches of rain, and this 
spring there was huge flooding. It washed out over a dozen 
bridges and culverts and lots of roads. And there was four farm 
families could only get to their house by boat. According to 
local producers, less than half the acres in the area will be 
seeded because fields are simply a mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is providing some disaster relief for 
infrastructure, but there’s no commitment to a special disaster 
relief program for farm land. We know there’s been one letter 
sent to the federal minister this week from the Ag minister, but, 
Mr. Speaker, time is running out fast for the farmers in that 
area. Decisions have to be made so farmers know where they 
stand. What is this minister’s commitment to these farmers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
not only have I written to the federal minister urging quick 
action on this because of the timeliness, but we also travelled to 
Ottawa where Wes Black, representative, lead representative on 
this issue from the Porcupine Plain area, accompanied me and 
put forward the case very clearly to the federal minister. And 
we do provide through crop insurance for unseeded acreage, 
$50 an acre payment to help deal with disasters such as this. 
 
Towards the end of this coming month, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
travelling to Porcupine Plain with the deputy, with Crop 
Insurance folks, and we will be looking very, very closely at 
what the situation is. And once we’ve seen the situation there, 
we will be looking at — as we advised the farmers from 
Porcupine — we’ll be looking at what kind of extended plans 
might be possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I know that Wes Black and many of the other 
people he travelled told him that time is of the essence. We 
don’t have until the end of May. 
 
Sharon Stegemann and her husband have a 7,500-acre family 
farm. She was the spokesperson for the group that came to the 
legislature, and she met with the Premier and the Ag minister. 
At the time the Minister of Agriculture expressed his concern 
about the problem and he said he’d come to the area. But he 

didn’t say he was going to wait until the end of May. 
 
If this is such a priority, why isn’t the minister going now rather 
than just seeing the pictures that were taken from the air two 
weeks ago when everything was under water? Will the minister 
commit to meeting face to face with the producers this week 
and discuss exactly what can be done to help them secure as 
much relief as possible, and then send this message to Ottawa 
so that they know this NDP government really does care about 
farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it is important to know that cabinet ministers from this 
government have been to Porcupine Plain. The members have 
seen first-hand what the situation is. I was there in the fall to 
that area and again saw the flooding that was taking place then. 
 
We have also carefully looked at the pictures that have been 
provided by the group and we know that today the water is 
drained significantly. And we will be inspecting this land to see 
what the situation is once the drying has happened. To go there 
in the midst of flooding conditions, which we have already seen 
and are aware of, provides little more support. What we are 
doing is pressing the federal government, and we as a provincial 
government are looking at what optional plans might be 
possible that would be outside of crop insurance, perhaps using 
crop insurance data. But we will be trying to find ways of 
providing support. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister was there last fall, 
then there should be some kind of a plan formulated by now. 
We received a copy of an email that Sharon Stegemann sent to 
the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture yesterday and she 
describes her frustration in dealing with the minister’s office. 
She writes and I quote: 
 

. . . Mr. Rusnak stated on Monday morning in our 
conversation, the farmers in our province cannot burden 
the taxpayers of the province expecting disaster funding 
 

She goes on to quote: 
 

. . . farmers are not a burden to Saskatchewan or to Canada 

. . . and if he eats food he is part of agriculture whether he 
likes it or not. 

 
I find it strange that someone who had a personal audience with 
the minister just a few weeks ago is being treated this way. Mr. 
Speaker, is this what the minister thinks of our producers? Is 
that the message that this minister is sending to his staff, that 
farmers are a burden to this province? Does he condone what 
his staff is saying to the producers of Saskatchewan? 
 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my office has been in virtually daily communication with Ms. 
Stegemann. That includes, Mr. Speaker, on the weekends for 
some of us. And we have been working with the group. 
 
But the spokesperson and the lead person as designated by that 
group is Wes Black. And certainly the correspondence that we 
have had with the group has been important, but it is also 
important — because we have many calls coming in — it is 
important to have a focus person, to work with that person as 
we try and develop this. And Wesley Black is that person and 
we will continue to have contact with him. 
 
And we will be meeting with others when we go out there. So 
we’re very . . . I can say clearly that my staff has been acting 
compassionately, has been working with the people, working in 
a reasonable manner. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Public Awareness of Health Care Options 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Minister 
of Health has ordered a review into the circumstances 
surrounding the lack of available treatment for baby Paige. The 
results of that review are set to be released tomorrow. 
 
Yesterday I asked the minister that no matter what the result of 
the review would be, if he would commit to improving the 
information available to Saskatchewan people as they try to 
make the most informed decision about their health care. The 
minister was less than clear on what he intends to do. All he 
said was that the province could probably do more. Can the 
minister tell us today exactly what that means? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that in prefacing my answer to the opposition Health 
critic’s question, that Saskatchewan was one of the first 
provinces in Canada to institute a critical incident reporting 
mechanism. Mr. Speaker, we in this province are considered by 
other provinces in Canada to be leaders in information 
gathering and information sharing. And compared to private 
sector health care in the United States, Mr. Speaker, where 
information is not released by insurance companies, we in 
Saskatchewan believe that we learn from gathering information 
and sharing that information, Mr. Speaker, to improve the 
situations in front of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our critical incident reporting mechanism involves 
quite a number of people. The work that’s being done in 
Saskatoon is a multidisciplinary review and, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
looking forward to the reports that are coming to me when the 
work is completed. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again there 
seems to be some communication problem, difficulty with the 
minister. Critical incident reporting is not what we’re talking 
about here. We’re talking about giving information to patients. 
We understand that the department does make information 
available in its website and that there are also brochures 
available in some doctors’ offices. But it’s evidenced by the 
cases raised in the legislature this is clearly not enough. 
 
As I said yesterday, in order to make well-informed decisions 
about their own health and to take responsibility for their 
well-being, patients must know all of their options. Yesterday 
the minister said, and I quote, “. . . perhaps we should review 
and maybe highlight a little more . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t sound like much of a strong 
commitment. Again, will the minister commit today to 
improving the information that is given to Saskatchewan people 
when it comes to making the important decisions about their 
own health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I reiterate that Saskatchewan is a leader in the country 
when it comes to information gathering, distribution, and 
analysis. Mr. Speaker, in the case that we’re dealing with in the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, Mr. Speaker, in this case 
we have a multidisciplinary approach. The family is very much 
considered an important part of that approach. Mr. Speaker, 
data is collected, including family data. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very important that when data is collected, that data will be 
shared with the family in addition to shared with the minister. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are very much committed to ensuring that 
what we learn from incidences, whether they’re considered 
formally critical or not, what we learn from incidences are used 
to ensure that the health care for others in the system is much 
improved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
Health minister wants to find out how to pay for a public 
awareness campaign for patients, he need look no further than 
the Premier’s own words. And I quote from September 22, 
1987 when the Premier in this very Chamber said, and I quote: 
 

But have they cut funding to their own political staffs? 
Have they cut anything from their self-serving . . . 
budgets? Have they cut from their lavish personal 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2006 

expenditures and trips on government aircraft? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: is he going to take his own advice 
from 1987 and cut spending in these areas? And will he make 
that money available to the Minister of Health so he can better 
inform patients about what their options are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Department of Health communicates greatly across the province 
through the use of our website, through the use of brochures in 
physicians’ offices. We communicate with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association in terms of educational preparation for 
individual physicians across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government just put 300 million extra dollars 
into health care this year, 300 extra million dollars that will 
assist in improving the health care for Saskatchewan people. 
The members opposite choose to vote against all of this 
commitment to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. I would 
encourage the members opposite to rethink their commitment to 
the budget, to the health care of Saskatchewan people, and vote 
again for the Saskatchewan budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
position is to find a solution for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Yesterday, yesterday, we heard in this . . . 
that no one, no one in Paige Hansen’s family was told they 
could travel out of province without prior approval for a quicker 
diagnosis. Not the doctor, not the quality of care coordinator, 
not the hospital. In October 1987, the Premier said and I quote: 
 

. . . if you want to transfer some money into home care 
from somewhere else . . . [why don’t you look for it] in the 
cabinet ministers’ travel allowances and air flights part of 
. . . [their] budget . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s good advice. Will the Premier transfer some 
money out of cabinet travel so that patients get more 
information on their options regarding out-of-province 
treatment? Will this government actually do something to 
minimize suffering and actually help thousands of people that 
are on waiting lists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be more than 
pleased to answer that question on behalf of the government. 

And I want to speak, Mr. Speaker, to executive air travel to 
which that member is referring. And I want to say to you and 
everybody in this province, Mr. Speaker, one of his colleagues, 
the member from Biggar, took more flights on executive air last 
year than six cabinet ministers of this government and, Mr. 
Speaker, he even took more trips than you yourself did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. For written questions, the Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions nos. 1,036 to 1,047 
inclusive, inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 136 to 147 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 
Why is the member for Saskatoon Southeast on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, in the west gallery, Don Funk, a 
constituent of mine. Mr. Funk is a well-known Saskatoon 
businessman and has been a great sports advocate and promoted 
softball teams over the years, and most recently has been very 
active in promoting the Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast. I am pleased 
to see that he’s here today and would like to welcome him to 
the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — For introductions? The member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I also would like to seek 
leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with the member from Saskatoon Southeast in welcoming Don 
Funk. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure of attending the Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast 



April 27, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

which is getting bigger and bigger every year thanks to the good 
work of Mr. Funk. I’ve also had the pleasure of meeting with 
Mr. Funk and sharing fellowship with him. And I must admit I 
would have introduced him myself, but I can’t tell from down 
here that it is Mr. Funk, so I’m afraid I’m going to have to get 
my eyes examined, Mr. Speaker. But I also want members to 
welcome Mr. Funk. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that Her 
Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:42 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at the present session has passed several Bills which, 
in the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour to 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — The Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 24 - The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment 

Act, 2005 
Bill No. 18 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 19 - The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 26 - The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 22 - The Forestry Professions Act 
Bill No. 21 - The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment 

Act, 2005 
Bill No. 4 - The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 5 - The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 6 - The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 15 - The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 301 - The Faith Alive Ministries World Outreach 

Centre Inc. Act 
Bill No. 302 - The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment 

Act 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Repeal Act 
Bill No. 33 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 34 - The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 

2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 65 - The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 1) 
 
to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s consent. 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:46.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good works of the Human Services Committee, as well as the 
policy field Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:47.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1397 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 33 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
 Bill No. 34 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Morgan ..........................................................................................................................................................................1400, 1408 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1408 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon’s On Stage Players 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
 National Medical Laboratory Week 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
 Campbell Collegiate Hosts Charity Concert Fundraiser 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
 Estevan Celebrates Women of Today  
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
 Saskatchewan Aboriginal Hockey Team 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
 Funding for Soil Conservation Association 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Celebrates 60 Years 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
 



 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Development of Biofuels Industry 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1404 
 Assistance for Farmers in the Porcupine Plain Area 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1406 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1406 
 Public Awareness of Health Care Options 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1407 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1407 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1407 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1408 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1408 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1408 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1409 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


