
















































Hansard: November 01, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 129 
 November 1, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again to present a petition in regards to dialysis in the 
Broadview Union Hospital. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by folks from 
the community of Grenfell. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
southwest Saskatchewan have been waiting for repairs to their 
highway for a considerable time. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this page of petition once again is signed by 
residents of the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people who are concerned about 
highways in my constituency, and today is Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Kelvington, Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are all from 
Preeceville. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition by Saskatchewan people to fund Avastin. Mr. Speaker, 
these people are concerned that this is the first time in the 
province’s history that the government has denied coverage of a 
cancer drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition come from 
the communities of Regina, Balgonie, McLean, Swift Current, 
and Kronau. And I am pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are very upset with 
this government’s move to turn a portion of Highway 22 back 
to gravel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Strasbourg, Pilot Butte, Earl Grey, Markinch, 
and Southey and Craven. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It won’t come as 
any surprise today that I again have pages of petition of citizens 
who are concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Archerwill, 
Annaheim, Humboldt, Watson, Vanscoy, Saskatoon, 
Kelvington, and Viscount. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine who 
have concerns regarding the Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
And the prayer reads: 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from Estevan, Oxbow, and Regina. 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition opposed to possible reductions of health care 
services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Oxbow 
and Glen Ewen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by many citizens from the 
towns of Craven, Nokomis, and Govan and Jansen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise again to 
present a petition regarding funding of the cancer drug Avastin. 
I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from throughout 
the province. I so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
I’m honoured to rise today and present a petition urging the 
government to repair Highway 36. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good people of Coronach 
and RM [rural municipality] 11, Hart Butte. Thank you. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are read 
and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have the privilege today of welcoming to our legislature a 
number of men and women each of whom have, at one time or 
another, occupied a seat in this legislature, former colleagues. 
What distinguishes, Mr. Speaker, this group of men and women 
is that today we have held somewhat of a reunion of this group 
of former members, each of whom were sworn into government 
exactly 15 years ago today on November 1, 1991, Mr. Speaker 
— which many will recall then as a group of caucus members 
on the government side formed that government which was left 
to deal with the financial mess that had been created in the 
1980s in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say before I introduce them by 
name, that work that we are able to do in the legislature today 
— whether it be in new diagnostic equipment in health care or 
whether, Mr. Speaker, it be in tax relief for Saskatchewan 
families — is work that we can do built upon the work 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

completed by this group of men and women those years ago. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to welcome this group and I 
would like to welcome them. 
 
Many of them are seated on the floor of the Chamber, a couple 
in the gallery. And I’ll first start with those who are seated on 
the floor. I would ask members today to welcome Judy Bradley, 
Carol Carson, Carolyn Jones, Reg Knezacek, Serge Kujawa, 
Jack Langford, Pat Lorjé, Janice MacKinnon, Andrew Renaud, 
Lorne Scott, John Solomon, Vi Stanger, Ed Tchorzewski, Eric 
Upshall, Bernie Wiens. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the gallery joined by their spouses, Carol 
and Dan Teichrob, Ron and Joanne Wormsbecker. I would ask 
all members to welcome these former members of our 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, I’ll join with the Premier, if I may, and welcome 
these former NDP [New Democratic Party] members back to 
the Legislative Assembly. It looks like they’re having an 
enjoyable reunion. And I want to assure them that soon and 
very soon, their numbers are to grow, Mr. Speaker. Welcome to 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you some very special 
students sitting in the west gallery. This is a group of young 
boys who are known as the Canada sports friendship exchange 
programs. 
 
The Canada sports friendship exchange program is a program 
that connects athletes from French speaking parts of the country 
with English speaking parts of the country by using the 
common language of sports and physical activity. Today we 
have with us 14 grade 7 boys from the city of Cowansville, 
Quebec; Phillippe Cote-Jaques, teacher and coach. And from 
Saskatoon, we have 14 grade 7 boys from the city and they’re 
here with Kavita Britton, assistant coach and exchange 
organizer. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce 14 grade 12 students from the great 
school of Viscount Central High. It’s great to see them here 
today and they’ve travelled this far to join with us. Along with 
them is their teacher, Maureen Vossen, and their chaperones, 
Richard Kirkwood and Myles Mann. I would ask everyone to 

welcome them to their legislature here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 12 people in the Speaker’s gallery. They are all 
employees of SaskPower and they’re over here visiting the 
legislature, coming to question period, and getting a better 
understanding of how this place works. 
 
And so I’m very pleased to introduce Cecile Matysio, Joanne 
Laslo, Elaine Kivisto, Beryl Procyshyn, Donna Corley, Pam 
Klein, Jackie Kashuba, Barb Beltramini, Dawn Agar, Lana 
Schneider, Wanda Perfect, and Lisa Marsh. I ask all members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would, on 
behalf of the opposition, like to welcome the SaskPower 
workers. For a very brief period time as a temporary worker, 
my daughter worked for SaskPower. She found it a great place 
to work and had hoped to get on permanently. It didn’t work out 
so, but welcome to your Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
all of my colleagues here in the Assembly two folks sitting in 
the west gallery. Crandall Hrynkiw . . . Crandall is the regional 
director for region 4, which includes Saskatoon and the 
surrounding area which actually goes all the way out — 
Sunwest, Horizon, Prairie Spirit school divisions as well as St. 
Paul’s and Englefeld. 
 
Mr. Hrynkiw is here doing work today and with him is his son, 
Matthew. Crandall has brought Matthew to work with him 
today. He has been through a visit of the office on College 
Street, has done a great number of, been introduced to a great 
number of employees over at 2220 College, and he said it’s 
been a bit of a boggling experience just seeing what his dad 
does. 
 
I’m very pleased to have Crandall and Matthew come over 
today for a quick visit in my office. I hope they have a very 
good day and a safe journey back to Saskatoon this afternoon. 
But I would ask all my colleagues to please welcome Crandall 
and Matthew here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to introduce family members. 
And today is one of those days that gives me great pleasure to 
reintroduce to the Assembly my dad, Peter Krawetz, sitting up 
in the far east gallery; and my stepmother, Sophie. I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them. But also, since today is 
November 1, I’d also like to ask all members in joining with me 
to wish my dad a happy 89th birthday. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Family Doctor of the Year 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently a 
40-year-old doctor, Dr. Ross Kerkhoff, was recognized as 
Saskatchewan’s Family Doctor of the Year by the College of 
Family Physicians of Canada. Dr. Kerkhoff received his award 
at the college’s annual family medicine forum held in Quebec 
City. 
 
A graduate of the University of Stellenbosch, Cape Province, 
South Africa, Dr. Kerkhoff was working in England when he 
received an invitation in 1996 from a Moosomin doctor — an 
old school rugby opponent — to do a locum in that community. 
Dr. Kerkhoff spent a year there before heading to Australia, but 
returned a year later to put down permanent roots. 
 

As a foreign-trained graduate growing up in a large city I 
didn’t see myself settling in a small community on the 
Canadian prairie. But it wasn’t long before we were 
embraced by the community and with a thriving practice 
came to realize what a good fit it was . . . [says Dr. 
Kerkhoff]. 

 
He was one of 10 recipients of the College of Family Physicians 
award this year. Dr. Kerkhoff continues to work in a group 
practice in Moosomin with four other doctors who share on-call 
duties and clinics including travelling to six satellite clinics that 
service 13 outlying communities. Dr Kerkhoff says: 
 

Therein lies our strength, in that we have been able to 
work together and support each other. It certainly makes 
for an interesting practice and provides us with the 
life-balance between work and home life . . . 

 
Congratulations, Dr. Kerkhoff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Constituent Training Youth to Run Marathons 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Ben 

Hernando is the marketing director for the North Central Family 
Centre here in Regina. He has run in more than 20 marathons 
and he is now using his experience to help the youth of our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since July Mr. Hernando has been offering 
training to north central Regina youth, in marathon training, in 
order to give them a goal and a chance for a better life. 
 
In exchange for five months of training, Ben Hernando is 
offering his students — dubbed the dirty dozen though there are 
now 15 of them, Mr. Speaker — the opportunity to run at the 
Las Vegas International Marathon in December. And though he 
has received some sponsorship, Mr. Hernando has purchased 
proper shoes and t-shirts for his runners out of his own pocket. 
Ben Hernando simply told his runners, if you give me your 
commitments, I’ll take you there. Even if I have to pay out of 
my own pockets, I’m taking you there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join with me in 
thanking Ben Hernando for his selfless commitment to the 
youth of north central Regina. People like Ben and Sandy and 
Ivan and all the folks at the North Central Family Centre help 
make Saskatchewan a great place to live and raise a family. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Weyburn Inventors Receive Awards 
 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
year has been an impressive one for the young people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and I wish to tell you about two of them 
today. Mr. Speaker, earlier this year two grade 12 students at 
the Weyburn Comprehensive won a gold medal at the Southeast 
Regional Science Fair in March. These students, Colby Mainil 
and Mike Ehman, invented a wheelchair capable of climbing a 
step or curb. 
 
In May they took their invention to Quebec City, taking gold 
again in engineering at the Canada Wide Science Fair. In 
addition to the prestige of winning a national award, both young 
men were awarded scholarships. And the recognition doesn’t 
stop there. Just this past September, Colby and Mike were 
invited to Calgary to receive the Manning Innovation’s young 
innovators award. 
 
Inspired by the fact that Weyburn has little in the way of 
wheelchair accessibility, the two developed an affordable 
manual chair attachment that can safely climb a curb or step in 
just 30 seconds. The two have patented the invention and are 
looking to manufacture it. 
 
These two young men are very humble, Mr. Speaker, giving 
praise to their families and to two of their high school teachers, 
Leo Carteri and Wade Oberg. Congratulations to Colby and 
Mike and best of luck in moving this worthwhile invention 
forward and with their studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Family Doctor Week 
 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this is Family Doctor Week in 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, each and every day in this country, 
family doctors diagnose and treat illness and injury, promote 
disease prevention and good health, coordinate care, and 
advocate on behalf of their patients. Family doctors not only 
provide primary medical care but also a substantial portion of 
secondary and tertiary care in many communities, working from 
their offices as well as hospitals, their patients’ homes, nursing 
homes, and other community facilities. 
 
Public surveys repeatedly show that Canadians hold family 
doctors in high regard for the quality of care that they provide. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to patient care, family doctors are 
involved in teaching students and residents in our 17 Canadian 
medical schools, and in conducting research. 
 
I am pleased to have this opportunity to acknowledge the work 
that family doctors do each and every day on behalf of their 
patients and for their ongoing contributions to our health care 
system in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to add my 
congratulations to Dr. Ross Kerkhoff of Moosomin, who was 
recently named Saskatchewan Family Physician of the Year. I 
ask all members to join me in supporting Family Doctor Week 
in Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Javelin Gold for Saskatchewan Athlete 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate Kirstie Redlick of Biggar. Kirstie brought home 
gold as the Canadian champion for the 15 and under for javelin 
at the Legion National Track and Field Championships in 
Burnaby, British Columbia, August 12 and 13. Her top throw of 
40.52 metres beat out her closest rival from British Columbia 
who threw a 39.13 metres. 
 
This achievement goes along with her other staggering 
accomplishments. In 2005 she broke the bantam record. This 
year the midget record fell to Kirstie’s javelin. In the last two 
years she has gone undefeated at the Western Canadian 
championships. 
 
Kirstie has put a lot of hard work into her achievements, 
training with some of the best throwing coaches beginning as 
early as grade 5. And beginning at only 13 years old, she is 
looking forward to many more record-breaking years ahead of 
her. She is now turning her sights on her other love, hockey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Kirstie for her achievements in track and field 
and wishing her good luck with her hockey season. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Share the Warmth 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Energy 
Share program is helping Saskatchewan people better manage 
their energy costs. One of its major initiatives is the Share the 
Warmth home energy efficiency project where community 
volunteers will help 2,500 families over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s project began September 7 in Regina 
and ended in Estevan on October 11 with retrofits to over 400 
homes in 19 communities. SaskEnergy, along with its partners, 
the Salvation Army, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology], and hundreds of community 
volunteers from hockey players to local bank employees to 
town councillors to MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], helped these families improve the energy efficiency 
of their homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to be one of 108 volunteers in 
Prince Albert where 49 homes were visited. Each family 
benefited from $200 worth of home improvement supplies 
which included weatherstripping, window shrink film, a furnace 
filter, a programmable thermostat, a low flow shower head, and 
my favourite, Mr. Speaker, a water wizard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these families can now see savings of up to $150 
per year, and I know that the volunteers as well learned what 
they can do to make their homes more energy efficient. And as 
the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre will attest, Mr. 
Speaker, we did find out first-hand how many politicians it 
takes to screw in an energy efficient 60 watt florescent light 
bulb. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the staff at SaskEnergy and 
its many volunteers for sharing the warmth across our province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Pressures on Rural Hospitals 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of rural Saskatchewan have a new definition for cavalier. 
When they look in their dictionaries, they will see a picture of 
the Minister of Health, Saskatchewan’s Minister of Health. 
 
Yesterday my colleagues raised serious concerns about the 
Spiritwood hospital. Spiritwood’s services were shut down 
indefinitely because of the shortage of doctors. When asked by 
reporters how frequently this occurs, the minister said it 
happens on occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan know all too 
well how frequently it happens. We’ve had examples in 
Kamsack. It has happened in Big River. It takes place on a 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

frequently routine basis across the province. Now it appears the 
minister is completely uncertain about whether or not his new 
recruitment program will actually relieve the pressures now 
being experienced. The situation in Spiritwood is serious. Lives 
are put at risk. Problems in Spiritwood will only make matters 
worse in nearby institutions already suffering from their own 
shortages. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve something more than the 
Minister of Health. They want to see something more than, oh 
well, or maybe they’ll shrug their shoulders. They deserve 
more, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Labour Shortage 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well anyone in this 
House will recognize there is just significant potential for 
Saskatchewan’s economy. Now and into the near term, we have 
a challenge. The challenge in the province’s economy right now 
is a labour shortage, a labour shortage in no small part caused 
by the NDP’s record of driving people from the province of 
Saskatchewan. Our province has lost 4,500 people last year 
alone since the Premier took office as Premier of the province. 
We’ve now lost another 18,000 people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what has the government done about it? Well they’ve done 
nothing about it. The minister is chirping from his seat. He says 
don’t worry when people leave; there’s more left for the rest of 
us. The sum and the total of their plan in the Throne Speech 
was to appoint another committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party released a plan to deal with the 
labour shortage that includes 39 points, Mr. Speaker — some of 
them short term, some of them medium, some of them long 
term. Will the Premier do what he usually does? Will he simply 
adopt some or all of the Saskatchewan Party plan so we can 
deal with this issue, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in a moment 
I’m going to ask the Minister of Advanced Education to address 
some of these issues. 
 
But let me say this to the Leader of the Opposition. Where has 
he been? Where has the Leader of the Opposition been? I’ve 
had a cursory glance at this so-called plan which he released at 
the Regina Chamber of Commerce today. There was some 
expectation there, Mr. Speaker, that they were going to hear 
something new. I’m told by people who were there, there’s 
some real disappointment. There’s nothing new here, Mr. 
Speaker, nothing new. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what he’s proposing, I 
say what he wants to invest in — people, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
doing that. He wants to enhance access to opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re doing that. He wants to improve immigration, 
increase immigration. We’re doing that. He wants to create 
opportunities for education. We’re doing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the difference. While they’re talking about 
stuff, we’re getting stuff done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Oh they’re getting stuff done on the labour 
shortage issue, Mr. Speaker. Last year, last year under that 
government’s leadership, the population of Saskatchewan 
dropped 4,500 people. He drove 4,500 people from the 
province. He’s doing something. Since he became the Premier, 
he has driven 18,000 people out of the province. He’s doing 
something. 
 
Not too long ago, the Minister of Industry said that there are 10 
to 15,000 jobs unfilled in the province of Saskatchewan. Oh 
they’re doing something all right, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
contributing to the problem, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the NDP 
government is doing. 
 
The Premier just stood up and said, well these are terrible ideas. 
If it sounds familiar, it should. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP said lowering the income tax was a terrible idea. When we 
raised it, they adopted it. They said lowering business taxes was 
a terrible idea. When we raised it, they adopted it. They did the 
same thing with the PST [provincial sales tax] and the basic 
food allowance. Mr. Speaker, when we said dedicate all the gas 
taxes to highways, they said it’s a terrible idea. Now they’ve 
done it. 
 
Will the Premier just save us all time and commit to adopt some 
or all of the Saskatchewan Party plan on the labour shortage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, well I find it very curious 
listening to the Leader of the Opposition because when Alberta 
has a labour shortage, he says that’s what we need to have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I do have an interesting email here. It’s an email from a 
23-year-old young woman from Edmonton, Alberta, who wants 
to move to Saskatchewan. And I quote: 
 

I love Saskatchewan. I love the lakes, prairies, towns, and 
the people . . . Is there any sort of recruitment program, or 
opportunities that I should be made aware of? 
 

That email was sent to the Leader of the Opposition. And did 
the Leader of the Opposition talk about all of the jobs that are 
available in the city of Swift Current? Did the Leader of the 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

Opposition encourage that young woman to move to 
Saskatchewan? Did the Leader of the Opposition tell that young 
person that we had 105,000 young people working in 
Saskatchewan in July 2006? Not once did the Leader of the 
Opposition encourage that young woman to come to 
Saskatchewan. All he did was dump on the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It seems that old habits die hard. 
I would remind our guests that while former members have the 
opportunity and are welcome into the legislature, I would ask 
them to resist all urges to get in there and participate in this 
debate. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although, I’m not sure I 
. . . Frankly the NDP opposite need all the help they can get, 
even from members who have already lost, I’d say. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the hon. member knows that he ought 
not to comment on rulings of the Speaker. The Chair recognizes 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The mistake I made in 
that email — if the minister read the entire email — the mistake 
I made was referring that young person, who we do want to 
move to the province of Saskatchewan, I referred her to the 
minister opposite, Mr. Speaker. That’s the mistake we made 
because her record, the NDP government’s record, is to drive 
people from this province in a boom. Forty-five hundred people 
last year; 18,000 since the Premier got his job. Just 58 per cent 
of Saskatchewan people are between the ages of 20 and 64. 
That’s 5 per cent below the national average, Mr. Speaker. 
What’s 5 per cent below the national average? Fifty thousand 
people. That would have dealt with the labour shortage, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately this government has done nothing on 
the issue. 
 
Here are 39 ideas for them to consider. Will they skip all the 
rhetoric and do what they usually do and steal the ideas from 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well it’s interesting that the opposition has just discovered 
there’s a labour shortage in Saskatchewan because last spring, 
last spring and during the discussion on the budget several 
members of the opposition said in terms of our commitment to 
bring 5,000 immigrants to the province they said and I quote: 
 

. . . their commitment was to bring in 5,000 immigrants 
into Saskatchewan on an annual basis . . . In other words, 
they want to bring people into Saskatchewan to be 
unemployed . . .  

That’s what they said. The second thing that they said: 
 

And the Minister of Immigration wants to bring 5,000 
immigrants, and that’s wonderful. But what are these 
people going to do when they get here . . . 

 
That’s what they said. Then they issued in, I believe, April and 
May six press releases on the economy, and not once did they 
mention labour shortages. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got an 
agenda. It’s going to be released shortly. I’m interested in 
seeing what the opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, psychologists talk about the five 
stages of grief. Here we see the five stages of NDP grief. We’ve 
seen it on a number of issues when we present a challenge and 
then an idea from this side of the House. 
 
First there is denial. That’s where they say the problem doesn’t 
exist, Mr. Speaker. Then there’s anger. That’s when the 
Minister of Industry phones an open-line show host, Mr. 
Speaker. Then there’s scoffing. That’s what we’re seeing now 
today from the NDP. And then of course follows plagiarism, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the second-last stage. The actual last stage 
in this process, mercifully, Mr. Speaker, is an election when the 
grieving will be over in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister talks about having a plan. They’ve 
set up another department. They’ve set up another committee. 
They haven’t addressed any of the specific issues and questions 
today that we’ve raised. I wonder if she has the time to do that. 
And will she commit to this Assembly that they’re going to 
look at this document, as they have our plan on income tax and 
on business tax, as they have our plan on the national biofuel 
strategy? Will they review the plan and move to immediately 
implement it for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I do have the Sask Party’s 
little document. I note that when we release documents, they 
always talk about targets. There isn’t one target, not one. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, let me tell you what we’ve 
done, what we’ve done in the last two years. Thirty-nine . . . 
Three thousand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. The 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Oh I know they don’t want to hear 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

about targets. But they’re quite prepared to talk about targets 
when it comes to health care. They want to talk about targets 
when it comes to the government. But not once do they talk 
about targets when it comes to themselves. 
 
Anyway, 3,904 new training opportunities in the last two years 
— 3,904. Five thousand youth apprenticeship positions for 
young people in high school as of September of this fall, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a mid-year coming shortly 
by the Minister of Finance, and we’ll have more to say about 
more training opportunities and jobs for young people in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
question is directed to the Minister of Community Resources. 
At any time did he receive a recommendation from anyone to 
end the contract with the Oyate Safe House? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated time 
and time again, we got advice from numerous folks, and 
certainly one of the persons whose opinion we highly value is 
that of the Children’s Advocate. And I’d ask the member to turn 
to page 37 of the Children’s Advocate report dated September 
2006, under recommendation SYS.14(06): 
 

That the Department of Community Resources and Oyate 
establish a collaborative partnership process within 60 
days of the date of issue of this report, to develop a shared 
vision and common service delivery principles for Oyate 
[Mr. Speaker]. 

 
We’ve indicated time and time again that the Children’s 
Advocate has always advocated for us to continue to 
partnership, if possible, and we’re working down that path, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we heard in the 
rotunda yesterday about the reports when you give only one 
page of a two-page report, where the actual information was 
contained on the second report of what the Children’s Advocate 
really said. Does the minister recall a briefing note that he got 
from the regional manager, southwest region of his department, 
on April 10 of this year? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, when we spoke of the 

effort of this government to try and respond to the issue of 
children being exploited on the street, what we wanted to do 
was set up the capacity of Saskatchewan to really respond to the 
issue. And in the process of trying to develop that capacity, the 
all-party committee recommended that we deal with First 
Nations, and in partnership with First Nations, to ensure that 
there was a connection with First Nations children, of whom 
many were involved with the sex trade, the target that we’re 
looking at. And obviously as we grew along and as we moved 
along in this capacity-building stage, there was challenges 
which we indicated. And as the challenges arose, we addressed 
them, and things were moving in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re at that stage now. The Children’s Advocate 
gave us the time frame for an update. Very quickly here we 
intend to meet with the Children’s Advocate. And secondly, 
Mr. Speaker, he also indicated that at the end of this year that a 
full report be submitted to him, which we intend to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure we’re talking 
about the same subject here half the time. He has never 
answered the question. I’d like to refresh his memory, of the 
minister, of the report that came to him from his own 
department. And I quote: 
 

The department has three options to consider in response 
to these incidents. The region is recommending option no. 
1. Option no. 1: do not enter into a future service 
agreement with the Oyate board. The department service 
agreement expires March 31, 2006. 
 

It goes on, Mr. Speaker, “removal of children effective 
immediately, a new RFP process would be required.” 
 
This is the minister’s own department that’s recommending it to 
him, but he hasn’t brought that forward. Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister . . . why did he reject the advice of his own 
department? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, again I’ll point out that 
the department did not run Oyate. And let me be perfectly clear 
to the people of Saskatchewan that we have shut down Oyate at 
the request of the board of Oyate. We have no children there, no 
staff, and no costs at Oyate at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Obviously when we looked at the involvement of the auditor 
and the advocate, what we said, we would take the advice of the 
auditor and the advocate, and we take that advice very 
seriously. And I’ll point out again, if you go back to page 37 of 
the Children’s Advocate report where it states, and I quote: 
 

It is the hope of the Children’s Advocate that the 
recommendations contained within this report will assist 
the Department of Community Resources and Oyate in 
moving forward in a positive, collaborative manner . . . 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

[which] will most effectively serve the best interests, 
well-being and safety of sexually exploited children in this 
province [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, obviously I’m going to get the 
same answer to every question. But his own department 
recommended that he stop this agreement, not the Children’s 
Advocate. Both of them have recommended it. And if he’d have 
given the press both pages of the information yesterday that 
would have showed up. 
 
Yesterday the minister repeated over and over again he was 
sticking with the current safe house board because that’s what 
the Children’s Advocate is demanding. Imagine my surprise, 
Mr. Speaker, when I turned on the radio this morning and there 
was the Children’s Advocate, Marvin Bernstein, being quoted; 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Bernstein said that the minister 
doesn’t understand his report on the safe house. Mr. Bernstein 
said his report identifies many problems at the safe house, and 
if the government shut down Oyate permanently, he wouldn’t 
object. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister quit playing his personal 
politics? When will he stand up to his responsibility? He is 
ultimately responsible for the children in this province, not the 
board of Oyate. He is, and he should do his job and stop playing 
politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is important is that 
we’re trying to provide solutions and leadership. We’re 
following the children’s . . . [inaudible] . . . We have a good 
blueprint in my hand here that we intend to follow. And if 
anybody’s playing politics, Mr. Speaker, that party has 
misquoted me on many occasions. They have talked about DCR 
[Department of Community Resources] staff conduct which 
was not called for. And now of course he knows better than the 
Children’s Advocate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to take our advice from a 
politically motivated party whose only role right now is to 
create doom, fear, and to try and get power, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’ll use anybody to try and achieve that goal. 
 
On this side we have a plan; we have an agenda. And we plan 
on putting in solutions as per the advice of the Children’s 
Advocate. And further, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go to page 47 of the 
report where it says under recommendation SYS.06(06), “That 
Oyate and DCR develop a comprehensive programming model, 
having regard to the following elements . . .” 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — You know, Mr. Speaker, how he can say I 
have an agenda when we prove concrete that he has an agenda, 
and it’s a political agenda. Four days ago, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister told this Assembly he would rather listen to the 
Children’s Advocate instead of the members opposite. 
Yesterday he said the same thing. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
should do as he promised. Will he listen to the Children’s 
Advocate who has told him today on CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] radio he should shut down the safe 
house permanently? This would be fine with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his political agenda is putting children at risk. He 
knows it. I know it, and the people of Saskatchewan know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me say again to the 
people of Saskatchewan that the Oyate Safe House is closed. It 
has been closed for six months. The Oyate Safe House is 
closed. And who closed it was the Oyate board, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’ll say it again that the Oyate house has been closed for six 
months. The board made a decision. 
 
Now we’re trying to get advice from the Children’s Advocate. 
And I go onto recommendation — that’s page 47 for that 
member opposite — and again you misquoted the Children’s 
Advocate and I quote: 
 

That Oyate and DCR develop a comprehensive 
programming model having regard to the following 
elements: 
 
Effective admission criteria and screening processes . . . 
 
Individual case planning and management . . . 
 
Safety and security concerns . . . 
 
Effective communication protocol . . . 
 

[14:15] 
 
And second, Mr. Speaker, another recommendation: 
 

That DCR and Oyate develop an operational protocol, 
having regard to the following elements: 
 

And I’ll continue: 
 

Clearly defined roles and responsibilities . . . 
 

Job descriptions for all staff members; 
 

Clearly outlined reporting responsibilities and processes; 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, today the minister says the 
facility’s closed. Yesterday he said they were doing criminal 
checks on the staff. So it’s either closed, or it isn’t closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister has a choice. He could accept the 
advice of his own department. He could accept the advice of the 
Children’s Advocate — stop jeopardizing the children who are 
at risk. But no, this minister refuses to listen to the advice of the 
Children’s Advocate, his own department who recommends it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister make such a reckless choice 
months ago? Why is he stubbornly sticking to that advice? Why 
is he playing politics, Mr. Speaker? Why doesn’t he get on . . . 
there is another group more capable in this city of providing it? 
And why won’t he go back out to RFP [request for proposal] 
and give other people an opportunity to provide this service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again that member 
is massively confused. I am not going to take advice over that 
member over that party when it comes to this issue. I am going 
to take advice from the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker, even 
the Provincial Auditor. And I’ll go on to recommendations 
again on page 48, and I’ll continue on. Recommendation 
SYS.09(06) that, and I quote: 
 

That all recommendations of the Children’s Advocate and 
Provincial Auditor be implemented prior to the resumption 
of operations at the Oyate Safe House. 
 

We’re going to follow that directive. Mr. Speaker, again page 
48, no. 5 recommendation, SYS.10(06). And again I quote: 
 

That Oyate Safe House staff be permanent and that Oyate 
Safe House staff include appropriate gender role models 
and be reflective of the children’s culture and life 
experiences. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to me that suggests from the advocate that we 
continue working away. And he has given us the time frame of 
60 days which we fully intend to comply with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to refresh the 
minister’s recollection of events, this was broken on CBC. The 
Saskatchewan Party took this and asked for the audit, asked for 
the Children’s Advocate to get involved because that minister 
would have left it open, and it’d still be that way today, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the minister has shown a reckless regard 
for the children of this province. He has taken political 
expediency over the safety of children. He’s callously rejected 
recommendations both by his own top regional manager 

involved in this where the no. 1 issue was close it down, by his 
own staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is he going to sever ties with this 
organization, put this back out to tender? When is he going to 
allow these children to be looked after immediately, not in six 
months from now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said time and time 
again, the children are being looked after. We have our own 
staff. We have resources and facilities. And I’ve indicated to the 
press that the children are being looked after. 
 
There are no children at Oyate Safe House. That board made 
that decision. So I’ll say it again loud and clear for that 
member. There are no children at Oyate. Oyate is shut down. 
All the children that were at Oyate are now being taken care of 
by DCR staff, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue that 
work. 
 
But as I’ve indicated to that member, we are going to work very 
closely with the auditor and especially with the advocate. He’s 
given us a November 14 timeline to try and find some 
resolution to our differences between Oyate and ourselves. And 
if we can’t, guess what? It ends there. But in the meantime, we 
said we’d follow the recommendations. We fully intend to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s own words, 
if these children are being looked after carefully now, then why 
do we need the Oyate Safe House? He just said they’re being 
looked after. Maybe he’d like to explain. 
 
You know this government’s handling of this safe house matter 
is inexcusable. You know we have a record of mismanagement, 
reprehensible conduct stretching over three separate ministers 
— the former minister from Moose Jaw North who started this 
project, the minister from Regina Rosemont who was involved 
in project, and the current minister. And they all have 
mismanaged this file. Each and every member opposite should 
be ashamed of this government’s record. They failed these 
children. They put lives at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, a former minister of Social 
Services: will he today commit to cancelling the safe house 
agreement, re-tendering the contract, and starting over with a 
new board and hopefully a new minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, just to remind that 
member it was the all-party committee of which I’m sure some 
of his members of his party had participated in and had 
certainly shared some advice with them. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
quite strange that that member doesn’t get it. 
 
One of the things we’re trying to do on this side of the House is 
trying to find some solutions, resolutions, and some 
opportunities for these children to exit that particular trade, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re trying to find some solutions, and in trying to 
develop those solutions, Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to reach out 
to the First Nations which that party agreed to. And the all-party 
committee was important. And now they’re changing their 
mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this side of the House, we’re going to continue working 
with those people that don’t have a political agenda, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is the Children’s Advocate, the auditor, and 
many First Nations that want to make a difference in these 
children’s lives. And that’s exactly where we’re going and 
shame on them. 
 
Once again, the Oyate house has been closed for six months. 
It’ll stay closed unless all the recommendations are met, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 1, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 

Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 5, The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 . . . Order please. Order. Order. It has 
been moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that Bill 
No. 5, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: —Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 6, The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services that Bill No. 6, The Youth Drug Detoxification 
and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 
Public Health Amendment Act be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 7, The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 be 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill be read a second 
time. The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, at the next sitting of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Duncan.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to begin by saying how pleased I am to be able 
to have been joined today by many of my former colleagues 
who are behind the rail today. It was in the past great to work 
with them. They’ve served their province well. They did a lot 
for our province and obviously helped to set the base for the 
things that we’re able to do today, and I want to thank them for 
that in a very public way. 
 
As well I’d like to thank, in speaking to the Throne Speech, my 
constituents from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote for giving me 
again the opportunity to represent them here. And I want to just 
briefly congratulate . . . As you will know, we’ve had civic 
elections around this province. We in Prince Albert now have a 
new mayor and I want to congratulate on your behalf I think as 
well, our new mayor, Jim Scarrow, in his new role. And I really 
do look forward to working with him. He’s been a very 
important part of the Premier’s task force on forestry. I think 
the people of Prince Albert recognized his work, and it’s no 
small wonder that he was victorious with the largest majority 
that I’ve seen in that city for a very, very long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having our colleagues here today, our former 
colleagues here today, brings me back to 1991, 15 years ago 
today, 15 years ago today as an old — and what ended up being 
a somewhat corrupt —administration was replaced by a new 
government with a new vision and new dreams, and established 
the base for a new future for our province. 
 
And it is with pride that I am able to support this Throne Speech 

today, Mr. Speaker, because of the work that was done by that 
administration. And, you know, I remember that day some 15 
years ago, being fortunate enough to have been elected in ’86 
and worked for five years in opposition to replace that 
administration fuelled by free liquor from the Liquor Board. 
And so it was a good day for many of us. 
 
And I can remember I walked in, Mr. Speaker, I walked in the 
back door and, lo and behold, who do I meet at the door? 
Fifteen years ago today I met a former employee of that 
administration walking out the back door, Mr. Speaker. It was 
an important day. 
 
And it was 15 years ago today that the Leader of the Opposition 
was cleaning out his desk in room 348. He was moving on. His 
minister had been defeated along with many of the other 
ministers. He’d served up his last drop of free liquor to his 
political masters. He’d collected his four months of severance 
for serving as a political adviser to one of those ministers. He 
gathered up government grant money to establish a new career 
for himself, a Country Music Hall of Fame business, in Swift 
Current. A business, I might add, that went broke some very 
few months later. Very short, short ending to that particular one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that employee of that 
administration decided that we needed more Progressive 
Conservative government and so he subsequently ran — after 
the museum closed — as a Progressive Conservative party 
candidate in that riding. Members of that party didn’t choose to 
accept him but, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in hearkening back, 
it really was an important day. 
 
And it was a day of change. And people will remember the 
challenges that that administration had in the 1990s, Mr. 
Speaker. People of this province understand that this Throne 
Speech is able to be presented in the way that it was because of 
the 10 years that people of the New Democratic Party 
government spent re-establishing and rebuilding the base for 
our province. And, Mr. Speaker, we have former cabinet 
ministers who served in the Treasury Board of that 
administration in those years here with us and they know only 
too well the challenges that were faced in putting our fiscal 
house in order. And so we spent those 10 years paying down 
some debt. We spent those years attempting to balance our 
budget and finally we did. 
 
And we were able to restore pride in the province for the people 
of this province which they hadn’t had for a number of years, 
the embarrassment of the 1980s still fresh in their minds. And, 
Mr. Speaker, subsequent to those 10 years we were able to 
spend the next five years rebuilding — rebuilding and 
reorganizing, re-energizing this province. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, so what have we been able to achieve in the last 
15 years? Well we got rid of a lot of that horrible, horrible 
Progressive Conservative, Tory, Saskatchewan Party debt. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we were able to re-establish the trust of the bond 
rating agencies and the bankers who financed the highest per 
capita debt that any province in this country at one time had. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the initiatives of the last five 
years we’ve been able to fuel what is one of the hottest 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

economies in this country. 
 
And so what have we been able to do? Mr. Speaker, in the last 
five years this administration I would say has been able to 
reduce the taxes of this province in an unparalleled and an 
unprecedented amount. Mr. Speaker, we know that we have 
made life better for our businesses. We’ve made them more 
competitive. And the people of this province know that they’ve 
got more money in their jeans because we’ve been reducing the 
personal income tax. Fifty thousand people, Mr. Speaker, no 
longer even pay provincial income tax as a result of the 
initiatives of this administration. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, are we able to make life better for 
Saskatchewan’s young people and Saskatchewan’s families? 
Yes we are. We’ve been able to recognize because of a hot 
economy and develop in the establishment of a Family Day, a 
statutory holiday in February to serve our families and give 
them that break in our long, long winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are so many firsts and have done and have 
created so many firsts. You know, I hearken back to 15 years 
ago and the subsequent budgets and I remember the joy in this 
province and I remember the joy in this government when we 
were able to deliver the first balanced budget of any province in 
this country. What an achievement. What a record. How proud 
the Saskatchewan people can be of themselves. 
 
And we haven’t let up. Thirteen consecutive balanced budgets 
now. Our provincial government debt is the lowest that we have 
had in 15 years. The bond rating agencies have saw that good 
management should be rewarded. We’ve had 14 consecutive 
credit rating upgrades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our people have the lowest utility rates of all of 
these Western provinces. And how have we been able to do 
that, Mr. Speaker? Because we protected those Crown 
corporations that deliver the lowest utility bundle from the 
privatization of the Leader of the Opposition and the gang of 
cabinet ministers that he fuelled with free whisky in the 1980s, 
and we protected the people of Saskatchewan from a wholesale 
sell-off of their Crowns. And well, Mr. Speaker, I remember the 
SaskEnergy debate. And well, Mr. Speaker, I remember the 
tenacity of those privatizing, right wing, money-squandering 
Progressive Conservatives in the 1980s. I remember it all too 
well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, members of the Saskatchewan Party who 
hide under a new name, taunt government members. And they 
tell us, oh we’re going to change this government and we’re 
going to be over there and we’re going to make things better. 
And these were the same taunts that we heard prior to 2003, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I tell you what. When it comes to decision-making time, 
the million people of this province do not forget who they are. 
They won’t forget. They can’t forget. They don’t dare to forget. 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there will never be, there will 
never be a Chair of the Treasury Board sitting in government 
from that side of the House because people remember who they 
are and people know them for what they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what about our future? And what about our children’s 

future? The number of jobs that have been created in this 
province — unparalleled, unprecedented. The Leader of the 
Opposition’s own riding, if you’ll check, check on the web 
page, you’ll find there’s about 150 jobs open in his community. 
And he knows what the economy of Swift Current is like. And 
he knows that this province because of the tax changes that 
we’ve made and because we’ve got a growing economy is able 
to afford to build the citizens of Swift Current and that area a 
brand new hospital. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, had we continued to do what the 
Conservative government of the 1980s did, we would have no 
money for hospitals. We’d have no money for roads. Mr. 
Speaker, we would have no future for the young people of this 
province. I tell you that all has changed and the young people of 
this province know it and they are filling those jobs. They’re 
going to continue to fill those jobs and I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re going to continue to work with them to 
ensure that there are jobs for that to be able to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, and how out of touch 
can these folks be? You know, yesterday I hear the member 
from Arm River-Watrous. And I’m glad he’s here today 
because I want to respond to his comments. He was 
complaining about the conditions of roads. And he was 
complaining about young people. He was complaining about 
everything you could possibly think of. But of course that’s the 
mantra of the Saskatchewan Party. That’s who they are. 
 
And he happened to mention Highway 219. And I was so glad 
that he did, Mr. Speaker, because what it did was gave me an 
opportunity to stand in my place and tell him that this 
government has committed $24 million to upgrading, paving, 
straightening, and widening that road in partnership with three 
RMs and the Dakota First Nations, Mr. Speaker. And if he 
didn’t know it, he should have known it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it won’t be enough. Not for them, not for 
them. You know, we’ve got $2 billion worth of upgrades to 
pave standard or thin membranes in this province. And they go 
around this province and they’re promising to commit to 
anyone who will listen that they’re going to upgrade them all. 
They’re going to pave every road, Mr. Speaker. There’s going 
to be a monorail in every city according to the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
But I tell you it all wears thin, Mr. Speaker. People know there 
are limits to what even this prosperous economy can afford. 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that member can chirp and 
he can harp and he can be all embarrassed that there’s $24 
million coming in to that area to rebuild that road . . . to $100 
million of economic development. But, Mr. Speaker, I will 
stand with the chief and I’ll stand with the reeves and I’ll stand 
with the people in his backyard, and we’ll build that road in 
spite of him. In spite of him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
interesting place. It truly is. This is a place where decisions are 
made that impact on people’s daily lives and obviously impact 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

on their future. And so have we recognized young people? Sure 
we have. Have we recognized the need for places of higher 
learning to have the capacity to train our young folks? Yes, we 
have. And all of that was outlined in the Throne Speech. And, 
Mr. Speaker, are we welcoming immigrants to this province? 
Yes, we are. And, Mr. Speaker, are we going to be building on 
the incredible base that the people of Saskatchewan have built 
for themselves? I say again, yes, we are. 
 
And so what to the future? Mr. Speaker, I will make a 
prediction — that you are going to see an in-migration of young 
people to this province because it is a province of opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We have affordable housing. We 
have the lowest of utility costs. We have the lowest or the 
second lowest tax base and tax rates. We are competitive. And 
it’s a good place to start a business, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good 
place to make money. And it’s a good place to raise your 
family. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t, by the way, squandered our 
lakes and our trees and our fisheries. We have a tourism 
industry that’s growing and has yet more opportunity. But 
what’s most important, Mr. Speaker, we have a quality of life 
that’s unparalleled in any province, in any province in Western 
Canada. And I want to say that people are looking for that kind 
of a lifestyle. But they’re also looking for the ability to make a 
bottom line in business or a good wage if they are working for a 
business. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, they’re not willing to trade that kind of 
a future and that kind of a base for some hyped-up political 
promises by retread Tories. Mr. Speaker, they are not going to 
go back to that. They’ve been there. They’ve had a taste of that, 
and it didn’t taste like applesauce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m suggesting that you’re going to see more and more people 
build their base and build their roots here in this province. And 
I’m suggesting that these job numbers are going to change our 
population figures because the population is obviously going to 
follow the creation of jobs that our businesses have created here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we are going to be doing new things and different things. 
And some of our industries are going to change. Agriculture has 
gone through an incredible transition and some difficult times, 
and we know that. And the urban people have worked alongside 
with our farmers and our rural communities as those changes 
have taken place. And it has been some painful in some 
communities. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in spite of what members on 
that side of the House say, there are people who see opportunity 
in rural Saskatchewan, and that’s why we’re seeing 
manufacturing and processing going. That’s why we’re seeing 
new cattle ranchers come into this province. And that’s why one 
of my colleagues now involved in real estate tells me over lunch 
that he has people from British Columbia and Alberta and from 
Europe looking at agricultural land because they see an 
opportunity here. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I agree with 
them and I agree with him. 

There is more, Mr. Speaker, to public life than just criticizing. 
There needs to be. There has to be. You have to, you have to be 
able to offer an alternative. But more importantly what you 
have to do is offer promise for our young people. And that’s a 
deficiency that the Saskatchewan Party has. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why they won’t be supporting this Throne Speech which 
is a document of vision. And it’s a document of promise. And 
it’s a document of optimism. And it’s a document of hope. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’ll be supporting 
this Throne Speech, as I will be supporting the budget that it 
leads up to because it’s going to mean money for kids, money 
for students. It’s going to mean a better lifestyle for 
Saskatchewan families. It’s a document I think that we need to 
be proud of. And I want to say quite publicly, it’s a document 
that I’m proud to be part of. 
 
When the Premier brought this document to cabinet and we first 
looked at it, obviously there are some comments here and there. 
And we do little amendments, and we do some changes. But I 
want to tell you, overall it’s a document created very much by 
his vision. 
 
He said early on when he took this leadership that it was his 
role to create economic prosperity to make families’ lives 
better. That’s what this Throne Speech is about. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, he’s been successful along with all of the 
million people of this province in creating an environment 
where it can and where it will happen. Mr. Speaker, that’s why 
I’ll be supporting this Throne Speech along with my colleagues. 
I’ll be voting against the amendment that calls for a motion of 
non-confidence because this Throne Speech is the right 
direction. 
 
This government is headed in the right direction, and, Mr. 
Speaker, it will lead to a better province. It’ll lead to a better 
quality of life for my family and for your family, for all the 
families in this province. So I’ll be voting for the Throne 
Speech and be very, very proud to do so. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise 
to participate in this debate today. I want to state right off the 
start that I’m going to be supporting the amendment, but I will 
not be supporting the main motion which probably comes as no 
surprise to the members opposite. 
 
I would like to start, Mr. Speaker, by taking this opportunity to 
recognize a few people and thank some folks. First off, I would 
like to thank the constituents of Saskatoon Southeast for their 
ongoing support over the last few years since November 5, 
2003. I look forward to continuing to support them both up to 
and after the next election. They’re a good constituency and 
have been very supportive, and they deserve a new government, 
and I plan to be part of that new government. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my hard-working and 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

dedicated constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett, who 
regularly works evenings and weekends meeting with 
constituents and arranging for things when I’m in Regina, and 
works tirelessly at seeing that phone calls get answered, 
correspondence gets dealt with, and I have nothing but praise 
and high regard for her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important as well that we recognize all 
of our family members, and I would like to thank my spouse, 
Sandy, who has been very supportive throughout this. As you’re 
likely aware, she worked for the law office where our current 
Minister of Justice was and I think her life is considerably 
easier when both of us are in Regina. But having said that, I 
continue to thank her for her ongoing support. 
 
I would like to comment briefly on my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a rapidly growing constituency. We have some 
areas of the city that are incurring substantial growth in the area 
of Stonebridge, Willows. Briarwood, and the acreages south of 
Saskatoon. It’s an interesting constituency. It has six golf 
courses and no high schools. So perhaps that’s an indication 
that when you play a lot of golf, you don’t have time for family 
making. 
 
We currently are getting a new Wal-Mart which is under 
construction on the south side of the city. They are building an 
overpass across the Circle Drive to access that and my 
constituents are looking forward to the construction work that’s 
being done. 
 
I’d also like to thank and congratulate all of the successful 
people that ran in the city council election — Mayor Pat Fiacco 
in Regina, Mayor Don Atchinson in Saskatoon, and the city 
councillors that I’m sure I will be looking forward to working 
with over the next few years, next months. 
 
I would, Mr. Speaker, like to recognize and thank our newest 
MLA, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. I think the 
members opposite had a taste of what kind of an MLA this 
person is when they heard his speech earlier this week and I 
think that’s typical of what the Sask Party crop of MLAs is 
going to be like after the next election. These are going to be 
not just formidable MLAs, Mr. Speaker, but some of them are 
going to be very formidable and very skilful cabinet ministers 
and I look forward to working with them. 
 
I enjoyed campaigning in that by-election, Mr. Speaker. Like 
most MLAs, we made a number of trips down to knock doors 
and I was frankly overwhelmed by the amount of support that 
was there. To receive 49 per cent of the vote in what’s typically 
referred to as Tommy-town is overwhelming and certainly 
gratifying. I wonder what it would be like if we would have had 
a local candidate, whether we would have got 59 or 69 per cent. 
 
I knocked on one door, Mr. Speaker, and I asked the person 
where their support was. And the person said, well I can’t 
support the New Democratic Party because they’re misnamed 
— they’re not new; they’re not democratic; and I don’t think 
they’re having much of a party any more. Well I have to say I 
agreed with that. 
 
And I think if Tommy Douglas was still alive, he would have 
probably watched the goings-on in that by-election and 

probably would have said, yes it’s time to support the 
Saskatchewan Party; the Saskatchewan Party candidate is the 
right person. And I’m sure that Tommy Douglas would have 
voted for us if that was the case. 
 
Another thing I did, Mr. Speaker, during the course of the 
summer, was I had the opportunity to go out and do some door 
knocking in some other constituencies as well. I knocked doors 
for a while in Yorkton. And I noticed the same sense of 
excitement and the same sense of a desire for change in 
Yorkton. I’m not saying that there’s an election coming any 
time soon, but I could certainly comment on what likely will 
happen in the election when that does come to pass. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that perhaps all MLAs should be getting ready 
and gearing up. 
 
I’d like to go back just to civic politics briefly. I want to 
welcome Robin Bellamy back to the Saskatoon Public School 
Board. Mr. Bellamy has been a good friend for a lot of years 
during my time on the board. And I also want to congratulate 
my neighbour, Kevin Waugh, who’s going to be on the 
Saskatoon public board as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back a little bit to what’s taken place 
over the last few months. And I want to make some reference to 
when I was growing up, which is some years ago. 
 
My brothers and I used to sit around, and we used to play a 
game called let’s imagine what it would be like to have a new 
bike, or let’s imagine what it would be like to take a trip to 
Disneyland. And we would plan those things in great detail. 
And we’d talk about where we were going to go on the new 
bike or what rides we were going to go on. And we’d just spend 
all this time with a colourful imagination and we focused on it. 
But then reality set in, and we realized my dad had to work 
full-time. We didn’t have any money for a new bike; w weren’t 
going to Disneyland. And reality set in, and I guess that’s what 
it’s like when you grow up. 
 
But unfortunately we have some folks over there that the best 
they can do, the best they can come up with is they can come up 
with what they call an Imagine campaign — what we would do 
if we had a whole bunch of money that we got from somebody 
else. Not how we’re going to go out and negotiate; how we’re 
going to go out and deal with the federal government. No. This 
is a government that goes around the province in a bus during 
the summer playing horsie or I spy with my little eye or 
whatever foolish games they play on the bus. 
 
It’s high time, Mr. Speaker, that those people over there grew 
up and started to realize what they were elected for, what they 
were elected to do, and why they’re being paid by the people of 
this province. They are being paid by taxpayer dollars. They are 
supposed to come up with a plan, a vision, and they are 
supposed to be able to negotiate effectively with the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the role of the Premier to be a visionary and to 
craft a plan and a direction that citizens can get behind and be 
proud of. The Premier is supposed to do that kind of thing. And 
we have a Premier over there that instead of that goes around on 
the bus tour and plays the childhood games. 
 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my advice to them is that they should grow 
up, quit daydreaming, and start negotiating with the federal 
government. That’s what they were elected to do. That’s what 
they are paid to and the best advice, Mr. Speaker, that I can give 
to that party is lead, follow, or get out of the way. The 
Saskatchewan Party is ready to govern. The people of 
Saskatchewan know it’s ready to govern, and they are ready for 
an election so that they can replace the people over there 
because they know the people over there have been there 15 
years and 15 years is too long for any government like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some specifics in this Speech from the 
Throne and some specifics I would like to talk about briefly. 
Mr. Speaker, health care is one of the things that’s most 
important to the people of this province. What we’ve done right 
now is we have to get a government that will focus on 
recruitment, retention, and deal with the staffing issues that we 
have in health care. We need a long-term plan to deal with 
staffing health care. 
 
I am one of the aging baby boomers in this province. We have 
parents that are elderly. We have people that need medical help 
and medical assistance. We are all aging baby boomers on this 
side of the House, with the exception of my colleague, and what 
we have to do right now is get a plan to get out and understand 
when and where people will retire, what our needs are going to 
be in the future, plan the education requirements, and plan 
around that. 
 
It’s very expensive to educate health care professionals in this 
province. And what we’re doing right now, we have had whole 
classes of nurses graduate partway during a fiscal year. When 
the government has ran out of money, the entire class goes and 
finds jobs out of province because this government can’t plan 
more than a month or two in advance. 
 
What we need to do is we need to develop a plan where we 
work through the budget cycle, we’ve got some multi-year 
planning. We need to do something to attract and develop the 
professionals that we need. We want to retain these people. We 
need to work with what they need for facilities, resources, 
research support. We need to ensure that they’ve got 
recognition and a chance to develop their careers and develop 
their careers within this province — not in the province next to 
us, not in the country to the south of us, but here. 
 
We need, Mr. Speaker, targeted incentives and a comprehensive 
plan, not a series of quick band-aid fixes which is what we are 
seeing from this government right now. Mr. Speaker, health 
care workers are our front line. We ourselves, our parents, 
grandparents, we owe it to the seniors of this province who built 
this province to ensure that our parents, our grandparents, and 
the seniors are well taken care of in their retirement. They 
deserve better. 
 
We need to have a plan that will look after the people that need 
it the most and frankly, Mr. Speaker, the people that deserve it 
the most. And this is what we’re getting instead from the 
government over there. And I’m going to give them the 
example of Terry Rak, which is somebody that we raise 
regularly in this House. Mr. Rak has paid out tens of thousands 
of dollars of his own money for the drug Avastin to try and 
prolong and try and save his life. This is a man who is critically 

and seriously ill and is getting no support whatever from that 
government over there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last week they started the ultimate insult. Mr. 
Rak was retaining and keeping his own records when he would 
get his blood tests done after each Avastin treatment. He was 
told by his health care professionals that if he wanted to get 
those records he would have to go to the administration office 
— not just a photocopy that they used to give him on it — he 
would have to go to the administration office, sign all the 
application forms, pay a $25 fee, plus $25 a page, to get his 
own blood test. 
 
I can’t believe the indignity that they’re heaping on a man who 
is critically ill. I don’t know what they’re going to do to him 
next. And he asks them why they’re doing this. And the health 
care professionals that dealt with this — it’s a directive that 
we’ve received from our superiors; it has something to do with 
privacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are Mr. Rak’s own records. They used to run 
next door to the next office and photocopy them for him and 
they’re not any more. They’re charging him $25 plus 25 cents a 
page each time he goes for a treatment to try and take his 
records home so that he can follow what’s happening with his 
health. 
 
I can’t imagine anything more . . . You know, you charge a 
person tens of thousands of dollars and I can’t imagine what 
they’re doing. Unfortunately in this province health care has 
become a political football. It should never, ever become that in 
Saskatchewan or in any other jurisdiction. But not in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare. Our 
citizens expect more, they deserve more, and frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, after the next election they will receive more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw and we continue to hear from the 
government members that they’re planning to have a green and 
prosperous economy. We heard some of the media make fun of 
it and talk about it being a mean and preposterous plan. 
Actually we haven’t seen very much of anything that they plan 
to do and the only thing that’s green on their ideas is the fact 
that they’re old enough, they’re growing mould and they’re not 
doing anything productive. So we’ve got these mouldy, green 
ideas that nothing has happened with. 
 
The reality of our environment we live in is we live in a cold 
and inhospitable province in January and February of this year. 
Our Saskatchewan residents pay several hundred dollars per 
month for utilities. They pay nearly as much in utilities as they 
do in food, and in some families probably even more. They 
need to have a sustainable, reliable system of electrical 
generation and natural gas. We need to look further than just 
next month or next year. We need to look at what the long-term 
growth plans are for energy consumption and what we’re going 
to do to prevent climate change. Mr. Speaker, natural gas and 
electricity are provided by Crowns in this province. We look to 
them for good service and for being served into the future. 
 
The two largest sources of global warming are automobiles and 
electrical generation, and we haven’t seen this government do 
anything to deal with those issues. They’ve done virtually 
nothing. There’s a myriad of things that they could look at or 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

they should be having discussion about. What are they doing to 
promote the use of hybrid cars? Are they looking at reducing or 
eliminating PST? Are they looking at cheaper licences for those 
cars? Are they looking at cheaper insurance for those vehicles? 
Are they doing anything for that whatsoever? 
 
Are they doing anything for electrical generation? They talk 
about clean coal. They talk about, do they want to remove 
particulate matter from coal. That might be a start but what 
about carbon dioxide? What about other energy options that 
they should be looking at? What about looking at hydro? What 
about looking at nuclear? What about looking at solar energy? 
What about wind energy? What about cogeneration? What 
about geothermal? What about allowing people to sell 
electricity back to the grid when they’ve got a wind charger? 
What about allowing private users to participate in energy 
production in this province? 
 
There is no overall plan. There isn’t even a bunch of band-aids. 
What we have them is running around saying green and 
prosperous, green and prosperous. Well let’s find out what 
they’ve got. Let’s talk about what they plan to do if they have a 
plan whatsoever. And right now they have no plan and no 
vision. 
 
They talk about conservation and they talk about conservation, 
Mr. Speaker, as if it is the only answer to this problem. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it makes sense to talk about conservation but it’s 
not a very inspired idea. You know that if you use less energy, 
you’re going to pay less. You need an IQ [intelligence quotient] 
of about room temperature to realize it makes sense to use 
smaller light bulbs and turn your thermostat down, keep your 
doors and windows closed. You don’t need any more than an 
IQ of room temperature to try and do that. Conservation is good 
practice but it’s not a solution. 
 
We know that the members opposite talk about Kyoto. They 
know that Kyoto means a 10 per cent reduction in the 1990 
consumption and to what was going into our environment in 
1990. What they haven’t looked at is what our changing needs 
and what our requirements are. And for most of them, 1990 
doesn’t seem like a very long time ago. But the reality of it is, 
Mr. Speaker, a lot has happened since 1990, and our 
consumption has gone up substantially. It’s not a matter of 
saying, reduce 10 per cent from what we’re using in 2006 or 
2007. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Right now, right now most homes have computers. Most homes 
have several computers. One or more of those computers are 
left on 24 hours a day to receive or send emails, even when the 
people aren’t home. There was no computers in homes in 1990. 
Many homes now have fax machines. 
 
It used to be in 1990 you may have had a colour television in a 
house. Now a lot of homes have home theatre systems with 
multiple speakers, large screen TV that use several times as 
much electricity. Most homes now have a deep freeze. A lot of 
homes have got a second refrigerator in the basement or 
somewhere else to keep soft drinks or whatever else. 
 
New areas of the city have got homes that . . . The outside light 

used to be one light that would be left on. Now there’s lights 
under the eaves. And I’ve counted in my constituency homes 
with 10, 12, and 14 lights on the outside of the house. 
 
We also have developed an affinity to use clothes dryers, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t talk about going back and using clotheslines 
like our parents and our grandparents did. We use dryers. 
 
It used to be when homes were built in the 1930s and 1940s, 
they were built with a 60-amp service. During the 1950s and 
1960s they went up to 100-amp services. Now homes are being 
built with 200-amp services. 
 
The reality, Mr. Speaker, is simply this. Our per capita 
consumption has grown and will continue to grow. We may use 
smaller light bulbs, and we may do things that are good energy 
practice, but the reality of it is our energy needs are going to 
continue to grow. 
 
And we need to look to that government for some plans and 
some direction. And if not, they will come from this side of the 
House and once again the ideas will get plagiarized. And we’ll 
live with that, and we’ll accept it. It’s a little difficult governing 
when you’re on this side of the House, but we’ve done a not 
bad job in the last while. And we’re going to continue to do it. 
 
While I’m talking about the environment, Mr. Speaker, I 
recently saw Al Gore’s movie, An Inconvenient Truth. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not particularly an Al Gore fan, and I’m not a 
Democrat — either the American variety or the new 
Saskatchewan variety of Democrat. And I may not agree with 
all that Mr. Gore has to say, but I certainly agree with some of 
the problems that he’s identified and some of the conclusions 
and some of the things that we know we have to deal with there. 
 
What I’d like to do is suggest over there, is that the members 
listen to the member from Saskatoon Greystone. He is one of 
the few over there that understand some of the issues there. I 
certainly don’t agree with some of his issues with regard to 
uranium and a number of other issues, but he has some 
understanding of what the needs are to look at alternate energy 
sources. And it’s an unfortunate loss to those members that he’s 
not going to be there. 
 
And I suspect the reason he’s not going to be there is he wants 
to distance himself from those people so that he can be open 
and frank in his criticism of that party and that government. 
And I think, come the next election, we’re going to hear a lot 
from the member of Greystone — and it’s not going to be 
directed to the members over here. It’s going to be directed to 
the members over there for not having any sense of direction or 
anywhere else they’re going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to the environment, there is no silver 
bullet. There is no one solution. There are many steps. We need 
to work hard. We need to provide incentives. We need to look 
at wind. We need to look at geothermal. We need to look at 
solar. We need to look at a variety of other things. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to encourage that government to take some steps to deal 
with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw in the Speech from the Throne reference 
to KidsFirst and pre-natal planning and dealing with FAS [fetal 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

alcohol syndrome] and it’s nothing more than paying a lip 
service to some previous ideas that they’d had before. Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t need to talk about those things. What we 
need to do is put some ideas and some resources in place to try 
and deal with the needs of our children and our youngest and 
most vulnerable members of society. 
 
Right now in this province we’re told that we have some 5,000 
children that are not in school. That’s 5,000 people, 5,000 lives 
that are being wasted. That’s roughly a community the size of 
Rosetown that is being wasted because the children are not 
being educated. They have no hope of becoming meaningful, 
participating members of this society. Mr. Speaker, those are 
lost lives, lost futures. Those children will have nothing but 
problems with justice from here on in. We have to develop a 
method of tracking them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude by referencing the 15 
years that are there. It’s too long and what I’d like to do in 
closing is quote Oliver Cromwell when he said to the Rump 
Parliament: 
 

You have . . . sat [here] to long . . . for any good you . . . 
[can do]. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In 
the name of God, go! 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today 
to add my voice to this debate on the Speech from the Throne. I 
would like to begin by paying tribute to the good people of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. From farmers to foresters, from ranchers 
to diamond drillers, from service providers to tourist operators, 
from francophone communities like Debden to the Big River, 
Wahpeton, Little Red, and Sturgeon Lake First Nations, there is 
a rich diversity of people and occupations in Saskatchewan 
Rivers, and nearly every sector of the provincial economy. And 
a rich diversity of landscape as well — prairie, forest, and 
many, many lakes. 
 
This is lake country, Mr. Speaker. Every summer, and this 
summer was no exception, we welcome visitors from all over 
the province and all over the country. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also 
had visits from members of the opposition and indeed from the 
Leader of the Opposition, and I would expect more and more of 
these visits in the months ahead. I welcome the interest of the 
Sask Party MLAs in Saskatchewan Rivers and I invite them to 
stop in and visit my constituency office any time before and 
after the next election. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, I love the constituency for the same 
reason that I love this province — for the diversity of its people, 
of its landscape, and of its opportunities for both work and 
recreation. I am proud to be its representative here in this 
Assembly. 
 
I would like to acknowledge and thank the community of close 
friends and family that keep me energized, my wife Val, 
daughters Kristin and Erika, my excellent executive and my 
constituency assistants, Barbara Terfloth and Caroline Bendig. 

And I would like here to state my pleasure at the new sessional 
calendar. I thank those who have worked hard to put it together. 
I will still have a total of eight hours of driving time every 
week, but I will now have one day every week with my 
constituents and I am thankful for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is good news for 
Saskatchewan and good news for Saskatchewan Rivers. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, to do any kind of meaningful work you have 
to begin with a philosophy, a set of beliefs, and the Throne 
Speech begins exactly here. Our goal for this session is to make 
life better for the people of this province, for families, for 
seniors and elders, for young people. This is all about quality of 
life. It’s about building on the advantage that we have here in 
Saskatchewan, an advantage that has been created by successive 
governments of Saskatchewan New Democrats. 
 
There are four cornerstones: that we will make Saskatchewan 
the best place for young people to live, work, and play, the best 
place to build a future; that we will continue to lead the way in 
public health care, and this means further reduction in wait 
times and access to services; that we will respond to climate 
change and global warming with a strong green agenda; that 
Saskatchewan families will benefit from the strength of our 
economy. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, cornerstones are traditionally used to 
provide a foundation, usually for a building of some sort. So it 
is with these four cornerstones. They provide a foundation for 
this home of ours, this Saskatchewan, as we begin this session 
and look to the future ahead. 
 
Other members have spoken about each of these cornerstones 
with eloquence and passion. It will be no surprise that I would 
like to focus on our green agenda, particularly the future of 
organic agriculture. 
 
The Speech from the Throne promises to introduce initiatives 
that will expand the production, processing, and marketing of 
local and organic food. Madam Deputy Speaker, one-third of 
the organic farmers in Canada are here in this province — about 
1,300 in all. And in Canada, 60 per cent of the land under 
organic production is here in our province. We lead the nation 
in organic production. 
 
In farm country, there is more and more interest by 
conventional farmers in making the difficult transition to 
organic farming. For economic reasons, yes, to escape from the 
cost-price squeeze that is at the root of the present farm crisis. 
But for other reasons as well; for environmental, health, and 
social reasons. 
 
At the consumer level, you only need to visit the nearest 
grocery store to see what’s happening. The organic section and 
selection is growing, with organic food sales increasing by as 
much as 20 per cent annually. Consumers are more and more 
interested in organic produce, especially if it is local organic 
produce. 
 
We are of course an export economy, but we are an import 
economy as well. We export most of the food we grow but we 
import most of the food we eat. For a province of 43 million 
acres with 45 per cent of the arable land in this country, we 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

have an opportunity to expand the range of food that we grow 
and export, as well as an incredible opportunity to grow more of 
our own food and process it here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So there are great opportunities and challenges that I am 
exploring through my appointment as Legislative Secretary for 
organic farming. And I thank the Premier for engaging me in 
this exciting and rewarding work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — At meetings and forums, in kitchens and 
community halls, at field days and AGMs [annual general 
meeting], I am meeting organic farmers and processors and will 
soon be weaving their ideas into a report for the consideration 
of this government. All I will say now is that there is a spirit of 
excitement and creativity, of breaking new ground in the 
organic sector that I hope to convey in my report. 
 
It will build on the wisdom of long-time organic farmers like 
Elmer Laird of Davidson and will build on the optimism and 
energy of young farmers like Kalissa Regier of Laird, who see 
rural Saskatchewan as a great place for young people to live, 
work, and build a future. And I hope my work can contribute to 
this future. Mr. Speaker, our Speech from the Throne sends a 
clear signal of confidence in the future of organic farming in 
this province. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, with regard to all family 
farmers, the Throne Speech ensures that we will continue to 
fully fund the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program. Madam Deputy Speaker, last weekend at 
one of my constituency’s fowl suppers I ended up in a 
discussion with a farmer from Shipman who summed CAIS up 
well. I don’t want to depend on farm support programs, he said, 
but if I need to, I want them to be fair. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we still don’t know the final fate of 
the CAIS program but right now it’s all the federal government 
can offer, warts and all, and we will fully fund our 40 per cent, 
knowing full well that our proportion is not fair. It is not fair to 
farmers and is not fair to the taxpayers of this province who pay 
three and four times as much as other Canadians on a per capita 
average. 
 
As stated in the Throne Speech, we need the federal 
government to cover its fair share of the CAIS program, to 
commit to an effective new disaster program, and to stand 
firmly in support of our farmers at the WTO [World Trade 
Organization]. And we call on the federal government to stand 
by its own legislation and let farmers decide the future of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We will debate this further in this Assembly because, and I say 
this to the Agriculture critic of the Saskatchewan Party, the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats, who has said publicly that this 
is none of our business. And I say this to the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena who yesterday said essentially the same 
thing. I say to those members that the fate of the Canadian 
Wheat Board most certainly is the business, not only of our 
provincial Minister of Agriculture. It had better be the business 
of the Agriculture critic and of every rural MLA and of every 
member of this Assembly because it will remove 3 to $400 

million from our farm economy every year. And this matters to 
every citizen of this province. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board was created in 1935 in the middle 
of the depression when farmers were in survival mode. There 
was the drought, of course, but there was also the injustice of a 
futures market that played farmers against each other and drove 
grain prices down. In those days, with farmers at the mercy of 
big business, of banks and railways and farm machinery 
companies and grain companies, it was blatantly clear to our 
grandparents and even to successive Conservative and Liberal 
governments that farmers could only survive if they had some 
form of market power. And so along with the formation of 
co-operatives, wheat pools, and credit unions, the Canadian 
Wheat Board was created to empower farmers in the 
marketplace, and in 1943 it was made a single-desk seller of our 
grain. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now over 60 years later we need the wheat board more than 
ever. Farmers are once again in survival mode. Once again 
nature has played its part with drought, early frost, too much 
rain, but once again we have a market economy that puts 
farmers at the mercy of railways, chemical and fertilizer 
companies, huge retailers, and the casino-like vagaries of the 
grain exchange — a cost-price squeeze that has decimated rural 
Saskatchewan. As corporations merge into monopolies, the 
Canadian Wheat Board is the last stand, the last hope for farmer 
power in the marketplace. And its future should be decided by 
farmers, in the words of our Throne Speech, in a open and fair 
plebiscite. 
 
Instead the federal government has said they will not hold a 
plebiscite, although from the news today they seem to be trying 
to save face. They have planned an end to the Canadian Wheat 
Board at closed-door meetings like the one held July 27 in 
Saskatoon. They have muzzled the Canadian Wheat Board from 
promoting its own work and they have, halfway through the 
election of its directors, removed I believe it is 16,000 farmers 
from the voting list. It is clear that the federal Conservative 
government is intent to destroying the wheat board and it won’t 
allow democracy, it won’t allow farmers to get in the way. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the Saskatchewan Party endorses — 
in fact celebrates — this action. 
 
Now I may surprise the members opposite by saying this. I wish 
to commend the members opposite for their position on the 
wheat board. I commend them and I’ll tell you why: because it 
is true to their beliefs. This party, the Saskatchewan Party has 
bent over backwards to hide its right-wing agenda. For this 
party, every day is Halloween. And they’re going door to door 
in this province wearing a middle-of-the-road disguise trying to 
convince people that they are no longer the ghouls they once 
were. But on this issue, on this issue, they show their true 
colours. 
 
You see, what we have here is a clear signal of what would 
happen should the Saskatchewan Party ever, ever gain office in 
this province. In the wheat board we have an organization 
created and protected by federal legislation, operating arm’s 
length from government with a mandate that is supported by the 
majority of farmers. 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

Well in this province we have a number of organizations 
created and protected by provincial legislation operating at 
arm’s length from government and supported by the vast 
majority of citizens and they are, of course, our Crown 
corporations. 
 
I say to the people of this province, you have a Saskatchewan 
Party that essentially wants to see the work of the Canadian 
Wheat Board privatized and deregulated. What makes you 
believe that they will do anything different with our provincial 
Crown corporations? Under their kinder, gentler costume is the 
same old right wing ideology that devastated this province in 
the 1980s. Trick or treat, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
By the way, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would assume the 
Saskatchewan Party also supports the federal Conservative 
position on the Kelowna accord and the cancellation of the early 
learning child care agreement. And the cancellation of literacy 
programs and of the EnerGuide program and of funding to the 
museum existence program. And status of women, as one of the 
members points out. 
 
And to the Canadian volunteerism initiative. And to the 
Saskatchewan forestry centre. And I would assume that the 
Saskatchewan Party supports the softwood lumber agreement 
which disadvantages this province. And I would assume the 
Saskatchewan Party also supports the federal government’s 
reluctance to keep their promise on equalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne, in stark contrast to 
federal and provincial Conservatives, this government pledges 
to deliver our own learning and child care program, to expand 
literacy programs, to support the arts with status of the artist 
legislation, and celebrate the arts through music in 2007. 
 
We will continue to support the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative and we will continue the EnerGuide program on our 
own. We will work with local communities to develop a viable, 
sustainable forest industry in this province and we will, drawing 
on that Saskatchewan sense of determination and fair play, 
force the federal Conservatives to keep their word on 
equalization. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to close by speaking 
briefly about the cornerstone that most defines the future of this 
province — our young people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve worked with young people all my 
life. And so the first person I talked to when we walked out of 
this Assembly, after the Speech from the Throne, was a 
16-year-old boy from Prince Albert. Then in a recent discussion 
with me he gave his impressions of the Throne Speech and I 
quote, “I find it encouraging for us,” he said, “because I’ve been 
here long enough to appreciate what’s beautiful here in this 
province and I like it here.” 
 
This young man took note of the continued freeze on university 
tuition, but the first thing he mentioned was the new statutory 
holiday. With both of his parents working, he sees 
Saskatchewan’s new Family Day as a valuable time for his 
family to be together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Borgerson: — In speaking with a young, Aboriginal 
woman and mother of two children after the Throne Speech, I 
heard the same message. And this is what I’ve heard 
everywhere, Madam Deputy Speaker. People welcome 
pocketbook gains, and so they certainly welcome the 2 per cent 
drop in the PST. But they are more and more interested in 
quality of life, especially young people. I hear more and more 
young people talking about the high cost of living to the west of 
us — the health premiums, the cost of housing. And I also hear 
more and more young people talking about the pace of life, lack 
of community, and the crime rate that accompanies the boom 
next door. On the news a couple of nights ago, we hear that 
Edmonton has the highest homicide rate in the country — 
higher than Vancouver, almost twice Toronto’s. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, at a recent graduation of regional 
college students in Melfort, a young woman from the welding 
program ended her speech by saying and I quote: 
 

I would like to encourage other graduates to make a future 
here in Saskatchewan. I can tell you Alberta is not all it’s 
cracked up to be. 
 

And I think that’s why our new Family Day has resonated so 
strongly with the people of this province. It is after all just one 
day, but it is more than that. It is symbolic. It makes a statement 
that we as a government not only wants Saskatchewan families 
to gain materially from our strong economy; we want 
Saskatchewan families to gain qualitatively from our strong 
economy. This is what a Saskatchewan New Democratic 
government is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — So it’s about time for families. It’s about a 
clean, green environment; food that is safe, healthy, and 
nutritious; communities that are safe; support of the arts, of 
culture, of volunteerism. The Speech from the Throne says and 
I quote: 
 

All of our efforts are toward the goal of making life better 
for Saskatchewan families and contributing to a . . . life 
. . . [that is better than none.] 
 

In a province that is down to earth but the where the sky is the 
limit, we all know that, like the sky, our future is limitless. And 
Connie Kaldor’s words, this is a place, quote, “where the sky is 
bigger than anywhere else, as far as the eye can see.” 
 
And that, Madam Deputy Speaker, is why I will not be 
supporting the amendment but will support the positive vision 
that the Speech from the Throne presented to this Assembly. 
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am proud and honoured to stand 
today and take part in the Throne Speech and represent my 
constituents, the constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook. 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

Before I get into the Throne Speech, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
want to say some thank yous, as most members have done 
already. And the first one I want to say thank you to is to my 
wife and my family. Without them I wouldn’t be able to do the 
job I’m doing here. Without them I wouldn’t be able to have the 
support to do the job here. And I can honestly say that going to 
a four-day week — that the government and the opposition 
have got together on — going to a four-day week, for me to go 
home on four days and having another day at home is great 
news. And I welcomed it. 
 
In regards to my wife and family, this summer has been a trying 
summer. As you know, my home town is Spiritwood. And of 
course Spiritwood was in the news for most of summer — at 
least for a couple months — but not in a good way, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And my constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook 
also suffered losses in my constituency that people in my 
constituency have great losses now. And it will affect them in 
time to come. 
 
For the members that don’t know, it all started out as after the 
session was over. I went home. It was very busy in June as all 
rural areas are busy. You’ve got parades. You’ve got functions 
to go to. So it’s always busy. Then July 7 hit. July 7 hit, and 
that’s when I woke up the next morning and found out that two 
police officers in my town of Spiritwood were murdered. And it 
sent shockwaves across the town, the community, and all of 
Saskatchewan, and Canada. 
 
Unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, I knew both RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. I knew them very well. To 
have their losses in the community of Spiritwood was 
unbelievable. The first person, the first media person that 
phoned me the next day referred to Spiritwood as another 
Mayerthorpe — Mayerthorpe, Alberta. And everybody knows 
what happened at Mayerthorpe. But to be related to 
Mayerthorpe in that manner, in that way, it’s tough. 
 
The ironic thing about that, Madam Deputy Speaker, is when 
the Mayerthorpe tragedy happened, the mayor of Mayerthorpe 
was originally from Spiritwood. He’s a very close colleague 
and a friend of mine. When the Mayerthorpe tragedy happened, 
I phoned him first to give him support. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
Saturday at dinnertime, the first person to phone me to give me 
support — because I’m a politician and I was originally a 
mayor of Spiritwood — was the same gentleman from 
Mayerthorpe. So that’s the connection between Mayerthorpe 
and Spiritwood. 
 
That went on, Madam Deputy Speaker, for about two weeks 
until the gentleman accused of murdering the two RCMP turned 
himself in. But it did not end there, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
The town of Spiritwood and of Mildred and of Shell Lake, 
they’re still hurting, and it’s going to take a long time to heal 
those wounds if they ever do. 
 
Everybody in small-town Saskatchewan, Deputy Speaker, 
knows everybody. We know the people involved, not only the 
RCMP, but the people that were accused of this tragedy. And it 
will go on for a long time. But the people of Spiritwood are 
good people. The people of Shell Lake and Mildred are good 
people. And banding together, we will get through this as did 
the people in Mayerthorpe did. 

After that, Madam Deputy Speaker, or during that period of 
time, I had my nomination and I was seeking for the third term. 
And through a lot of hard work that my wife and my family and 
myself did, I was victorious again, and I will be carrying the 
banners for the Saskatchewan Party in the next upcoming 
election whenever it is called, next time it’s called, for the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, after that happened, then there 
was a great loss to the town of Rosthern and a great loss to this 
Assembly. And that is the passing of a friend to us all here in 
the Assembly in the name of Ben Heppner. Ben Heppner was 
an honourable gentleman everybody knew and everybody 
respected. And personally, as myself, he was a very, very close 
friend. 
 
And when I was first elected in 1999, Ben Heppner was my 
buddy constituency. And I went to him many, many times, and 
he taught me the rules of this place, the rules of this place, the 
dos and don’ts of this place. He even tried to get me to point the 
finger, but I’m not good at that. But we will miss him here. We 
really will. But I will miss him because of the experience he had 
and what he taught me of how the role of being a politician 
could be. And I’m going to miss him. 
 
I now, Madam Deputy Speaker, want to say congratulations to 
the newest member of the Saskatchewan Party, the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy, and I want to welcome him here. 
He’s young, aggressive, and he will carry on the tradition of the 
Saskatchewan Party for years to come. And after the next 
election, I know we will be on that side and with the experience 
that we have that he will gain, he will be on that side in 
government for many years to come. So congratulations to the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I also 
want to say thank you to the members of the FSIN [Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] who were just appointed here 
in a week past. I want to say a special congratulations to Chief 
Lawrence Joseph, as the chief of FSIN. I also want to say a 
special congratulations to first Vice-chief Morley Watson, 
second Vice-chief Guy Lonechild, third Vice-chief Glen Pratt. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to say a special 
congratulations to fourth Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish who is from 
Whitefish First Nations outside of Big River but works in 
Spiritwood at the ATCT building in Spiritwood. And I’ve know 
him for many years, and he’s a good person, and I say to FSIN, 
you’ve gained a valuable source in Lyle Whitefish. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech, we’ve got to 
get to the Throne Speech. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is 
the same old, same old, worn out NDP government that has 
been here for — what? — 15 years. And actually when I look at 
the Throne Speech, Madam Deputy Speaker, God, I have to 
wonder if the paper was worth this Throne Speech to be written 
on. You know we have a lot of problems in the forest industry, 
and when you look and see what this paper went to to present a 
Throne Speech that had nothing in it. But there again, it’s from 
the same old NDP government. 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

Madam Deputy Speaker, here in the Assembly today we had 
question period, and I remember the Leader of the Opposition 
and the member from Saskatoon was arguing about what was in 
our policy and what they’ve taken from their policy and in the 
Throne Speech, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is a section and I 
will quote: 
 

In this Session, legislation will be passed to dedicate every 
dollar of fuel tax collected by the province from motorists 
toward the maintenance and building of Saskatchewan’s 
road network. 
 

Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you refer to the 2005 
Saskatchewan Party policy guide and what does it read there on 
HT05-5: investing all provincial sales tax and transportation 
infrastructure. It says, I quote: 
 

Be it resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government . . . 
[would] commit, as a . . . [minimal], all provincial fuel 
taxes collected to fund provincial and municipal 
transportation infrastructure construction and renewal in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Well where’d they get that from? They say they don’t take 
anything from the Saskatchewan Party, and it’s written right 
here that they did. And that’s only one of the many, many 
resolutions that we have put forth in papers previous that the 
NDP have taken from us. 
 
So it begs the fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, who is running the 
province? We on this side here, Madam Deputy Speaker, have 
come up with resolutions when they’ve asked. We’ll come up 
with resolutions. But you know something? The NDP are taking 
them. So it begs the question, who’s running the province? It 
looks more and more like the Saskatchewan Party is running the 
province, not the government in power — the NDP. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I also want to bring to light a 
comment made in his Speech from the Throne, the member 
from Regina Coronation. And in it he says, and I quote: 
 

Fifteen years ago the deficit, the annual deficit in 
Saskatchewan, was $1.1 . . . [million] and the total debt 
was fifteen and a half billion dollars. Such huge debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and one million people left with the mortgage. 
 

Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I also look at the report from the 
Provincial Auditor. And I can honestly say, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I’m no accountant, but I do know that running a 
business for myself for many years I’ve gained some aspect as 
to how the books are run. And when I look at the report from 
the Provincial Auditor, I look on page 34. And on page 34 it 
says, understanding the finances of government. It says that 
“. . . amounts owed . . . [by] unfunded pension liability has 
increased to $4.3 billion.” But that we can’t control— either 
side — but it’s increased. 
 
But on the chart that’s prepared for us, it starts off with the 
Crown debt, and it also talks about the debt of the province. 
Well if you look at 1991, the Crown debt in 1991 was 2.8 
billion. You add that to the debt of the province, as far as the 
operating debt, was 12.1. And you add them together — and I 
believe that my addition is right and when I went to school and 

finished my grade 12 — it came to 14.9. If you go to 2006, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and you look at the Crown debt, you 
don’t look at the liability, pension liability, but you look at the 
debt of the province which, according to the NDP, has gone 
down . . . And rightfully so. It says 11.1; from 12.1 down to 
11.1 from ’91 to 2006. You add that together, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and that is 16.7 billion, 16.7 billion. 
 
Remember in 1991 we only had 14.9 billion. So in my figures I 
would say it went up. And the member from Northcote agrees 
with me. And I’m glad you agree because that’s what the 
Provincial Auditor says. So who are you going to argue with? I 
mean I don’t know, Madam Deputy Speaker, but I can honestly 
say by looking at this paper and understanding the finances of 
government, I will believe the Provincial Auditor before I 
believe the government. I can guarantee you that. 
 
Secondly, Madam Deputy Speaker, I noticed that everyone 
from the government side stands up and they talk about the 13 
consecutive balanced budgets, 13 consecutive budgets. Well 
again, Madam Deputy Speaker, I look at the Provincial Auditor 
on page no. 7 — and remember I’m not one that is an 
accountant or anything — but I look at the chart on page 7 and 
out of those 15 years I believe there is . . . Let’s see, 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7 that are deficit budgets. Seven are deficit budgets. Not 13 
consecutive balanced budgets. Only eight balanced budgets. 
 
So who do we believe again, Madam Deputy Speaker? I can 
guarantee you the people of Saskatchewan will believe the 
Provincial Auditor because I can guarantee you the members on 
this side of the House, that’s who we put our faith in to running 
the books, is the Provincial Auditor. And he gives a very, very 
clear view of what is in this book, and it is the actual truth. And 
I guarantee you that next time around, the next election, when 
we bring these reports out to the people, they will believe us 
and not the NDP. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the Throne Speech under the four 
cornerstones it talks about, and I quote, “Make Saskatchewan 
. . . [a better] place for young people to live, work and build 
strong futures.” 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege two weeks 
ago of going to a school. I was invited to a school — and it was 
the Leask school — to talk to the high school kids. And as the 
member before me from Saskatchewan Rivers talked about 
talking to kids and loved doing that, I also love doing that. I 
enjoy going to kids. 
 
So I went to the Leask school, and I talked about my role as a 
politician, my role as an opposition politician, somewhat the 
role of the government — and I had never been there, so I can’t 
really comment on that a lot. But I talked to them about what it 
is like to be a politician and how would a guy get there. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, after I finished, I allowed them to ask 
questions. And I can guarantee you, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the kids in rural Saskatchewan have a very good idea of 
politics. And they asked me some good questions. Some were 
hard. 
 
But after the questions I asked them . . . And there was roughly 
18 kids in the school, a split between First Nations and white 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

people. I said to them, of the 18 students that are here today, 
how many students plan on leaving the province if and when 
they finish their high school? And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 16 
hands went up. Two did not. So I asked them, are you planning 
on staying in Saskatchewan? And they said, yes, we are. One 
wants to go to university, and he is going to the University of 
Saskatchewan. Then he plans on going to Alberta. So, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, out of that class, 90 per cent of the students 
there plan on going got Alberta. 
 
So what does that say for this government? How are they going 
to recruit and stay students in this province when at a very 
young age in school, they are already talking about going out of 
province. They are going to Alberta. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I noticed that the member from North 
Battleford was chirping from his chair. And I also know that he 
is also the Minister for Health. And in the last couple of days I 
have raised questions in this House regarding the Spiritwood 
Hospital. And it’s not just the Spiritwood Hospital that I’m 
worried about. It’s all rural hospitals, and that is in recruiting 
and retention of rural doctors. 
 
And I know that the minister from North Battleford, the 
Minister of Health, has a challenge. but this is the same 
challenge that has been going on and on and on. And we 
haven’t heard anything that’s going to change that other than an 
oh well, and this happens from time to time. Well that’s not 
good enough for rural Saskatchewan. These people that live in 
rural Saskatchewan rely on the services of health. We have a 
right to that. 
 
But now when you look at the town of Spiritwood and the 
communities surrounding Spiritwood, they will look at going to 
Shellbrook which is only about . . . well not quite an hour, very 
close to an hour drive. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, Shellbrook 
is in the same crisis as what Spiritwood is. They have a 
five-doctor situation. They’ve lost one doctor, and the fourth 
doctor that they have has to write an exam here very shortly 
within the next couple weeks and if he does not pass that exam, 
he will have to leave. They will be down to three doctors. 
 
I agree with the minister from North Battleford. I hope he 
passes his exam. We need him here in Saskatchewan. Yes, we 
need him here in the town of Shellbrook. 
 
North of Shellbrook is Big River. It’s out of my constituency 
but it is also having a doctor problem. They have a two-doctor 
system and there’s only one doctor there. The doctors from 
Shellbrook, from Spiritwood, and from Big River have been 
relying on locums to come in and fulfill that need. There is a 
shortage of locums. That is what happened in the Spiritwood 
case when they had to shut it down for a weekend. They could 
not retain or bring in a locum to fulfill that weekend. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I say to the NDP government that 
we need changes and we need to do more in rural Saskatchewan 
because we can’t keep funnelling our people, our patients from 
rural Saskatchewan into the big centres who are already 
overworked. They’re busting at the seams already, and we can’t 
keep doing it to the people because what about the people that 
live in the big centres like Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince 
Albert? Where are they going to go for their health services if 

those spots are taken by rural people? We need changes and I 
hope the Minister of Health, the member from North Battleford, 
takes this into account because we need changes and we need 
them now. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if it’s not bad enough in the town of 
Shellbrook that they’re having some doctor problems, last year 
it was announced that there’s going to be some rural 
maintenance shops closed down and Shellbrook was slated for 
closure. We know it’s closed because the members working out 
of Shellbrook are coming to Spiritwood. The question I have for 
the Minister of Highways, the member from Northcote is, in 
Spiritwood there’s a new building attached to the old building. 
That building is a cost of $515,000. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that building is only a 40 by 50 garage. How in the world can 
you spend $515,000 on that building? It just blows me away. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Furthermore, Madam Deputy Speaker, the building that’s still 
in Shellbrook today is perfectly good. There’s nothing wrong 
with it. Why didn’t the minister at that time look at moving the 
building from Shellbrook to Spiritwood and attaching it? It 
would have been a heck of a lot cheaper — a heck of a lot 
cheaper, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I see my time has run out. I feel I just 
got into it. And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will be 
supporting the amendment put forth by the member from 
Weyburn and seconded by the member from Cannington, but I 
will not be supporting the budget . . . or the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from 
Athabasca, the Minister for Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Chair. First of all, I want to stand up today and proudly support 
the Speech from the Throne. I think the Speech from the Throne 
certainly sets the tempo, Madam Deputy Speaker. I think it’s 
important that people of Saskatchewan know that this is 
certainly an opportunity for them to share the wealth and share 
the opportunities that we enjoy as a province. 
 
And it was really a tremendous opportunity today, Madam 
Deputy Chair . . . or Speaker, when we seen a number of MLAs 
that served with this government in the early years, and I’m 
talking 1991 of course to 1995 and 1999. And as I sat there and 
I was thinking, as a number of them helped us celebrate our 15 
years in government today, one of them made a comment today 
that I think really had a profound effect on me. And that 
comment spoke of the fact that they had to clean up an 
incredible mess, Madam Deputy Speaker — an incredible mess. 
 
And Saskatchewan was on the verge of bankruptcy. And as they 
spoke, as they spoke, some of the members spoke of the really 
tough times that they had when they took over in 1991 from the 
then premier, Grant Devine. There was incredible sacrifices that 
they had to make and many, many meetings, sometimes three or 
four o’clock in the morning. But as they went on, Madam 
Deputy Chair . . . Speaker, as they went on about some of the 
meetings and some of the experiences, some of their stories and 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

some of the comments that other people had to do and some of 
the work they had to do and the comments they had, it really 
had a profound effect on me because one individual wrapped it 
up and said, had we not done the work then, we would not be 
enjoying what we have today. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is absolutely, absolutely 
true. We owe to those individuals who came here and sat in the 
back and watched from a distance because they’re no longer 
elected. We had to show them appreciation for the work that 
they did and the sacrifices that they made and the amount of 
communication and the amount of meetings and the amount of 
trips that they had to take to make sure people understood the 
mess that we were in, and the work that they had to do to bring 
this province back from the brink of bankruptcy, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And who do we thank? Right over there. And every one of them 
when they get up to speak about a Family Day, oh they don’t 
support the Speech from the Throne. So they’re speaking 
against the Family Day. Oh they don’t support the whole notion 
of a 2 per cent PST cut. Because they don’t support that, so 
we’re going to vote against that. Well you know, the other thing 
they can say is, oh it was our idea. It was our idea that the NDP 
government had all these ideas. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
those guys are only four years old and they act like 
four-year-olds. 
 
But the problem that we have here is that, who done the work? 
Who made all the sacrifices? Who showed all that 
commitment? And certainly who showed all the discipline, 
Madam Deputy Speaker? Well certainly from my perspective it 
was a group of ladies and gentlemen across the back row here, 
that we pay tribute to today. They’re the ones that should be 
recognized, and of course the many others that served in this 
party long before I arrived. 
 
And as I sat here and listened to the doom and gloom and, oh 
my goodness, the world is falling . . . Why is it that every time a 
good announcement comes out — like the Speech from the 
Throne speaks about a Family Day — oh, they cringe, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They cringe at good news. And they talk about 
the 2 per cent PST cut. Oh, they were really sad that day. 
 
And you know what, Madam Deputy Speaker? When you look 
at the difference between Saskatchewan and Alberta, we only 
look at . . . no need to look further than what they pay in a 
health premium, the cost of living in Alberta and, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, what it costs to buy supplies, food, and the list 
goes on and on and on. And when you incorporate those costs, 
you can see that Saskatchewan — as the Throne Speech 
suggests — is the best place to raise a family and to bring 
young people to start careers. 
 
And it’s going to be done in a sustainable, green economy, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And that really speaks well of what 
this government’s intention is. And I think it pays tribute to 
those people that came here today and all the sacrifices that they 
made. And all they can say to him across the way is oh, you 
know, that was our idea. Yes. Well you know what they say — 
whatever. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I listened to the member from 

Arm River. You know, he was going on and on about what the 
problems are, and oh my goodness, this is happening; the world 
is falling. And I looked at the election results of his. He lost 
every major centre in his riding last time. And it makes it sound 
like he’s this great messiah from his region, Arm River. The 
fact of the matter is I think he lost Davidson by a substantial 
amount. I think he lost Craik by a substantial amount. I think he 
lost every major town in his riding. Every major town, he lost. 
 
And I think, I think when he makes a statement, when he makes 
a statement, he says to the people, well I believe that’s what 
happened. Well he believes what he wants to believe. 
 
The bottom line on this side of the Assembly — we are going to 
make a significant difference with this Speech from the Throne. 
And we’re not going to sit back and listen to the bafflegab that 
comes from that member from Arm River or any member from 
across the way because it’s exactly what people of 
Saskatchewan said to them in 1991, 1999, 1995, and 2003 — 
we don’t buy your rhetoric; we don’t buy your agenda. And we 
know who you guys are and what you represent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The other day, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the member from . . . I’m not sure where the riding is. 
She spoke of how we need to help the children. I think it’s 
Kelvington-Wadena, I think. And anyway she spoke about 
trying to help the children. Well wasn’t it that same party that 
was proposing a $50 million cut to social services? That was the 
same party. And now they’re here again crying crocodile tears 
— oh the poor children; why don’t you help families? And 
that’s exactly what the Speech from Throne does. It talks about 
raising families, in helping families. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government has done a 
tremendous amount not only for bringing back this province 
from the brink of bankruptcy that that party was a part of but 
really trying to build a future here for young people and for 
families. And I say that’s a tremendous accomplishment on our 
part, and this government should be commended full well 
knowing that many pioneers of our party and many people that 
served in early years, they’re also to be commended and 
recognized, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I will point out again that the other critical part of that party 
opposite, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that when it comes to 
Saskatchewan they do not have one good word to say about 
Saskatchewan. Not one good word. Their vision is non-existent. 
Their plan is just a bunch of words; it has no targets. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, every time somebody speaks 
glowingly of Saskatchewan they become offended and they 
certainly become depressed. Why is that? 
 
And the other thing that’s amazing, I think, to people of the 
North is they talk to people, they say, oh we need less 
government. We need less government, less government in your 
face, less rules and regulations, less government. Well I tell 
people back home, they talk about less government. Well why 
do you want to be government? Because the bottom line is you 
want to diminish this province to a point where the work that 
you began in the ’80s, you want to come along in 2007 or 2008 
when we next call the election, you want to finish that job. You 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

want to finish this province off so end up being nothing. That’s 
exactly what that party opposite wants to do, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But our Speech from the Throne talks about a number of 
fantastic things for the North and I want to spend a bit of time 
on that, all the while knowing no matter what is being said 
across the way, we just don’t buy it, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and we will never buy it. We know what they are. We know 
what they represent. And they know what they’re going to do to 
this province if they ever form government which I know will 
never happen, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
First of all I want to point out that this party and this 
government, through the Speech from the Throne, spoke about 
a Family Day beginning February 2007, which is a fantastic 
opportunity for families to get together. They are going to 
expand partnerships for First Nations and Métis people, to 
enhance education and skills training for Aboriginal youth, 
which makes it a good place for this province to live for young 
people because many young people are of Aboriginal ancestry. 
 
It’s going to talk about providing support for children with 
mental, physical or behavioural disabilities and disorders 
because they’re part of Saskatchewan. It’s an opportunity for 
them as well, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We want to talk about a national summit on Aboriginal 
economic development in partnership with First Nations, Métis, 
and Inuit. We’re going to hold that. This province is going to 
host that. That event will be held and what it gives us an 
opportunity to do is to hear from Aboriginal people and to 
showcase the power and the might they have when it comes to 
the economy. And you don’t need to look further than some of 
the examples in SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority]. Some of the other examples I noticed in the ABEX 
[Achievement in Business Excellence] award that there was a 
gentleman who had an oil well company that was doing quite 
well, won Business of the Year. I don’t have his name handy. I 
also notice that people like Chief Darcy Bear out at Whitecap, 
he’s doing a tremendous amount of good work for his people. 
And those are the kind of people we need to showcase. 
 
And what does this government want to do in the Speech from 
the Throne? They want to recognize them. They want to put 
them on a pedestal. They want to learn from them so they can 
have a more powerful Aboriginal population in this province to 
become a true and equal partner in Saskatchewan as a whole, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re also doing the commitment to make sure that families in 
Saskatchewan have the lowest bundle — whether you’re paying 
for your power, your telephone, insurance, and the list goes on. 
I believe we have met our target and again we made that 
commitment in our Throne Speech. And I think that’s 
something that people in Saskatchewan appreciate, because all 
you got to do is go to Alberta for a day and you see what people 
are paying there in insurance and I can tell you it is an 
astronomical amount. 
 
There are many, many young people with one or two accidents 
that are paying two or three times more for insurance on their 
vehicle or their licence as opposed to here. And I think that’s 

something that the whole world should know and that should be 
spread out throughout all of our speeches. But not one kind 
word from the members opposite, because they don’t want to 
show people how great Saskatchewan is. 
 
And if Saskatchewan was so bad, why do we have so many 
people buying land and buying homes and buying buildings all 
throughout Saskatchewan? And they’re buying them from 
Ontario. They’re buying them from Alberta. They’re buying 
them from Manitoba. We’ve got a lot of people showing a lot of 
interest in Saskatchewan because this is a good province. And 
that party opposite has got to get with the program. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the other thing that’s really 
important to me in the North is working on the abandoned mine 
strategy. As we know, we enjoy the uranium mining industry in 
Saskatchewan. I’m a strong proponent of that. And we have 
agreed to work with the federal government and the mining 
sector to look at the abandoned mines issue and to clean up all 
those northern mines. And northern people love a clean 
environment and that, Madam Deputy Speaker, also is noted in 
the Throne Speech. 
 
We’re also examining the impact of the overtime exemption 
that currently exists in northern Saskatchewan. And my 
colleague from Regina — I’m not sure of the constituency — 
he’s travelled . . . Northeast, Regina Northeast. He’s travelled 
throughout the North. And I made a comment on the radio that 
Ron Harper’s not just another guy from the South trying to tell 
us what to do. He’s really a guy trying to help out many 
workers in the North. And that’s my quote, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We want to maximize business training and employment 
opportunities. We want to continue the tuition freeze for an 
additional year. We want to legislate passing every dollar 
collected for fuel tax towards the maintenance and the building 
of Saskatchewan’s roads. And northern people will benefit from 
that. And the list goes on. 
 
And all this great fantastic news, all the great fantastic news, 
and what happens across the way? Oh we want to do something 
different. Well the people of Saskatchewan are just tired. 
They’re tired of the negativity, the doom and the gloom. And 
every time something great happens in Saskatchewan, people 
celebrate. You know, they celebrate. Right on. PST cut — 
perfect. That’s what we need to do. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And we see the costs of living in Alberta are high, but we’re 
getting our taxes reduced. Oh Saskatchewan’s a great place to 
live, work, and raise a family. It’s a great place to have an 
opportunity, whether it’s education or a career for young 
people. It’s going to be done in a sustainable green economy. 
And all these great, great initiatives and great accomplishments, 
and who’s the unhappy bunch, Madam Deputy Speaker? Right 
across the way. Right across the way. You know why they’re 
unhappy? Because it’s the right thing to do for Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re here to build up Saskatchewan, not Alberta and not any 
other province in the world except our home and our home 
province. And those guys don’t like it. And so they don’t like 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

Saskatchewan. They don’t like Saskatchewan. They don’t like 
us owning the utilities. They don’t like us paying down debt. 
They don’t like us investing in Indian and Métis opportunities. 
They don’t like us pushing health care and building up 
educational opportunities for everybody. They don’t like the 
tuition freeze. 
 
Well every time we do something fantastic, their job is to knock 
it down. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, they knock 
Saskatchewan down every single day. And they use the words 
that government, but really they mean that province. And that’s 
exactly their agenda. And they do not, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
they do not have any plans — no plans, no experience, so no 
way will they ever form government. 
 
And that’s why today I’ll speak proud and loud against the 
amendment that they have foolishly thrown up. And I’ll stand in 
full support of this Throne Speech that has vision, dedication, 
discipline, and a history of support from many of our former 
colleagues and really paves the way to the brand new century, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a privilege and honour to get up to speak today on the 
Throne Speech. I listened to the member opposite’s speech, and 
I’ll certainly have to check Hansard. I know in his last response 
he had 12 words on his portfolio. I think he even underdid that 
this time with less words. 
 
You know, he’d mentioned about Chief Darcy Bear and their 
involvement. I would like to bring to his attention, when there 
was an announcement at Dakota Dunes for the opening of the 
casino, that there were three members of government there — 
my colleague from Cannington, my colleague from Saskatoon 
Southeast, and myself. Nobody from the government showed 
up, not even the Minister of Industry and Resources. You know 
they had a shovel there for him. I’m sure they knew where to 
tell him for the shovel. He never even showed up out of 
courtesy to that organization. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to give a little background on 
myself and coming to Saskatchewan. I came from Toronto — 
which most of us jokingly say the centre of the universe — and 
when we arrived here in Regina in 1988 we made a quick 
decision, a family decision, that we really liked this province 
and that we wanted to stay here and make it home. We were 
coming on a short-term package, but we made the decision that 
we would continue on while we were looking at where we 
wanted to form life. We knew it was here. We knew it was here 
in Saskatchewan right away. 
 
We moved to Saskatoon in 1991, 1992. And I just want to tell 
you that we fell in love with the city. We fell in love with the 
people. Saskatoon Northwest is where I ran, where I made my 
home, where I own my business. And it was so great to be out 
and meet the people in that region and understand what their 
concerns were. It was also very good at that time and had the 
opportunity to run against the former minister of Finance. And 

it was a pleasure on election day to know that the people chose 
a different vision. 
 
You know, one of the things that we noticed when we came to 
Regina and came to Saskatchewan was that the first impact you 
get is that — and this was long before I even thought of politics 
— was that the government continually wanted to bring this 
province down to a common denominator. It was about 
everything of being mediocre. It was nothing about growing the 
province, nothing about things for children to stay here long 
term. 
 
You know, this government always tries to belittle this 
province. You know we have a Premier who calls it the wee 
province. And I’ve noticed that the government always wants to 
bring things to an equilibrium. You know the Premier’s canoe 
story I think is a prime example of that as to when we always 
want things to be together and that everybody in the province 
finished last. And that’s not with the people. 
 
I think my member from Weyburn said it correctly when the 
young people, they want to know something about the future of 
this province. This government traditionally lives in the past. 
 
You know they talked about balanced budgets. And yet when 
you read the auditor’s report, you have to ask what document 
they’re reading. You know, they haven’t had 15 or 13 balanced 
budgets. Read the report. 
 
You know, it was interesting just a little while ago when 
Mitchell’s Foods announced in Saskatoon that they were no 
longer coming to this province. What happened? You know, the 
Premier was asked a question by the press. You know, would 
you respond to this? And the Premier said no, I’ll have the 
Minister of Resources respond to it; he knows more about this 
file. Well ironically Mitchell’s is located in the Premier’s 
riding. You think he would want to speak to the issue. You 
think he would want to tell the employees. You think he would 
want to tell the people of his own constituency. You think he 
would want to respond to that. But no, he pushed it off. He 
didn’t want to talk about it. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, you know, what’s new for 
this Throne Speech? You know, we have more promises. When 
I first came here and first got involved in politics I thought the 
two issues that the NDP had over the Saskatchewan Party were 
health issues and social services. Well I certainly got a rude 
awakening to both of those areas. You know, I thought that the 
strength of them was in those areas. When I became involved in 
social services I found out that that wasn’t correct. 
 
You know, let’s take a look at a list in hospital care: longest 
waiting lists of anywhere in Canada; lack of doctors and nurses; 
lack of front-line workers. I listened to the debate with my 
colleague the other day and the Minister of Health about 
oncologists, whether it should be seven, eight, or nine. And I 
was sitting there thinking to myself, God forbid we would want 
to have one more and have eight, nine, or ten, so that we could 
clean up the waiting list. God forbid that we would have an 
extra one in case one left, so that we would be ahead of the 
program. 
 
But you see, that is not living in the past; that’s living in the 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

future and that’s planning ahead. That’s looking to what needs 
to be done and doing it and not saying we are always going to 
set levels at the bare minimum, that that’s all we need. You 
know, in this minister . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, he’s 
beaking now about different kinds of oncologists. He knows 
exactly what I’m talking about and he can beak on all he wants. 
You know the number is that he needs one more than we need. 
And he can’t even fulfill them. The ones he’s talking about are 
not even here and working. What about the people that are 
waiting in the interim between those times and those wait lists? 
And what happens if another leaves? 
 
You know, future-thinking people would look ahead and say, 
what we need in this province is 11 because we know there’ll 
be attrition. We know there’ll be changes in demographics. And 
for us we would look at it and say, we know we’re going to 
grow this province so we need more. 
 
You know, when you look at social services . . . and we had 
some fine examples of that in the last few days. You know what 
really, what really got to me was the fact . . . the number of 
cases that I get in my office on a weekly basis. And the ironic 
part is the majority of these cases come from the Premier’s 
riding. And you have to ask yourself, why are they coming to 
my office? Why are they coming and asking for assistance from 
this government, which isn’t doing their job? Why can’t they 
come and why can’t they go to the Premier’s office — it’s right 
there on 22nd Street — and get assistance? Why do they have 
to come all the way to the north end of the city? 
 
I’ll tell you why. Because they know we’ll do something about 
it. They know we’ll take their case forward. They know we 
have an interest level in it. They know it’s not a political 
decision. It’s a decision of looking after the people’s needs. 
 
And the minister that was just up prior to me, how much did he 
want to talk about social services? Very little. He wanted to talk 
in the past. I would think he would be proud to get up and talk 
about his file and what he’s doing and the changes he is going 
to make to these people’s lives on a daily basis. 
 
You know, foster families was an issue that we debated in this 
House. And the minister had a situation where he went out and 
tried to increase the number of foster families in this province 
— very laudable goal. But what he didn’t do was consult with 
Foster Families Association, the people that deal with it, to get 
their input into the situation. 
 
And ironically I thought he would’ve wanted to stand up today 
and say we’ve grown it by 50 families or 100 families or 200 
families. No, he didn’t want to talk about that. He didn’t want to 
tell about what his advertising did to increase the number of 
foster families in this province and help with children. 
 
We know that in Saskatoon for instance, we know there are five 
foster families that well exceed the government minimums, the 
mandates. And I would think he would’ve been proud to get up 
today and to say, we’ve resolved that issue. I would think as his 
portfolio, he would want to tell this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan the job he’s done to solve that problem. But not a 
word. Haven’t heard one word from him about that. 
 
You know, we have a lot of serious issues that are going on. I 

met with some families from Alvin Buckwold Centre about a 
week ago with a couple of my colleagues. I just want to go on 
on this subject for a couple of minutes if you will. These people 
at Alvin Buckwold Centre deal with the most needy of our 
children — children that have disabilities. Interestingly enough, 
listening to them, they haven’t had an increase in staffing since 
1980 — 1980. They are handling families all across this 
province. You know they deal with 4,000 families in that centre 
and no increase in staffing. 
 
You know, I would think that the minister would want to get up 
and say he’s going to resolve that issue. He’s going to look into 
it. He’s going to help these people. He’s going to double their 
staff. He’s going to deal with it — 4,000 families using this 
facility that need help, need care for their children, that haven’t 
had an increase since 1980. 
 
I would think that would be a major issue for this government, a 
government that founds itself on social services. It’s ironic. You 
know, they got an increase of $250,000 — 4,000 families. 
Regina, which has 1,000 families, got an increase of $250,000. 
That’s very interesting. We have the same amount so that we 
keep in this government’s mind everything being even. We sure 
wouldn’t want anybody getting ahead. 
 
You know, the mothers that were there were asking me, we 
need respite. When we looked at respite forms, an educated 
mother from the university said, Mr. Merriman I got to the 
second page and gave up. She said, I don’t have the time or the 
emotional ability to deal with this. She said that report is so 
thick, to get help, I can’t get through it. Four thousand children 
needing help, needing their budget doubled, need an increased 
staff. Where are the plans to educate these people so that we 
have a lot of these people that can become therapists? Where is 
the government’s vision on how to deal with this? When is the 
minister going to speak to his portfolio instead of historical 
rhetoric? 
 
You know, I’d like to go on about the need of many people in 
the community with the Project Hope. You know this is 
something that I’m obviously very familiar with. You know it’s 
interesting that all of the plans we have and all of the things 
we’ve seen which are the critical mass of what we need, 
everything is coming in 2008. That’s an interesting aspect. You 
know, not today when the kids need it today, when kids are 
dying today and yesterday — 2008. And what are we building? 
We’re building, at $3 million, 15 beds for detox. 
 
Well let me tell you about another group in this province that 
did something about it; the group that that government doesn’t 
want to talk about because it’s a group called Teen Challenge. 
And they don’t want to talk about it because it’s a faith-based 
organization, and God forbid we were to say that. 
 
Except what they don’t understand, that every organization that 
deals with addicted kids is a faith-based organization. Their 
own program runs on faith-based. It’s run to a 12-step program, 
and one of the steps in that program are to a higher power. 
Aboriginal programs are run on faith-based, so why can’t this 
program run on faith-based? I have seen the results of this 
program. Has anyone from that side been there to see these 
young people that have come from despair back into society? 
No, they won’t because it’s a bad word — that Teen Challenge 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

with faith-based organization. 
 
Well, you know, I heard on the news that the new government 
detox centre is going to be $3 million. I just want to report that 
prior to Christmas, Teen Challenge will be opening 25 new 
beds, with a kitchen, a dormitories, a chapel facility, for a half a 
million dollars. Now isn’t that ironic how that can be done? 
 
[16:15] 
 
I also want to report that Teen Challenge is now out fundraising 
to put a women’s facility . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh so 
now we can hear the minister from Yorkton beak because he 
doesn’t take this seriously. He can beak all he wants about it. 
He doesn’t take drug issues with children seriously. He wants to 
get into a debate about what we’re going to cut. I want to get 
into a debate about what they’re going to do, not what they’re 
going to cut. When are they going to take this seriously and get 
on with it? 
 
You know, who closed Whitespruce? The Premier of this 
province closed Whitespruce. He closed a facility that was state 
of the art. And yet in the last session, the minister tried to tell 
me it’s still open. What a . . . still open. 
 
You know, it’s interesting that we have these requirements in 
our communities, that this government gets up and — I’ve 
heard it in speech after speech — say, our children are our 
future. They continually say, our children are our future, and yet 
everything they do doesn’t demonstrate that. We saw that in the 
House today. We saw that in the House for the last four days 
when we talk about Oyate and children at risk on the inner 
streets of Regina. You know, the organization that we . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member of Saskatoon 
Northwest has the floor, and I’d ask members to respect that 
and let him continue. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. You 
know, the member from Yorkton says, Whitespruce never got 
cut. Well that’s a revelation to the million people that live here 
because all of us know it has been cut. And how he could make 
that statement is just ironic, you know. I guess that’s like the 
pathologist that they have up in Yorkton that really they don’t 
have yet. 
 
You know, it’s talking about futures. What we’re trying to say, 
and what we’ve been saying all along from this side of the 
House, is that we need to plan for the future, not the past. They 
want to deal in the past. They want to deal from 60 years ago, 
30 years ago. And as my colleague from Weyburn states, the 
young people want to hear about the future. They want to know 
where we’re going. They want to know what we’re creating in 
this province. 
 
And I can tell you that the parents that are dealing with these 
at-risk children, the parents that are dealing from Alvin 
Buckwold, they want this government to step up and do the job 
that it’s doing and fund these programs properly. 
 
You know, this government has $50 million sitting in a fund for 
business investment, something that can certainly be proven 
that they don’t have a lot of expertise in. Can you imagine what 

that $50 million can do? Two point five million doubles Alvin 
Buckwold’s budget — $2.5 million, $2.5 million. We can now 
get more therapists, respite care for . . . There’s 4,000 families 
that use that facility. Two point five million dollars in Regina, if 
that’s what it is, will help those thousand families in there that 
need the help. 
 
So where do we want to put our money? They talk about the 
future. They talk about the great Throne Speech, but what they 
haven’t talked about is the kids in this province. They haven’t 
talked about investing where they need to invest, in places like 
Alvin Buckwold Centre, in places like Teen Challenge, in 
long-term addiction treatment centres. 
 
I was at a drug court convention in Edmonton a few weeks ago 
when the head of the drug court was there, that we have set up 
in October. And it was quite interesting that he had said it 
started in October 4, and they were just getting organized. And 
there was the chief of drug squads from Saskatoon and the 
RCMP drug squad from Regina — the head of that — and I 
went over and said, well what do you know about this? And 
both of them said, that’s the first we’ve ever heard of it. Can 
you imagine that? We open a drug squad and the two . . . drug 
court, and the two people that should be intimately familiar with 
that heard about it at a conference. 
 
What does that tell you? That tells me about consultation. It 
tells me about consultation with foster families. It tells me about 
consultation with people at Alvin Buckwold Centre. It tells me 
a lot. It tells me about a minister that isn’t doing his file. 
 
You know I would thought he would want to get up today and 
be proud of what he’s doing in this department. But I know, I 
know because I deal with these people every day coming into 
my office, these people with family issues, that they don’t want 
to deal with. You know, he says when I called him twice, he 
didn’t return my call because his staff didn’t want to talk. 
 
Well the two cases I wanted to talk to him privately, because he 
needed his intervention, are both before the courts now. Both of 
these could have been solved if he’d have picked up the phone 
like his colleagues does and be courteous enough to call me 
back. 
 
I don’t use his office lightly. When I call him, it’s an 
emergency. And yet he says he was on holidays. That was four 
months ago. So he’s either getting more holidays than I am or 
whatever. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, Throne Speech should be 
about the future. But more importantly, it should be 
implementing things of the future. It should be dealing with our 
children. It should be dealing with the serious issues that this 
province is dealing with, with the 78,000 people that are on 
some form of social assistance. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ll wind up by saying that I will not 
be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina 
Northeast. 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate, the debate 
on the Throne Speech. First I want to take this opportunity to 
congratulate my good friend and colleague, the member from 
Regina Coronation Park, for his eloquent job in moving the 
Throne Speech. He did I’m sure challenge Hansard in 
describing all of the terms that he used during his speech but 
I’m sure Hansard would be up to meeting that challenge. 
 
I did review the content of his Throne Speech and I compared it 
to the content of the mover of the Throne Speech from last year 
and I must admit he came close — did not surpass the bar — 
but he did come close to meeting the bar that was set by the 
hon. member and my seatmate from last year’s Throne Speech. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the member 
from . . . my former seatmate, the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains, for her seconding of the Throne Speech. 
Likewise I did the same. I compared the content of her Throne 
Speech to the content of the seconder of the Throne Speech 
from last year. And I can assure all my colleagues that she far 
surpassed the bar that was set by that member. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to welcome the new member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy to this legislature. I want to 
congratulate him on his election, congratulate him on taking his 
seat here. I hope he enjoys his time here. It is truly an honour — 
as he has already mentioned in his speech — it’s truly an 
honour to have the privilege of serving the people of 
Saskatchewan in your constituency in this great forum. It’s truly 
an honour and I’m sure he appreciates that. 
 
It is, as I said earlier, truly a pleasure for me to enter into this 
Throne Speech on behalf of the fine people of Regina 
Northeast. There’s no doubt, Madam Speaker, that all 
Saskatchewan people are fine people, but there are no finer 
people than the people in Regina Northeast. And this summer as 
in past summers I spent some time out canvassing in my 
constituency. I enjoy doing that. I enjoy getting out and meeting 
folks at the doorstep and talking to them about the issues that 
they face each and every day. I like getting their feedback. I like 
hearing what they have to say. I usually set a goal for myself of 
14 polls and I try to canvass those 14 polls in the summer 
months, preferably in the early part of the summer and the 
springtime when the weather is more conducive to being out 
door-knocking and so on. 
 
Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I was unable to meet my goal 
of 14 polls this year because of other duties that was asked of 
me. I was only able to get 13 polls done. But during that time I 
set a standard question and I took a bit of a . . . I took a bit of a 
page from my colleague from Greystone who also likes to 
canvass and we’ve talked about this many times. I can do a poll 
in about five to six hours but this year I decided to go a little 
slower at it and spend a little more time talking to my 
constituents and getting a little more in-depth feedback from 
them. 
 
So I developed a standard question I would ask them. The 
question was quite simple. What do you expect from your 
government? The answer was loud and clear. They wanted a 
government with a vision, a vision of the future, a vision that 
included making Saskatchewan a better place for young people 

to live, work, and raise their families. 
 
In order to achieve this we must give our children the tools to 
meet the challenges of the future by giving them the educational 
opportunities so they will be able to take part in tomorrow’s 
economy. 
 
Education is an essential building block of the province’s social 
and economic well-being. An example, Saskatchewan will 
invest in the groundbreaking KidsFirst initiative which blends 
the efforts of the health districts, school divisions, Aboriginal 
organizations, and communities, and provides home visiting 
programs, community supports, early development programs, 
prenatal care, and family support. 
 
My constituents told me that they wanted a government to 
invest in education and training opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. They said as young people grow and look to their 
futures in whatever walk of life they chose, government must be 
committed to addressing the labour markets changing needs and 
will expand training opportunities to meet the market demands; 
unveil new partnerships between business, labour, and our 
training institutions to provide counsel to government to meet 
Saskatchewan’s evolving labour market needs; and strengthen 
and expand our regional training models bringing education 
closer to the students and better linking training to learners, job 
seekers to employers. As well, expanding partnerships with 
First Nations and Métis people to enhance the educational skills 
training for our Aboriginal youth, continuing the freeze on 
university tuitions and hosting a youth summit to link young 
people, business, employers, and government in building a 
brighter future for the youth of our province. 
 
Our province has an abundance of career opportunities, a 
province that is down-to-earth, of where the sky is the limit for 
jobs in every corner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summer while I was canvassing I asked: what 
do you expect from your government? The answer was loud 
and clear. They wanted a government with a vision, a vision 
that included strengthening Saskatchewan’s public health care 
while reducing waiting lists. Saskatchewan remains the 
distinction . . . retains the distinction as the only have province 
in Canada that does not charge its people a health care 
premium. My constituents told me to strengthen the best health 
care system for families by enhancing efforts to recruit health 
care providers using new relocation incentives in return for 
service commitments, increasing opportunities for 
internationally educated professionals to work right here, right 
now, and expand Aboriginal health work force and continue the 
process toward the development of a children’s hospital within 
a hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our seniors, elders worked, fought, and sacrificed 
to build our health care system. We today can honour their 
efforts by continuing the fight to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
people are served by the best health care system anywhere in 
North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summer when I was door-knocking in my 
constituency I asked: what do you expect from your 
government? The answer was loud and clear. They said they 
wanted a government with a vision, a vision that included 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

making Saskatchewan a leader in environmental protection and 
a green economy for our families to remain healthy and our 
economy to remain prosperous. 
 
Saskatchewan will be a leader in the protection of the 
environment and the promotion of clean and renewable energy. 
Saskatchewan will demonstrate national leadership in the 
conservation, protection, and restoring the health care of our 
environment. With our connection to the land and our 
commitment to environmental stewardship, Saskatchewan 
clearly demonstrates it’s down-to earth with only the skies as a 
limit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summer when I was visiting with my 
constituents I asked: what do you expect from your 
government? The answer was loud and clear. They wanted a 
government with a vision, a vision that included ensuring 
Saskatchewan people and families benefited in our strong and 
prosperous economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has caught the eye of the world. 
Major investors are making investments from national and 
international companies including oil and gas, diamonds, 
uranium, value-added agriculture, ethanol, and potash. Our 
external trade missions and promotions and the work of the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership are bearing fruit. 
 
Saskatchewan’s co-operative, financial, manufacturing, 
tourism, film and video, music, small business, and retail 
sectors are expanding and providing even greater opportunity 
for Saskatchewan young people. In support of our growing 
economy and increasing the demand for skilled tradespeople, as 
well as righting a long-time wrong in our taxation system, the 
employee tool tax credit program that was introduced by our 
Minister of Finance in the 2005 budget was greatly, greatly 
appreciated by over 15,000 working men and women in our 
province. For the first time ever anywhere tradespeople who 
have to provide tools as a condition of their employment can 
now write those costs off against their income tax. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at this Throne Speech I see that it 
addresses all of the wishes of my constituents and more. This 
Throne Speech clearly demonstrates the vision that this 
government has for Saskatchewan. It continues with the 
commitment of providing the lowest-cost utility bundle in 
Canada. It continues to provide growing opportunities for 
educational and training opportunities for our youth. It 
continues providing employment and career opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. It continues to provide speedy access to 
top quality health care when it is needed by Saskatchewan 
people. It continues to ensure that we today and future 
generations will be exposed to a clean and healthy environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech has the vision Saskatchewan 
people are looking for and — with the announcement made by 
our Minister of Finance on October 27, 2006, that the PST will 
be reduced from 7 per cent to 5 per cent — was warmly 
received by all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was the people of Saskatchewan that worked 
with this NDP government to move our province from the edge 

of bankruptcy to a have-province status. It was the people of 
Saskatchewan who worked with this NDP government to 
accomplish 13 consecutive, balanced budgets, 14 credit 
upgrades in just 15 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan look back they 
say it was the NDP that had the vision to bring us forward. Mr. 
Speaker, today the people of Saskatchewan say it is only the 
NDP that can guide us into the future if that future is to be 
continued, filled with the opportunity and prosperity. Mr. 
Speaker, that is why I have been instructed by the fine people of 
Regina Northeast to support the Throne Speech with such a 
bright future in it for Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise today to speak in response to the Throne 
Speech. But before I do, I would just like to thank my family, 
my husband Vic, my kids and my grandkids for all their love 
and support, and my caucus. 
 
It would pretty hard to do my job without the support of my 
family, their patience and understanding. And, Mr. Speaker, 
people on both sides of this House recognize the sacrifices that 
our families do make. So I truly thank mine. And as you are 
aware, Mr. Speaker, my family has been dealing with some 
serious health issues this past year, and I would like to thank the 
members of this Assembly and also my constituents for their 
concern. I am happy to say that things have turned out well, and 
my husband is on the mend. But he and I are both very 
appreciative of the support shown. 
 
And I would also like to take a minute to pay tribute to my 
colleague Ben Heppner. He was also a friend. Ben was an 
honourable man, and he was a true gentleman and a mentor to 
me and I’m sure many others in this Assembly. From Ben, I 
learnt a lot of things, but the two that come to mind are how a 
quiet presence can speak volumes and how to always stand up 
for what you believe in and never waver. But Ben will sincerely 
be missed, and our thoughts and our prayers are certainly with 
Arlene and the family. 
 
I would also like to thank my constituency assistant, Mr. 
Speaker, Leanne Fox. The first impressions people have of us 
are those that are left by our constituency assistants: the way 
they’re treated when they make phone calls, the treatment they 
get when they walk through that door. And I would just like to 
thank Leanne for treating my constituents with courtesy, the 
professionalism, and the respect that they deserve. 
 
I would also like to thank the people of my constituency for 
allowing me this privilege to serve them in this Hon. Assembly. 
It’s been seven years. That time has went fast. But through their 
continued encouragement and support, that enables me to do 
my job. 
 
And I too would like to join my colleagues in congratulating the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy on his outstanding victory. 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, my constituency borders his, and I 
run into people from his constituency all the time, and they are 
so proud to have this bright young man represent them in this 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with a couple of exceptions, this Throne Speech 
was just a duplicate of previous ones. The first thing that got my 
attention in the Throne Speech was that this NDP government 
said that they were going to earmark all fuel taxes to go back 
into highways. Highways are a big issue in my constituency, 
and to earmark this money for highways is really nothing new. 
 
In my constituency there are three highways that are major links 
to the USA [United States of America] — Highway No. 35, 
Highway No. 39, and Highway No. 47. And granted there has 
been some work done on Highway 39, but that was mainly 
through the program that the federal government had with their 
border infrastructure program. But Highways 35 and 47 are an 
absolute disgrace. Smashed windshields and damage to vehicles 
are constantly being reported to my office. 
 
And in fact one of my constituents just recently went to trade in 
his vehicle. It had 70,000 klicks on it, and this vehicle is never 
on the gravel roads. It’s mainly on Highway 47, south of 
Estevan. And when he took this vehicle into the dealer, they 
thought he turned the odometer back because they had never 
seen a vehicle in such rough shape with that few kilometres on 
it. And this was just from driving on these highways. 
 
At the end of September, Mr. Speaker, I went for a drive on 
Highway 47 South. And when I stopped along the highway, a 
safety officer from the department came and told me that I 
couldn’t be out in that area without a hard hat on, as workers 
were out there sand sealing it. And I want to emphasize that 
when this gentleman told me this that he was just doing his job. 
But the first thing that came to my mind is perhaps the minister 
should give an order that everyone that travels on that highway 
should be issued hard hats before they go down that section 
because, you know, the potholes are so deep when you hit the 
bumps that I think it would save everyone a few injuries. 
 
This Highway 47 South, Mr. Speaker, was sand sealed last 
summer, and the government has chosen to go that route this 
year. And there are so many semis on this stretch of highway 
that what they really need is a thick layer of asphalt. Let’s fix it 
once and for all, and with the proper maintenance we’d be in 
good shape out there. 
 
Highway 18 West is a major route in the Torquay, Oungre, and 
Lake Alma area. And I recently travelled on this road, and it too 
is in deplorable condition. I wrote the minister concerning it in, 
I believe, it was late July or early August and two weeks ago I 
finally got a response from him. And he said that this section of 
the highway between Oungre and Lake Alma was being turned 
back to gravel and the reason given was that gravel was much 
safer than broken pavement. But I guess that begs the question, 
how did the highway get in such rough shape that it, you know, 
it’s all broken pavement? And the answer is simple. It’s through 
15 years of neglect by this NDP government. 
 
And with the oil revenues that are coming in from my corner of 
the province, that is an absolute slap in the face to the 
constituents out there that this government doesn’t see fit to put 
more money back in that area in infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also hear in the Throne Speech how the 

government will shorten the waiting lists, and that’s basically 
the same old, same old. We’ve heard that before. I think that 
promise has been made in every Throne Speech. And the 
Minister of Health boasts that those on lengthy waiting lists, the 
number is very small. But what he doesn’t realize, that each 
person that brings their case here to this Assembly is just 
representative of hundreds of others that are affected by this 
government’s mismanagement of the health care system. I have 
people in my province who have gone out of the province or out 
of the country to have medical attention and hip surgeries, knee 
surgeries. And this is really sad that they have to do this 
because their tax dollars here are going to their health care, and 
yet they have to pay for their care out of their own pocket. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government also claims ownership to social 
issues. And through the neglect of the Premier and his minister, 
the Oyate Safe House is no longer operational. 
Recommendations and inquiries that should have been dealt 
with were ignored. And now the children have been abandoned 
by this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency — and as you will 
remember I have been presenting petitions regarding this 
situation — the Estevan Daycare Co-operative has been denied 
the requested spaces. There are about 80 children on the waiting 
list for licensed care, but the government, who are so quick to 
blame everyone else, doesn’t see fit to provide any extra spaces 
for these people. In the letter they received it’s got, priorities 
reflect, and included in the reflections of the priorities were 
rural development. So the people of Estevan are very upset with 
this government, and they will continue to be that way unless 
there’s some drastic changes made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has always been very quick to point 
out the promises that the federal government has made and did 
make during their campaign — the election campaign — and 
how he is going to pressure them to keep their word. Mr. 
Speaker, the feds should live up to their commitments, up to 
their promises. No question. But what about the promises this 
Premier made? 
 
Remember the 2003 campaign? There were to be no tax 
increases. He said, read my lips, no tax increases. What 
happened? The PST went up 1 per cent. And when questioned 
about this, the Minister of Finance said that it wasn’t politically 
popular to discuss tax hikes during an election campaign. So 
now in the eleventh hour, they see fit to give the people of this 
province a cut in the PST. While the citizens of this province 
are happy about any tax reduction, they realize that this is a last 
ditch effort by this government to retain power. 
 
The people of Weyburn-Big Muddy gave this Premier and this 
government a wake-up call in the June by-election, but 
apparently the Premier hit the snooze button and went back to 
sleep. Remember, Mr. Speaker, the desperate measures that the 
government used in dealing with the Souris Valley Hospital 
issue in Weyburn during the campaign. The Deputy Premier 
and the NDP candidate were out in full force for their photo ops 
in a desperate attempt to win that by-election. But the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy weren’t fooled. 
 
The Sask Party candidate, the new member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy went on to soundly trounce the NDP, forcing them to 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2006 

wind up in last place in Tommy Douglas’s hometown. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of this province won’t be fooled either by 
the political manoeuvres of this desperate fatigued government. 
So, Mr. Speaker, one has to question the motives of this 
government. 
 
As I said earlier, people are happy and of course they are very 
deserving of this PST reduction. But they view it as a 
distraction from what’s really happening on that side — a 
desperate, cynical, political move by a government in panic 
mode. 
 
Many from the government side have stood and repeatedly 
touted 14 balanced budgets. Yet look at the 2006 volume of the 
Provincial Auditor’s report, page 7 says: 
 

. . . the Government has lived within its means for nine of 
the last sixteen years (that is the Government [has] raised 
more revenues than it spent in each of these years). 

 
Simple math states, Mr. Speaker, the conclusion that there were 
seven deficit budgets. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And the speaker from the government side that preceded me 
just went on to say about the ’80s . . . And of course I dedicate 
The Beatles tune “Yesterday” to them all over there. But they 
have very selective memories because they always mention the 
’80s and they do not mention the debt that was left when the 
government took over in 1982. And that was a $6.4 billion debt 
left by Allan Blakeney, and I believe the interest rates were 22 
or 23 per cent at that time. So you figure out how many years it 
takes for that debt to double. 
 
On page 39 of the Provincial Auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker, you 
will see that the money focused for agriculture has been slashed 
from $837 million in 2002 to $512 million in 2006, this from a 
government who repeatedly proclaims their support of the 
agriculture industry. And, Mr. Speaker, that is simply shameful. 
Crop insurance premiums have increased. The coverage has 
been reduced. They’ve shut down rural service centres. They 
have simply not been there for those in the agriculture industry. 
They put their noses in places where they shouldn’t be, and 
where their attention should be focused they ignore. And that is 
the legacy of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is basically the author of a book of 
broken promises. And for the last while he’s been reliving the 
days of The Beatles. And I really liked The Beatles in the ’60s, 
Mr. Speaker. I was a big Beatles fan . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . I liked him too. And so now he has his Imagine campaign. 
And that Imagine campaign is at a cost to taxpayers of 
$300,000. But you know what? I can think of another Beatles 
tune that the Premier will probably have for his next campaign, 
and it’s a song The Beatles had out. It was very popular — 
movie of the same name — simply titled “Help!” And another 
one, a good one is “Yellow Submarine,” I think of when I hear 
about this government because they are doing what submarines 
do, Mr. Speaker, and that is sinking. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 
put forward by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, but I 

will not be supporting the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview, the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into this Throne Speech debate, and I’ll say right from 
the start that I’m going to support the Speech from the Throne 
and the government plan that is there. It sets out a very clear 
message to the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada as to 
what this government is going to do. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the members who presented this motion 
and seconded it, and I’d also like to welcome the new member 
from Weyburn. We acknowledge that he is here in his new role 
and that we look forward to working together with him as the 
years develop. I’m sure he’ll enjoy many years on that side of 
the House, and that will be very interesting for all of us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech tries to set out in a very 
clear way what the government intends to do to make sure that 
our people in this province are going to be able to build their 
futures here. And that applies to the parents, grandparents, 
children, grandchildren — all of the people in this province. 
 
And I think that no matter how we look at that, the whole issue 
of what we do with our air and our land and our soil and our 
water makes a huge difference in where the plans go in the long 
term. I think we’re at a very interesting point in the history of 
the earth where people are concerned on a broad basis as it 
relates to all of these things. 
 
Many of us have grown up in a time where it seemed like there 
was unlimited amounts of water. Air was always going to be 
clean. We didn’t have to worry about protecting the land. That 
has changed very dramatically, and the message has come home 
to all of us that we need to work on those particular issues. In 
this Throne Speech, there are some very clear messages around 
what we can do as citizens of Saskatchewan to contribute to this 
particular role, and we are going to be using our people, our 
ingenuity, our ideas. We’re going to be using the resources that 
we have. We’re going to be using our space on this earth. 
 
I often try to describe Saskatchewan, when I travel other parts 
of North America or the world, to people who have never been 
here before. And one of the messages that I give to people is 
that we have a very large space or share of the earth but we only 
have a million people who live here. And that those people who 
live in Saskatchewan have a very interesting or unique role as 
park wardens or game preserve wardens or as conservation 
officers for what I would call one of the largest green spaces on 
earth. And we as Saskatchewan people, and especially us who 
are on the government side as leaders in the government, have a 
very strong role in providing guidance and assistance to make 
sure that our role as a green space on the earth is preserved. 
 
What we know is that many parts of the earth have such 
tremendous pressures of population and human activity that 
they don’t have the opportunities that we have to preserve a 
space on the earth. And we have to then be very, very careful 
how we plan for the economic development of our province and 



November 1, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

for our people, while at the same time taking on our role as 
world citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll be working on a number of these issues and 
have been for many years with that bigger picture in mind of 
what happens in Saskatchewan. The announcement earlier this 
week about how we use our coal resource, where we have 300 
years worth of energy in coal, we’re going to use new 
technology gathered from within Saskatchewan, from within 
Canada, from around the world, to use the coal in a way that 
causes as little impact on the environment as possible. And this 
SaskPower clean coal project and all the related issues is 
something that we are extremely proud of. 
 
In the same light we know, and I think one of the members 
opposite was referring to this earlier today, that our use of 
energy will increase. It’s just how we end up living in this 
world. And we’re going to respond to that by conservation 
methods and using other things that we can do, but we’re also 
going to respond to it by totally renewing how we provide 
energy to people in Saskatchewan. And that’s one of the very 
interesting and exciting discussions that’s taking place over the 
next couple of years here in Saskatchewan. What do we do with 
our energy requirements? How do we respond in what we do in 
making the most efficient use of that energy, but more 
importantly how do we respond in finding new sources of 
energy. 
 
Right now in Canada we’re the leaders on a per capita basis of 
use of wind energy in our regular power system. That’s a great 
achievement. It’s a dramatic change from what it was just five 
years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to look at 
that. 
 
We’ve got our stable of hydroelectric power but we don’t have 
quite the same opportunity as some of our neighbours in that 
area. But we are making sure that we can do that in a way that’s 
environmentally sustainable in the long term. 
 
We have our small power producer programs that we have used 
and have had in place since 1999. We’re reviewing those in 
light of all of the things that we’ve learned about what’s 
happened across the country. We don’t have the same 
incentives that Ontario has around solar power but clearly we 
have more sun than they do in many parts of our province and 
that’s something that we’re continuing to look at as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the Throne Speech recognizes is that as 
Saskatchewan citizens we have a responsibility and a role to 
live in a new green way. And we need to capture that sense and 
we’re going to do that. Also, Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to 
be doing in this next year is continue to develop some of the 
things that we’ve been working on. 
 
One of the areas that I’m especially proud of and pleased to 
work on relates to work around the parks system. And this is 
something previous ministers of Environment and the 
government in general have been working at, but I sense a 
renewed interest in our provincial parks or regional parks or 
urban parks and the municipal parks in a way that allows us to 
rejuvenate a lot of infrastructure but also develop more 
preserved places in the province. So we have a parks legacy 
program which is part of our agenda in this next year which will 

be looking at all of those things. And what it will do, it provides 
an array of opportunities for outdoor recreation, learning, 
personal renewal, at the same time as preserving some areas as 
wild areas or protected areas. But we’ll be doing that in 
conjunction with the local communities. 
 
We’re also going to be modelling collaborative management 
with the local communities, and some green and 
environmentally sustainable practices, so that we can 
understand and build on what we already know. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our parks system this year had an estimated 
2.5 million visits. This is up 5 per cent from our record year last 
year when we had the centennial year. What we know from 
talking to people is that over 90 per cent of Saskatchewan 
residents have used our parks in the last five years. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the economic impact of the parks has a huge part in 
what happens. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other areas that I 
would like to deal with tomorrow, as I see that the time is 
getting late. And so at this point I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Lakeview that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
deputy to the Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the deputy to the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................129 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................130 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................130 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................132 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan’s Family Doctor of the Year 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................132 
 Constituent Training Youth to Run Marathons 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................132 
 Weyburn Inventors Receive Awards 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................132 
 Family Doctor Week 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................133 
 Javelin Gold for Saskatchewan Athlete 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................133 
 Share the Warmth 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................133 
 Pressures on Rural Hospitals 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................133 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Labour Shortage 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................134 
  Calvert: ......................................................................................................................................................................................134 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................134 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................136 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................136 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................139 
 Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................139 
 Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................139 
 Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................139 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................140 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................146 



 

  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................148 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................151 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................154 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................157 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................158 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................160 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


