


















































Hansard: May 05, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 54A  FRIDAY, MAY 5, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1519 
 May 5, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of individuals throughout the 
constituency of Cypress Hills as well as individuals from 
communities around the province very concerned about the 
condition of Highway 32, especially the stretch between Leader 
and Cabri. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petitioners are from the communities of 
Cabri, Swift Current, Pennant, and Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present today on health services in the great 
community of Tisdale. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that surgical services are 
reinstated in the Tisdale Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Tisdale, Zenon Park, 
Archerwill, Sylvania, Prairie River, Nipawin, Biggar, Ratcliffe, 
Mistatim, and a number of communities across the province. I 
so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise again 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
government not covering the funding for the cancer drug 
Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Crooked 
River, Archerwill, and Weekes. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the government’s refusal to 
fund the cancer-fighting drug Avastin. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are 
all from the city of Saskatoon and I am proud to present on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition regarding the government’s refusal to fund the 
drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member of Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens of Biggar who are opposed to 
possible reductions of the health care services. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Perdue. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

elementary school in Arbor Creek. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners live in Northeast Saskatoon on Sears 
Cove, White Crescent, and Highlands Place. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the conditions 
of Highway No. 3. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Livelong, 
St. Walburg, Turtle Lake, and Saskatoon, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition for the people concerned with the government’s 
failure to implement the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Watrous, Young, and 
Imperial. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition to reinstate 
surgical services at the Tisdale Hospital. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that surgical services are 
reinstated in the Tisdale Hospital. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of White Fox, 
Rose Valley, Tisdale, Mistatim, and Melfort. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today for a 
petition on the cancer drug Avastin. This is the first time in the 
province’s history that the government has denied coverage of a 
cancer drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon and Wakaw, Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present another in a series of petitions regarding 
autism spectrum disorder: 
 

This petition is presented on behalf of citizens that are 
supportive of the Government of Saskatchewan caucus 
committee’s recommendations. These citizens are seeking 
continued provision of intensive behavioural intervention 
and other therapies for so long as an individual’s lead 
medical professionals deems such services to be required, 
to provide respite and family support to individuals as 
required, and to make access to specialized equipment and 
supplies based on need and to encourage and support 
autism-related research in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to present this on behalf of 
citizens from Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 13, 64, 67, 638, 669. 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome a 
number of students that we have in the House with us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, May 1 to May 6 is School Safety Patrol Week 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. And it really gives us an 
opportunity, a wonderful opportunity to say thank you and pay 
tribute to all the work that’s done by the 6,000 safety patrollers 
right across the province of Saskatchewan. They give very 
conscientious service and ensure the safety of their fellow 
students day in and day out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in the House we’re joined by 150 safety 
patrollers from right across the province along with 29 
chaperones that have come to help the safety patrollers enjoy 
the weekend. Part of the highlight of this week, Safety Patrol 
Week, is a jamboree. And this is the 16th annual jamboree that 
is really coordinated and sponsored by CAA [Canadian 
Automobile Association] Saskatchewan. And there’s also 
support from the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
IPSCO, FirstBus Canada, Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, the Bank of Nova Scotia, SaskEnergy, SaskPower, 
and SaskTel, that help put on this jamboree and show our 
appreciation for the patrollers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll name the communities where the safety 
patrollers are from and I would ask them just to give a wave 
when we announce your community. And what we’ll do is have 
your MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] actually give 
a wave also, so you’ll know who in the House represents your 
community. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have five safety patrollers and one 
chaperone from Battleford. And where are they? Oh there they 
are. And from Estevan we have six safety patrollers and one 
chaperone. And you’re . . . Oh. And Gravelbourg, we have two 
safety patrollers and a chaperone. And Kindersley. Kindersley 
we have two safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
And Maidstone, from Maidstone we have two safety patrollers 
— oh, they’re up in the east gallery. Maple Creek. Maple 
Creek, we have eight safety patrollers and one chaperone, and 
they look like they’re spread around here. Martensville, two 
safety patrollers and a chaperone. And from Moose Jaw. Moose 
Jaw we have eight safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
Nipawin, two safety patrollers and a chaperone. Nokomis, we 
have two patrollers. 
 
North Battleford, we have four safety patrollers. And Prince 
Albert, we have 12 and two chaperones. Oh it’s a whole crowd. 
From Regina we have 23 safety patrollers and two chaperones 
from Regina. This Regina group must be pretty well behaved. 
There’s only two chaperones for 23. That’s pretty good. 
 
Rosetown, from Rosetown — where are they? — and we have 
four patrollers and one chaperone. Rouleau. Rouleau we have 
two patrollers from Rouleau . . . oh three by the looks of it. I 
think three from Rouleau. Saskatoon. We have 40 from 

Saskatoon and five chaperones. Spiritwood, we’ve got four 
patrollers from Spiritwood — oh there they are —and one 
chaperone. Turtleford, we have eight safety patrollers in the 
west gallery there from Turtleford and two chaperones. 
 
Unity, there is two patrollers and one chaperone. Oh there they 
are, west gallery. And Warman, we have two patrollers and two 
chaperones from Warman. There they are. And Watrous, there’s 
four safety patrollers and a chaperone from Watrous. And 
Weyburn, we have four patrollers and one chaperone from 
Weyburn in the east gallery. And Wynyard, we have two 
patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in your gallery we have the organizers from 
CAA, Louise Houldsworth and Maureen Murray, who have 
done a great, great job in organizing the jamboree and 
supporting the patrollers. And I have to say on behalf of all of 
us, it’s greatly appreciated that you give time to give back to 
patrollers that give so much to our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all of our colleagues would say 
congratulations to the patrollers and offer them a very warm 
welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would like to join with the Minister of 
Learning in welcoming the 150 safety patrollers and 29 
chaperones to their legislature. It’s a pleasure once a year to 
host all of you very quality young people in our legislature. You 
provide a tremendous service to the people of Saskatchewan 
and to your fellow students. And we would like to acknowledge 
you and thank you very much for your fine work. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a number of 
women sitting in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, who are 
providing inspiration, dedication, and commitment to 
improving the quality of life in Saskatchewan. They belong to 
two organizations: the Midwives Association of Saskatchewan, 
and Friends of the Midwives. And perhaps I could ask them to 
stand and wave when I call out their names. 
 
Today we have with us Jeni Minion, Sylvi Wa, Joanne 
Havelock, Sonja Duffee, Carolin Peterson, Joanna South, and 
Marie and sixteen-month-old Julie Berwald. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank them for their energy and 
guidance both in the past and in the future, and ask all members 
to welcome them to the legislature on this special day. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition I’m very pleased to also welcome 
the midwives here to this Assembly. We’ve had the opportunity 
to meet with you over the number of years, and it’s nice to see 
you here today with a big smile on your faces. And welcome to 
your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to the legislature through you, 
a person who controls the traffic going through my constituency 
office. My constituency assistant, Kent Macaulay, is seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Mr. Macaulay is a former executive director of Community 
First, a Saskatoon community-based charitable organization 
which manages a local investment fund. He’s a former adult 
educator with the Government of British Columbia, and he has 
been a constituency assistant in the offices of former members 
Bob Pringle and Herman Rolfes. 
 
And Mr. Macaulay’s abilities and experience have helped me 
serve the people of Saskatoon Meewasin very effectively. And I 
would like to thank him, first on my own behalf, but also on 
behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Meewasin for his 
service. And I hope all members join me in welcoming him 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to the Assembly a number 
of folks that are here in your gallery, Speaker, from my home 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And last night the Minister of Northern Affairs, myself, and the 
minister for Indian and Aboriginal affairs attended the Voices 
of the North concert at the casino. And it was a tremendous 
evening, displaying a lot of Aboriginal talent. And one of the 
performers that evening was Dakota Caisse who is originally 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse and is now living in Prince Albert because 
that is where the show is based out of. 
 
So with Dakota is his mother, Georgina Caisse and his 
grandmother, Pauline Favel and his uncle, Geordie Favel. And 
they all travelled here to support Dakota in his effort to be part 
of the Voices of the North. 
 
And it was a tremendous show. And Dakota done 
Ile-a-la-Crosse proud. He done many Métis people proud. And 
he put on a tremendous show. And he has a tremendous voice, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

So I’ll ask all members of the Assembly to join me in not only 
recognizing the family that’s supporting Mr. Caisse but to also 
point out that he gets his voice from his grandfather, Geordie 
Favel, who’s in Ile-a-la-Crosse. That’s where the voice comes 
from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d ask all members to give us a very special, warm welcome 
to the Caisse and Favel family who are here for Voices of the 
North and thank them for making a tremendous trip here. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

International Day of Midwives 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is International 
Day of Midwives. Mr. Speaker, midwives play an important 
role in providing a positive environment for women who are 
expecting and delivering babies. They work collaboratively 
with other health professionals to ensure effective, 
comprehensive services for women and their newborns. 
 
Our government recognizes the significant potential benefits of 
integrating these professionals into Saskatchewan’s health 
system. We are introducing a provincially funded midwifery 
program with the advice and support from regional health 
authorities and organizations representing midwives, 
physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and the public. 
 
I would like to recognize members of two very important 
groups, the Midwives Association of Saskatchewan and the 
Friends of the Midwives, some of whom, I’m happy to say, are 
present in the gallery today. 
 
Through extensive consultation we have made excellent 
progress preparing to make midwifery services available in 
Saskatchewan. We will continue to rely on our partners to assist 
with implementation and provision of these services. A 
midwifery implementation committee will be named shortly, 
and we expect midwifery services to be available once their 
work is complete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support health care services that address not 
only our society’s collective goals but also individual patient 
needs. Midwifery services are a good example of how we can 
encourage increased flexibility and freedom of choice in the 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the Assembly and all 
Saskatchewan residents to recognize this occasion and to join in 
celebrating this very special day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

2006 YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the honour of joining the Leader of the Opposition 
at the 2006 YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] 
Women of Distinction Silver Anniversary Awards Banquet. 
 
As members are aware, the YWCA’s annual dinner recognizes 
the outstanding accomplishments and contributions made by 
women in Regina to their communities and the province. This 
year’s banquet attracted more than 600 people and raised more 
than $30,000 which will be used to support community services 
for women and children in need. 
 
Women in Regina make a significant contribution to their 
community in business, community development, education 
and health, technology, culture, and sports and recreation. 
 
On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party I want to offer our 
congratulations to all of last night’s nominees and recognize the 
10 winners in the categories: Carol Gay Bell for performing 
arts, communication, and broadcasting; Darlene Olsen, business 
and trades; Pat Hanley, community leadership; Gloria Rivero, 
cultural heritage; Mary Delanghe, education; Bonnie Blakley, 
health and wellness; CIPS [Canadian Information Processing 
Society] Regina, women in IT [information technology] 
committee, for science, technology, and the environment; Mary 
Anderson for sports and active living; and Heather Abbey for 
young women of distinction. 
 
On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, congratulations to all of 
the winners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this past Wednesday I had the honour, along with my 
colleague from Moose Jaw North, to attend the fifth annual 
Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards hosted by the Moose 
Jaw and District Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MC [master of ceremonies] for the evening 
was Moose Jaw’s own Rob Carnie from 800 CHAB who got 
the evening off to a great start with his usual repertoire of jokes. 
 
But the Moose Jaw Business Awards acknowledged the 
achievements of our own businesses that enhance the Moose 
Jaw community. Twenty-five nominees in 10 categories were 
chosen from over 40 businesses put forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the winners were: for community 
involvement, the Independent Medical Rehabilitation; for 
customer service, the Yvette Moore Gallery; for young 
entrepreneur, the Sterling Fitness Centre; for business 
innovation, Wells Camera and Sound; for marketing, Wrapture 
Spa and Salon; for exports, Raider Industries; for business 
ventures, CJAY Trailers; for job creation, Tim Hortons. And 
the Pioneer Award went to the Moose Jaw Co-op Association; 

and the Business of the Year was Triple 4 Advertising Limited. 
And, Mr. Speaker, a chamber of commerce program that’s been 
running all year, the Service with a Smile Award recipient went 
to Cheryl Chase from the Heritage Inn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these businesses and all businesses in Moose Jaw for the 
contributions to Moose Jaw and the surrounding area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

School Safety Patrol Week 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
School Safety Patrol Week in the province of Saskatchewan. 
During this week we recognize the more than 6,000 patrollers in 
our province for their service to their schools and communities 
ensuring the safety of their schoolmates. 
 
At this time one should also note the tremendous contribution 
made by CAA Saskatchewan in assisting with the operation of 
school patrols across our province. For 55 years CAA has been 
helping schools around Saskatchewan ensure that their students 
arrive to school every morning and home every afternoon. 
 
Individuals who volunteer to be part of the school patrol learn a 
lot of lessons about the value of volunteering and about serving 
those around them, even though I imagine a number of them 
aren’t so appreciative of these lessons on those early mornings 
at 30 below zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage all of my colleagues to 
join me in recognizing the enormous contribution of these 
young students that they make to our schools and our 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

2006 YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Crofford: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I, along 
with the member for Walsh Acres and Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre and a large and enthusiastic crowd, had the 
pleasure of attending the YWCA Silver Anniversary Women of 
Distinction Awards. 
 
Since 1981 these awards have recognized women whose 
activities and achievements have contributed significantly to the 
health and success of the community. And the money raised by 
the awards go toward funding the YWCA crisis support 
programs and services that empower women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women honoured at last night’s event are 
among south Saskatchewan’s most dynamic, talented, and 
dedicated leaders, and they’ve made a real difference in our 
province and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to reaffirm that this year’s recipients are for 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

the arts, Judith Silverthorne; in the business and trades category, 
Darlene Olsen; in cultural heritage, Gloria Rivero; for 
community leadership and enhancement, Pat Hanley. 
 
Mary Delanghe is the recipient of the Education Award; health 
and wellness, the winner is Bonnie Blakley. The Canadian 
Information Processing Society’s women in information 
technology committee received the Science and Technology 
Achievement Award; Mary Anderson for sport, recreation, and 
active living. And, Mr. Speaker, this year’s Young Woman of 
Distinction is Heather Abbey, and Carol Gay Bell for the 
Lifetime Achievement Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to all of the nominees and award 
winners. They spoke of their love of Saskatchewan, our 
tremendous quality of life, and, Mr. Speaker, these are the 
women who help make it so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Support for Canadian Troops 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party would like to take this time to offer our 
support and encouragement to our military personnel serving 
Canada in Afghanistan and around the world. Our troops are 
defending Canada’s interests, preserving our freedom, and 
protecting our way of life. Our troops are also participating in a 
great humanitarian effort. They are helping to rebuild schools, 
provide leadership, and restore faith to the Afghan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, dozens and dozens of our military personnel are 
from Saskatchewan. They come from small towns, villages, and 
our cities. They have chosen to serve our country to the best of 
their ability. Some of these troops will serve by laying down 
their life for their country. This is the ultimate sacrifice and 
every person in Saskatchewan and in Canada should be ever 
grateful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members of this Assembly will join 
with me in saying to our troops that we are proud of your good 
work and keep it up. Mr. Speaker, members of the public can 
send our troops supportive messages from our website at 
www.skcaucus.com by clicking on the support our troops link 
on the right-hand side. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

2006 World Class Players’ Cup 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, soccer is 
the world’s largest sport. This week in Regina at the credit 
union sportsplex there’s been soccer — or football — going on 
as players play for the World Class Players’ Cup right here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 20 countries represented in this second 

annual World Class Players’ Cup of football which is Kevin 
Holness’s brain child. Kevin, formerly of the Canadian national 
football team, is playing with the Barbados team here in Regina 
this week. 
 
It is a real tribute to the teams, the organizers that we have 
people playing with pride for their original nations. There’s a 
spirit of sportsmanship and there’s a simple joy of being part of 
the world’s biggest game, and what an exciting game it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, El Salvador won last year’s championship. I can 
tell you they’re well-trained. They’re determined to defend as 
champions this year. 
 
The round robin ends and turns into playoffs today, tomorrow, 
and it ends Sunday, with the final game late Sunday afternoon. I 
know I will be there and I expect there will be some others 
there. I look forward to the final championship game and the 
presentation of the World Class Players’ Cup of football this 
year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Infant’s Medical Treatment 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has now been 
two weeks since the minister promised to review the 
questionable circumstances around the baby Paige case. Let’s 
review what happened there. 
 
The Hansen family had to flee to Edmonton so that they could 
get timely care and treatment for their baby because it wasn’t 
available here in Saskatchewan. Baby Paige received diagnosis 
of leukemia within 24 hours of being admitted to the Stollery 
Children’s Hospital in Edmonton. 
 
The minister launched an investigation on April 24. On Monday 
he said that he was waiting to speak to the family. Our office 
contacted Paige’s aunt this morning. Alisa Worobetz is 
extremely upset because, according to her, no attempt has been 
made to set up an interview with the family. Can the minister 
tell this Assembly whether a contact has been made with baby 
Paige’s family? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite have on occasion stretched the credibility of 
all members of society in Saskatchewan with their quotes of 
individuals taken completely either out of context or talking to 
the wrong people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the aunt may have information in this case. I don’t 
know; I’m not talking to her. The Saskatoon Regional Health 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

Authority has been making contact with the family throughout 
the course of the week. Mr. Speaker, I understand that Mike and 
Michelle were in Saskatoon yesterday with baby Paige. The 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority was also going to talk to 
them yesterday. Have they conducted their interview? I don’t 
know that, Mr. Speaker. I’m not rushing this case. The interests 
of the family is the most important in my mind at this point in 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week the minister 
also said that he’d provide information about the case as it came 
available. Now we still don’t know whether the family has been 
interviewed. He admitted that right now. 
 
But there are questions that should be answered and should be 
able to be answered today, questions like, how come the family 
had to wait three weeks or more for a bone scan? What were the 
reasons for that? What are the reasons for the MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] being out of service? Was it out of service? 
And why weren’t they forwarded on to another health district, 
because only one MRI was operating in Saskatchewan? Can he 
answer those questions today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
in fact the member opposite is aware that I’ve said that I will 
release information when information is available to be 
released. I stand by those comments and will in fact release 
information when information is available to be released. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very anxious to ensure that information that 
has been gathered from the clinical review is shared with the 
family and is corroborated by the family, that recollections for 
the family are identical to the circumstances described in the 
clinical review. Mr. Speaker, I am not going to surprise family 
members with information released through the media. I’m 
going to share that information with them. This review is going 
to be done correctly. It’s not going to be rushed because the 
members opposite want it rushed. It’s going to be done well. 
It’s going to serve the interests of baby Paige’s family, and it’s 
going to serve the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister first 
launched this internal investigation about baby Paige’s case, he 
told the people of Saskatchewan that the results would be 
available last Friday. A week has passed, and we haven’t heard 
one answer from this provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday the minister provided few answers to 
any of the questions that were put towards him, questions about 
why the diagnosis was going to take so long in Saskatchewan 
and it only took 24 hours in Edmonton, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

unconscionable. Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the 
Assembly today then when he expects the report to be done? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
report will be done in a timely fashion, and information will be 
released to the people of Saskatchewan when it is appropriate to 
be released and not on a timetable set by the members opposite. 
 
I remind the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that when third 
parties have taken a look at the Saskatchewan medical system 
and compared it to other provinces, Mr. Speaker, the 
Conference Board of Canada says Saskatchewan has the third 
best system in the country with the fourth lowest cost. Mr. 
Speaker, we are very proud of the service that we are providing 
to the people of Saskatchewan. We are also aware that when 
there are challenges within the system that need to be met, we 
have processes in place to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this process includes respect for the family. I have 
that respect and I will ensure that that respect is carried through 
in this investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Provision of Oxygen and Palliative Care 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well Mr. Speaker, the Stonehouse family 
certainly didn’t see any respect from this minister yesterday. 
Yesterday I raised the case of 55-year-old Linda Stonehouse 
from Arborfield. She’s suffering from terminal lung cancer, and 
her doctor and oncologist has said that she requires oxygen. 
Linda faces frequent episodes where she’s short of breath. 
When this happens, she is forced to drive 45 miles into Nipawin 
from Arborfield to the emergency room. Once she’s in that 
emergency room, she’s threatened because her immune system 
is so low. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister said that he’d review this 
case. Has the minister done that, and can he tell this Assembly 
and especially Linda Stonehouse that she’ll be receiving oxygen 
because she’s in a palliative care state? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I remind the member opposite that indeed if he had raised that 
question with me prior to question period yesterday, and we’d 
had some opportunity to examine this, we could have informed 
the member in question period yesterday and the family that 
there has been communication between Sask Health and the 
doctor representing Mrs. Stonehouse. There’s some information 
that needs to be collected from the family prior to an assessment 
and a final decision being made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department is using its normal processes to 
deal with this case. She could be entitled. She very much could 
be entitled to receive this oxygen, Mr. Speaker. I encourage the 
members opposite to use the processes that are in place to deal 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

with cases where people’s lives are affected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the families are getting 
absolutely sick and tired of this minister and this government’s 
cadre of options they have to do before they get care. She’s 
gone through the quality care coordinator. She’s gone to the 
cancer advocate from the cancer society. She’s checked with 
her personal physician. She’s checked with the oncologist, and 
they’ve all said that she needs oxygen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said outside the House yesterday that 
this policy hadn’t changed since the 1990s. But if you talk to a 
number of families who’s had a loved one on palliative care, 
they say a number of people have been dropped off the oxygen 
free category because they don’t meet the guidelines. Can the 
minister tell me, is this true, that the department has truly 
changed its policy and knocked a number of people off the 
oxygen program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has worked very hard with the palliative care 
association in this province and with others across Canada who 
care an awful lot about the terminally ill and their families. Mr. 
Speaker, we have developed over a number of years the Aids to 
Independent Living. Mr. Speaker, some parts of the SAIL 
[Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living] program require 
some fees to be paid by individuals and some do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a case of an individual who either can’t or 
won’t pay for a program under the existing program. Mr. 
Speaker, if this is a family who cannot pay, there’s another way 
in which we can address this situation. Mr. Speaker, the 
important thing is to identify what the problem is and to address 
that problem to focus in on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the palliative care program recognizes the needs 
of individuals and families. The independent living program 
addresses the way in which we address some of those needs. 
And we will address this from the assisted living point of view, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when I asked the minister 
yesterday what the definition of his government, or Sask Health 
definition of palliative care was, he told me to go to the 
dictionary because the dictionary’s definition would suit Sask 
Health. Well the dictionary’s definition is anything used to 
alleviate pain and anxiety. I can’t think of a better case than the 
Linda Stonehouse case when she suffers from a shortage of 
breath. And an episode like that, can you imagine the anxiety 

the family goes through and she goes through on a 45-minute 
drive to Nipawin? Can you imagine how it would alleviate the 
pain and pressure that she feels if she had oxygen at home? 
 
Everything about this case talks to palliative care which is a 
definition that his government should be following through. 
Will he review the case and agree to the fact that palliative care 
and supplying Linda Stonehouse with oxygen is one and the 
same? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I remind the member opposite that, one week ago, the 
doctor representing the individual in question wrote a letter to 
Sask Health asking for the oxygen program to be renewed in 
her case — one week, Mr. Speaker. In that week, the 
department wrote back indicating that there are tests that the 
doctor knows has to be performed — simple tests — in order 
for her to qualify. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individual in question and her doctor, 
professional relationship, Mr. Speaker, can determine whether 
or not this person is eligible under the Aids to Independent 
Living program. Mr. Speaker, I urge the individual, I urge the 
doctor to work within the existing program to ensure that her 
needs are able to be addressed and ultimately met. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Job Growth Statistics 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning 
Statistics Canada released the most recent job numbers for the 
province, and I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
again finished last in comparison to all other Western 
provinces. But before that minister stands up and brags and 
brags about how the job numbers in this province are up 
eight-tenths of 1 per cent, I must tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this 
is a dismal record for a province experiencing a resources 
boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Industry and Resources: is the 
minister proud of having the worst job growth record in 
Western Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I am proud of the business people in this 
province, of the working people of this province, the people that 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

are building the economy of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition complains when the job numbers 
go down. The opposition complains when the job numbers go 
up. There’s nothing I can do to make the opposition happy 
about the fact that the job numbers are 3,700 more jobs this year 
than a year ago. But that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is also the fact that we are a have province. We’re one of 
three provinces with above-average personal income. And, Mr. 
Speaker, our economy is one of the fastest growing economies 
in Canada. Is it good enough for them? No. But we’re going in 
the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In spite of that minister’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Once again I 
recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In spite of that minister’s rose-coloured view 
of the world, Mr. Speaker, under this NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government, we’ve been losing people to other 
provinces. And it’s no secret why, Mr. Speaker — because the 
neighbouring provinces are experiencing real job growth: 
British Columbia, 76,700 jobs over the same period; Alberta, 
67,500 jobs; Manitoba, 11,500 jobs; and Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, 3,700 jobs. That is a pathetic record, and it’s no 
wonder that we can’t keep our young people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: what is that NDP 
government doing to ensure young people have a chance to stay 
in this province and work when every other province in 
Western Canada is beating us? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The member asks what we’re doing. I’ll 
tell the member what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. According to 
the Fraser Institute, we now have the second lowest bundle of 
personal taxes in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, my 
colleague the Minister of Finance, a few weeks ago had a 
budget for growth and opportunity that cut business taxes in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
And we look at the headlines, Mr. Speaker. What do they say? 
They say, “Swift Current hopes boom times continue.” They 
say, “Saskatoon good for business.” They say, “Life is very 
good here.” And it is, Mr. Speaker. They say, “Regina house 
sales set record high.” 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also see an article that says, “The 
grumpiest folks in Canada,” and I can only assume, Mr. 
Speaker, that article must be about those people over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want that minister 
paddling my canoe. Again, Mr. Speaker, I will try and put into 
perspective the job growth record of this NDP government for 
the minister. 
 
For every job created in Saskatchewan, three are created in 
Manitoba. For every job created in Saskatchewan, 18 are 
created in Alberta, and finally, Mr. Speaker, for every job 
created in Saskatchewan, 20 are created in BC [British 
Columbia]. To put it another way, Mr. Speaker, if there were 42 
new jobs in Western Canada today, only one would be in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To the minister: can he explain why, under this NDP 
government, Saskatchewan continues to finish last? What can 
he say to the graduating class of 2006 when they start looking 
for work in other provinces because Saskatchewan lags so far 
behind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, what 
I would say to the graduating class of 2006 would be this. I met 
a civil engineer the other day in downtown Regina, who 
obtained employment in Saskatchewan. I asked him what 
happened to your class of civil engineers? This is what he said, 
Mr. Speaker. He said out of 26 graduates all but five had 
obtained employment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because, Mr. Speaker, we can have the 
opposition saying that when the jobs go up, it’s not enough. 
There’s nothing that will ever keep the opposition happy. 
 
But I have this to say to them. In the last three years, the gross 
domestic product — the economy of this province, Mr. Speaker 
— grew by 10.7 per cent, the second highest growth in Canada. 
So they can purvey their gloom and doom, Mr. Speaker, but the 
people of Saskatchewan who are proud of this province are 
going to keep going in the right direction because we are going 
in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
former Vice-Chair of Saskatchewan’s Labour Relations Board 
says he asked for another term in that job and was denied. 
Walter Matkowski alleges the deputy minister of Labour 
advised him to quit immediately because his rulings were not 
popular with unions. That allegation, if proven to be correct, 
amounts to political interference in what should be an 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

independent body — the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has been aware of these allegations 
for several days. Will he today agree to conduct an investigation 
into whether or not there was political interference in the 
Labour Relations Board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 
on a day like today, when we’ve had good news about the 
employment numbers for April — 3,700 new jobs — and we 
are moving in the right direction, the member opposite just 
wants to mud sling. 
 
You know, I have spoken with the deputy minister and his 
recollection of these allegations is very different. But I want to 
assure the people of Saskatchewan there was no political 
interference. 
 
But let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker. Let’s be very clear. Mr. 
Matkowski’s five-year term had expired. It had expired. No one 
who’s appointed to a board or Crown or agency is automatically 
entitled to a renewal. That is a fact, Mr. Speaker. There is no 
automatic entitlement to a renewal. Mr. Matkowski went 
through a competition originally, and that’s how we plan to fill 
this position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. According to the document 
from Mr. Matkowski and obtained by the minister two days 
ago, Mr. Matkowski was told it would be best if he resigned. 
Mr. Matkowski alleges the deputy minister of Labour told him 
unions had been complaining about his decisions before the 
Labour Relations Board. Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of 
Labour tell us if he or his predecessor received written or verbal 
complaints from any union about Walter Matkowski and his 
rulings before the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, you know I just want to 
make sure that we speak about the facts in this House. This is 
very clear that Mr. Matkowski’s five-year term had expired on 
February 28, 2006. He had completed his term. And just to 
review the facts, Mr. Speaker, no one who is appointed to a 
board, agency, or commission in Saskatchewan is automatically 
entitled to a renewal. 
 
Now as I had said earlier, Mr. Matkowski went through a 
competition originally and that’s how we plan to fill this 
position. We fill these positions through competition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that on a day like 
today, these members who have no credibility and about arm’s 

length . . . how we deal with arm’s-length agencies . . . No 
credibility. Here we have job numbers of 3,700 that show 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and raise a family. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, from the affidavit of Mr. 
Matkowski I want to quote. This is about his interview process 
by the then deputy minister of Labour. I quote: 
 

. . . I asked what would be expected of me in the position 
of Vice-Chairperson of the Board, in that as an arbitrator, I 
called them as I saw them. Ms. Morgan assured me that I 
was to call them as I saw them, and that there would be no 
political interference or ramifications if I did this, in that 
the Board was an independent tribunal. 

 
Can the minister assure this House that there were no 
ramifications of Mr. Matkowski’s non-appointment based on 
the concerns expressed last summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to see if I could shed a 
little bit more light to the member from Canora-Pelly, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say this. You see, Mr. Speaker, I have read 
extensively the code of ethics of the Saskatchewan conservative 
party, Mr. Speaker. I’ve read that. And that code of ethics, Mr. 
Speaker, says that there should be an opportunity, Mr. Speaker 
. . . That code of ethics, Mr. Speaker, is to address itself to when 
there are issues that are of need to dispute, should get ratified. 
 
That member for Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker, had the deputy 
minister in front of him in a committee. He could have asked 
the deputy minister about whether or not there has been any 
interference. The Minister of the Environment has on a number 
for occasions said there has not been any interference . . . the 
Minister of Labour has said there has been no interference. Why 
didn’t the member from Canora-Pelly ask the question of the 
deputy minister so that he could have brought the record right 
and said that there hasn’t been any interference. 
 
Why? Because we’ve got this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the . . . Order. Order. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
this province needs is a Labour Relations Board that’s fair. We 
don’t need a board that’s biased towards business. We don’t 
need a board that’s biased towards unions. We need an 
impartial Labour Relations Board that bases rulings on the facts 
and on legal precedents. We don’t need a Labour Relations 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

Board where those hearing matters are chilled by allegations of 
political interference that have not been answered by this 
minister. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. Order Please. 
Order. Order please. Order. The floor to the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is this. Can this minister tell us if he received 
representations asking him to take Mr. Matkowski off the LRB 
[Labour Relations Board]? And can he ask the former minister 
if she received representations from anyone asking her to take 
Mr. Matkowski off the Labour Relations Board? 
 
The Speaker: —Order please. The Chair recognizes the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker what I just . . . 
[inaudible] . . . the member from Canora-Pelly has asked the 
question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Once again the 
Chair recognizes the member for Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Canora-Pelly 
asks what this Assembly and what this province needs. What 
this province needs is a bit more integrity, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say . . . [inaudible] . . . and that integrity, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read this quote, Mr. 
Speaker. This quote says, and the comments are about Ms. 
Lynda Haverstock, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I appreciate the enthusiasm that 
members have here, but I do want to be able to hear the words. 
There have been a couple of things here that appears to have 
passed by that I was not able to hear, and I insist that I must be 
able to hear what the people that are on the floor are able to say. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, my comment was that what 
we need to hear from the member from Canora-Pelly is a great 
deal more integrity from the opposition. I say this, Mr. Speaker. 
These are his words as it relates to the Lieutenant Governor of 
the province: “She’s a great . . . person, tremendous, but as a 
team-builder, [and as] a . . . player, maybe not so.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, and then this member from Canora-Pelly had the 
audacity to attack now our public servant by saying that he has 
put words in the mouths of . . . that the member, that the deputy 
minister, Mr. Speaker . . . has made allegations that are 
absolutely not accurate, Mr. Speaker. And the member from 
Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker, also talked about the fact of what 
happened to Mr. Waller a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
This member opposite, Mr. Speaker, continues to attack 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, whether they’re the Lieutenant 
Governor, whether they are the deputy ministers of the Crown, 
Mr. Speaker, or whether they are individuals who are working 

today, Mr. Speaker, in major corporations of this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Once again I would like to have 
caught this at the minute that it happened, but it’s difficult to 
hear under certain circumstances. But I did hear the member 
from Yorkton, and I verified that he brought up the words of the 
Lieutenant Governor and talking about the Lieutenant Governor 
in this Assembly, and I just believe that that is improper and 
that ought not to be raised in the Assembly, should not become 
a matter of debate. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state this point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is a long-standing tradition 
in this House that members are not permitted to do from their 
seats what they’re not allowed to do on the record. And within 
the previous about three minutes, Mr. Speaker, as part of the 
shouting from across the floor by the opposition, the hon. 
member for Silver Springs several times shouted across the 
floor calling the government members communists. Mr. 
Speaker, there have been rulings in this House previously that 
have disallowed this reference. It was clearly intentional. It was 
repeated, and it was very loud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you will ask the hon. member for Silver 
Springs to withdraw his remark and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order, the Chair recognizes 
the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the heat of debate there has certainly been words that have been 
expressed and exchanged. But I’d also ask you, Mr. Speaker, to 
check the official record, and I believe it will show clearly that 
the Deputy Premier also used unparliamentary references to the 
official opposition. And I don’t think that the Government 
House Leader should stand and pretend that his members have 
not incited our individuals to reciprocate in using language that 
may be out of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that before . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to put on the 
record that it is inappropriate for the Deputy Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — One point of order at a time. I can’t be going 
into a couple of points of order. Would the member please stick 
to this point of order. 
 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Then I would ask 
the Speaker to officially check the record and ensure that all 
episodes of improper use of language is also adhered to. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for raising the issue, 
and it brings back the point that I think I was originally talking 
about and that is I found it almost impossible to hear. And it 
was impossible to hear. I was not able to hear the statement that 
is alleged to have been made. There are probably other 
statements that have been alleged to have been made. 
 
All I can say about that is I thank the members for raising it. I 
ask members to refrain from doing what they cannot — order 
please — across the floor by just throwing remarks across the 
floor at random. And if the member indeed did make the remark 
which is unparliamentary, that is do name calling in the name of 
communist, if he did make that remark, I would invite him at 
this stage to rise and withdraw the remark. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I withdraw that remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. I thank the member . . . 
Order. Order please. Order please. Order please, Order please. 
Order please. 
 
Members, let’s raise the bar somewhat, members. Order please. 
Let’s just raise the bar a little bit, members. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Then, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to officially raise a point of order to make 
reference to the fact that the Deputy Premier referred to the 
official opposition as the Saskatchewan conservative party, and 
clearly the Speaker has ruled that that’s inappropriate. 
 
The Speaker: — On the same point of order, the Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand the 
sensitivity that the opposition has. This week it is getting 
increasingly difficult. It is getting increasingly difficult to 
differentiate between the Conservative Party and the 
Saskatchewan Party. I can understand. I can understand the 
sensitivity that the hon. member has. And clearly his colleagues 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. The member complete his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it may very 
well have been that the Deputy Premier made reference to the 
Saskatchewan Party as a conservative party. And if so, if so, I 
think we all understand why it’s easy to confuse the two. We 
understand that. If so, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Once again the record will show 
what was said and what was not said. If the member did refer to 
the party represented by the opposition in an inappropriate 
manner, I give him the opportunity at this stage to withdraw the 
remark. 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would withdraw that 
particular remark. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to move to government orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader is requesting 
leave to move to government orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 55 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to speak to Bill 
55 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order please. 
Speaking to adjourned debates then, the Chair recognizes the 
member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
to me to stand and speak in this House to Bill 55, the industrial 
sites reclamation Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that’s aimed at 
the . . . aimed towards the cleanup of reclaimed industrial sites. 
And the Bill defines and identifies a closed site, among other 
things. And for the purposes of this legislation, it deals with the 
issue of the decommissioning of an industrial site, Mr. Speaker 
— the decommissioning as well as reclamation, remediation, 
and transition of industrial sites, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, the Bill deals with an institutional control registry; 
another bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker, that may be of dubious 
value. 
 
We agree, certainly agree, that there is . . . that legislation of 
this type may be well justified, Mr. Speaker, and the thinking 
behind it may be noble. The problem with this Bill may be the 
implementation and the detail of the regulations that may 
accompany this Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

We’ve heard this government give assurances of full 
consultation and co-operation with the industry. I’m not so sure, 
Mr. Speaker. This Bill was brought to us very late in the 
session. We understand there has been some consultations. The 
extent of that is a matter for some debate. And we don’t 
necessarily concede that that’s been properly done at this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I understand the legislation correctly, it deals 
with a mine site or industrial site that is decommissioned. This 
Bill would replace certain . . . would place certain requirements 
on the owner of such site. And if those regulations, rules and 
regulations that are put in place are met, that site would be 
given approval to be included in this registry program. 
 
One of the things that should be mentioned is that no indication 
exists in the Bill as to what the financial obligations on the 
owners of those sites to be placed into the registry may be, and 
over what period of time those obligations would continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this causes us grave concern. This legislation was 
presented to us very late in this session. I know that the mining 
association assumed that we would have been presented with 
this some time, some considerable time, before we were. And 
on checking with the mining association they seemed to have 
had some consultation. Although they were misled as to when 
we would receive this legislation, they have had some 
consultation and they seem to generally favour the framework 
of this Bill. Our concern is that they’re not . . . nobody knows 
what may turn up in regulations. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, having said those things, since the 
mining association does seem to have a basic understanding and 
agreement with the framework of this Bill, I think we are 
prepared to move it to committee at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that 
Bill No. 55, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No 55, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act be referred to the policy field 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 55 be referred to the policy Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 55 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 48 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
appreciate being given an opportunity to enter into the debate 
on Bill 48, The Parks Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill too was introduced fairly late in our 
legislative agenda here in our calendar. And it’s a Bill that 
extensively . . . Well it basically has two parts. 
 
One part, which is the minor portion of the Bill, cleans up some 
of the land descriptions in a couple of our provincial parks — 
the Makwa Lake Provincial Park and the Meadow Lake 
Provincial Park. There was some, I understand, some errors in 
land descriptions and bits and pieces of land around lakes and 
so on. And so this cleans that up. 
 
[11:15] 
 
But the main purpose and the majority of the Bill deals with 
setting fees for those people who own cottages within the 
boundaries of our provincial parks, Mr. Speaker. And this is an 
issue that gained the public attention nearly two years ago when 
the Environment minister of the day revised the fee structure 
that cottage owners paid for rental fees and lease fees that they 
would have within the provincial parks. 
 
And at that time, the revised system — back in 2004 — 
proposed huge increases in fees, some as high as 300 per cent 
increase. And this, as you might well imagine, brought great 
concerns and disagreement by owners of cottages within our 
provincial parks. 
 
And I remember a series of meetings that were conducted that 
summer throughout the parks. And the halls were overflowing 
with people who were very upset with the massive increase in 
rental fees, and they certainly voiced their opposition. And as a 
result, late in 2004 I believe it was, the minister of the day 
decided to review the system that he was proposing and asked 
to have a consultation process or set up a consultation process 
whereby the representatives of cottage owners would have input 
into the fee structure. 
 
And I believe a committee of five people from around the 
province representing various cottage associations, that 
committee of five was set up to work with officials of the 
Department of the Environment. And numerous meetings were 
held to discuss the issues, to see if they could find a solution to 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

this fee structure. And after a extensive period of meetings and 
consultation, the committee submitted their final proposal to the 
minister, to the Department of Environment for minister’s 
consideration back in February of this year. 
 
And interestingly, Mr. Speaker, I have been in conversation 
with a number of committee members. After they submitted 
their final recommendation, they have had no further 
communication from the minister or any officials within the 
department as to whether their recommendations have been 
accepted. They haven’t been consulted as to what the 
government is proposing in this matter. The first time they were 
aware of what the government is proposing, as far as setting 
fees, was when Bill 48 was given first reading, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And basically what the Bill does, it’s proposing that cottage 
owners pay two fees. One is a service fee which will be “. . . 
determined by the minister in accordance with the regulations 
and based on direct service costs; . . .” as it says in clause 2(a) 
of section 4. And the second fee is a land lease fee which is 
again determined by the minister in accordance to regulation. 
 
Well the general thrust of these two fees I believe is in keeping 
with what was recommended by the committee, but as I said 
and read from the Bill, the fees will be set by the minister in 
regulation. And that leaves a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker, that 
need to be answered because we don’t know what items will be 
included in determining the fee. We don’t know what allocation 
of those costs will be attributed to cottage owners because there 
is costs associated with the daily visitors and occasional 
visitors, the campers, you know, road maintenance, general 
maintenance within the park. So there’s a whole series of 
questions surrounding the service fee. 
 
And then also there’s an equal number of unanswered questions 
as far as how the land lease fee is going to be determined. In the 
2004 proposal, the fee was based on a fair market value system 
of the cottage and lot in accordance with the SAMA 
[Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] guidelines, 
and then the minister proposed to take an average mill rate of 
surrounding communities and apply that to that assessed value 
which resulted in those tremendously high fees in 2004. 
 
Well now what system is the minister proposing to determine 
the land lease fee? We don’t know that. The old fee, prior to 
2004, the rental fee as I understand it was based on the 
dimensions of your lot, sort of the front footage of the lot. 
 
And the fee was so many dollars per foot, which in itself was 
really not a fair system of determining the fee. Because if you 
happened to own a large lot with no buildings or very minimal 
buildings on the lot, you paid quite a large annual fee compared 
to someone who would maybe have a smaller lot but has a very 
new cottage and so on. So there was inequities in the old 
system. The proposed system in 2004 certainly didn’t meet the 
Bill. 
 
On the face of it, what’s proposed here may solve the problem. 
And the framework looks like it may be able to come up with a 
fair and equitable fee for cottage owners within the parks. But 
the devil is in the detail. And in this case, Mr. Speaker, the 
details are in regulation. 
 

So having consulted with cottage owners and their association 
to get a better understanding of what has transpired in the past 
and what is being proposed there, there were certainly quite a 
number of questions and concerns raised by these individuals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I did ask the minister for a briefing so that we 
could get some sense of what he was proposing and to 
understand how the various fees will actually be calculated. 
Well to this date, Mr. Speaker, that briefing hasn’t taken place. 
So in order for us to move this piece of legislation along, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to have the information as to how the fees 
will actually be calculated. I mean something as basic as do the 
cottage owners have to buy a park pass to get into the park so 
they can go to their property? Even a basic question like that we 
have no answers to at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the minister assured me in our conversation that he has the 
answers. Perhaps he hasn’t found time to slot in a briefing on 
this particular Bill. We are prepared to move this Bill to 
committee, but I must tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we will be 
asking a lot of questions, a lot of detailed questions. It will take 
a lot of time, Mr. Speaker, in committee. 
 
And I would hope that the minister and his committee members 
are prepared to give us the time that is needed to answer all 
these questions because, Mr. Speaker, the general public wants 
to know the answers to this. And without the answers so that we 
have some sort of an idea as to what level the 2006 fees will be 
set at and the methodology that will be used to determine these 
fees, without having that information, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid 
we will have to keep this Bill in committee until we get those 
answers. So by way of this discussion today, I’m serving notice 
to the Minister of Environment. And I would hope that he is 
prepared to provide us with these answers. 
 
But in a gesture of good faith, Mr. Speaker, we will move this 
Bill to committee. But as I had said, we are prepared to spend a 
lot of time, and we need to spend a lot of time and get the 
answers to these questions that have been raised by the interest 
groups. So, Mr. Speaker, I would recommend that we do at this 
time move this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 48, 
The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48, The 
Parks Amendment Act be referred to the policy field Committee 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 48 be referred to the policy field 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. So the Bill 48 stands 
referred to the policy committee, Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into the Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — The estimates before the committee would be 
the estimates for the Department of Health vote 32 in the 
Estimates book. I welcome the minister and his officials and 
would ask him to please introduce the officials to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I’m very glad to 
be back in front of Committee of Finance on estimates. I have a 
number of officials from the Department of Health today. I’m 
just going to provide the names as opposed to pointing them out 
because, without turning around, I’m not exactly sure how 
we’ve all settled in back here. I have . . . 
 
The Chair: — What you could do then, Mr. Minister, as you 
introduce your officials, they could just give a quick wave so 
the opposition members can recognize them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Okay. I think everyone’s familiar with 
everyone else but, as I call your name, I would ask my officials 
to indicate who’s who. I have with me a very recognizable 
individual to members opposite, the deputy minister, John 
Wright; the assistant deputy minister, Lauren Donnelly; 
executive director, workforce planning branch, Bonnie Blakley 
who by the way was recognized by Women of Distinction last 
night. We’re very proud of the work that Bonnie has done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The executive director, finance and 
administration branch, Ted Warawa; the assistant deputy 
minister, Max Hendricks. We also have with us the executive 
director, community care branch, Roger Carriere; executive 
director, population health branch, George Peters; executive 
director, drug plan and extended benefit branch, Kevin Wilson; 
executive director, regional policy branch, Rod Wiley; 
executive director, regional accountability branch, Bert 
Linklater; director, medical services branch, June Schultz; and 
assistant to the deputy minister, Leslie Grob. 

[11:30] 
 
The Chair: — Thank you. The estimates before the House, 
vote 32 Health. I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Chair. And thanks to 
the minister and all the officials for being here on a gorgeous 
Friday morning and soon to be afternoon. I hope there’s not a 
test on all those names and putting a name and a face to the 
wave because I won’t pass, but I have a number of questions in 
a lot of different areas regarding Health of course. 
 
But the first area I want to talk about is non-profits. And in the 
health care field there’s a lot of non-profit, non-government 
organizations that operate in the health care field, whether it’s, 
you know, the autism society or a number of different 
non-profits. And I would just ask the minister, does the 
department fund any of them, grant them money to keep the 
doors open for general operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would ask the member to be a little bit 
more specific. Non-profits could be any number of things. He 
mentioned the autism society. Is he talking about societies and 
associations, or is he talking about some business interests? 
Non-profits could be delivering services that the department 
pays for. Others simply provide a referral or an information 
service. I don’t fully understand the member’s question, and I 
want to be as specific as possible in answering. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess maybe just a general statement to 
begin with because some of the organizations that I’m going to 
be looking at supply information, education, supply services 
that the Department of Health doesn’t. So just give me a general 
statement I guess, and then I can go from there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Chair, it’s always been suggested to me 
that be careful what you ask for. The member opposite asked a 
very open-ended question and answering it, just listing the 
organizations we fund, could take me about 20 minutes. And of 
course there is the fact that not only does Sask Health provide 
some funding, but also the regional health authorities through 
their own budgets and community activities would also provide 
some funding. 
 
But for example just let me indicate, in terms of our third party 
funding program, we provide funding — and I won’t give the 
dollar values or we’ll be here all day — the FAS [fetal alcohol 
syndrome] support network; MACSI [Métis Addictions Council 
of Saskatchewan]; the core youth and field worker programs; 
rehabilitation programs through MACSI; the St. Louis 
Rehabilitation Centre; the Saskatchewan Institute on the 
Prevention of Handicaps. Through the University of 
Saskatchewan there’s a drug evaluation support group, the 
Canadian Institute for Health Information, and a bunch of 
others. 
 
Under mental health services, the Canadian Mental Health 
Association in Saskatchewan; Canadian Mental Health 
Association in Saskatchewan’s annual conference we provide 
support to. The addictions clinical conference; mental health 
rehabilitation conference; Saskatchewan Towards Offering 
Partnerships Solutions to Violence program; Saskatchewan 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

Seniors Mechanism; Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan; 
advisory committee on family planning; AIDS Program South 
Saskatchewan; AIDS Saskatoon; All Nations Hope AIDS 
Network; Alzheimer Society; association of Saskatchewan care 
home auxiliaries; Canadian Coordinating Office for Health 
Technology Assessment; the child action plan prevention and 
support programs; the first responders, first responders’ 
conference; avenue centre for gender and sexual diversity; hope 
air; Mackenzie Infant Care Centre. 
 
The list is quite extensive in that we provide considerable 
supports to organizations, associations, non-profits throughout 
the province, Madam Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you for that answer. And it looks 
like there’s an awful lot of organizations and associations and 
groups that do receive some funding. How do you determine 
who does and who doesn’t? Because that’s really kind of the 
root of my question. 
 
I was able to meet with a couple of people from Saskatchewan 
Epilepsy Inc. And they have had an organization that’s been 
operating for a number of years and they have been fundraising 
on their own. They were part of the United Way and they are no 
longer part of the United Way. They had a bingo. They used to 
run bingos in downtown and found that since Casino Regina 
opened up that their funding has dried up. I think the last bingo 
that they went to operate, there was only two or three people 
there to play and a number of there to work to fund their 
organization. 
 
When you look at the work that these people need to do, it’s 
amazing. And there’s certainly a real void there for the 
information that the epilepsy Saskatchewan inc. can provide. 
 
So I guess maybe I would like some guidelines as to how you 
determine who you would fund and whether this group would 
fall into that category because as I said, there’s a void there in 
education. It seems like, you know, epilepsy is very seldom 
talked about, and they really find it difficult to keep their doors 
open to provide a service that is much needed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Indeed as I had indicated earlier, there are a number of 
programs and associations who do receive funding. I’m also 
aware that each year Saskatchewan Health and the regional 
health authorities would receive many, perhaps hundreds of 
applications for funding from various groups across the 
province. 
 
I’m assuming the question has to do with criteria of evaluation 
because obviously when you receive a request for funding and 
there’s a specific dollar value available for funding, evaluations 
need to take place. And you evaluate on the basis of criteria. 
Some of that criteria would include the provincial focus of the 
work that’s being done, the ability to meet the broad needs 
across the province with the specific program, tying it into very 
specific initiatives that may be under way in the province 
already through other existing work or work that is taking place 
through the department where a focus has been assigned. 
 
There’s no easy answer to the member’s question specific to 
this particular application. Because I think we are all aware of 

the important work that the folks who are advocating on behalf 
of epilepsy, the value of the work that they are contributing to 
the province. But the applications are based specifically on 
what is being requested, the focus, provincial focus, the dollars 
that are available, and perhaps meeting the needs of a 
provincial-wide focus that’s already in place. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — After talking to two of the people from the 
Saskatchewan Epilepsy Inc., they certainly educated me on the 
need for education and you know it’s something, if you’ve ever 
been around a person that has an epileptic seizure, do we know 
how to act? And it’s not just the general public but it’s even 
professionals such as police and ambulance attendants and so 
many other people. 
 
Who would do the education then to inform people if it isn’t an 
association like this? Does the Department of Health do that? I 
know sometimes it’s been talked about . . . well it would fall 
under mental health. But it really doesn’t fall under mental 
health because the seizure could be 30 seconds long once or 
twice a year and the other, you know, total amount of time the 
person is functioning perfectly normal. So it’s really not under 
mental health and they find that they’re kind of in limbo. They 
don’t really have anybody, you know, educating other than 
themselves. But again they don’t have funding. So do you know 
if any of this is covered off through any department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Before I try to seek some guidance on the 
specific question I just want to indicate to the member opposite 
and to any of those who might be watching, of the answer I 
provided earlier about we receive perhaps hundreds of 
applications, the member opposite could be actually asking a 
question on behalf of any number of organizations who have 
made an application and have not been funded because there’s 
not enough money in the system to fund everybody. 
 
When I was the minister of Government Relations we managed 
programs of community infrastructure. I appeared in committee 
here in which members opposite raised concerns about 
communities that they represented, doing very good work for 
their citizens, not being funded under a community 
infrastructure program. The concern is always specific to the 
application. They’re doing good work, absolutely wonderful 
work. It’s evaluated against others doing equally valuable work. 
The set of criteria can only fund so many. Some won’t be. So 
some are happy under a funding mechanism; others are 
unhappy. Ultimately we’d like to be able to ensure that the 
services being recommended are provided. 
 
Now there are a number of other sources available within the 
communities and whatnot. And I know that agencies like the 
United Way and others provide funding to assist associations 
locally and provincially to provide services. The health regions 
have health promotions branches that are engaged in 
community distribution of information. That’s not to say that 
what they’re doing meets the needs of all of those who are 
advocating in that area, whether it’s epilepsy or any number of 
other areas. 
 
But I just want to stress to those who are watching, who have an 
interest in funding of associations, that there is provincial 
funding available — not to stop trying to do good work, not to 
stop because you’ve been unsuccessful at getting money one 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

year, not to stop making applications in the future. There are 
dollars available. There is an interest within Saskatchewan 
Health and the regional health authorities. And I simply 
encourage people to keep bringing forward their applications so 
that it can be considered along with those others that are in the 
system. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t know. I 
didn’t ask the question, whether they have even applied. They 
may not have even applied to your department for funding. 
 
But what I would ask then is that maybe your department would 
get in touch with them. I know they have sent a letter to your 
office because they sent a letter to my office at the same time. 
And I would say it was two weeks ago. I met with them 
yesterday or two days ago. They haven’t heard a word back 
from your department yet, but I would ask that the department 
then get in touch with them and perhaps tell them the options 
that are available through the department because I don’t 
believe that they were aware of that. I’m not sure. But it may 
just be an issue of communication. And between the two, they 
didn’t know what was available. So would that be okay? 
 
I can give the information to you, or I know you have a letter 
has been sent to you with the information on how to contact 
them. Would that be fair then to have your department at least 
get in touch with them and maybe walk them through the 
different options they may have to fund their organization 
because as you have said . . . But, you know, after listening to 
the work that they have done and knowing a couple people that 
suffer from epilepsy, the work that they do is really very, very 
important because for someone for the first few times, if they 
have a seizure, it is a pretty scary time. They don’t know, you 
know, what this all entails. 
 
So I would ask that the department work with this organization 
to walk them through the process of hopefully finding some 
funding so they can keep their doors open, because right now 
it’s being run out of one person’s home. It’s her home phone 
number. She is the organization. And with such a void out there 
for education, I don’t think that’s the way it should be. I think 
there should be some funding for this organization. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t want the direction considered by 
the question left that in fact the letter to my office or the 
department might go unanswered. If a letter has been provided, 
the letter will be answered. And it will be answered in a way 
that we assume will be helpful. 
 
What the member opposite is suggesting, that with . . . The 
request may be to keep the doors open, not necessarily to 
provide education. I can’t, I can’t respond to that. We don’t 
provide core funding, for example, to associations or agencies. 
The funding would be to provide for very specific programming 
aspects. But certainly if the letter is within the department, the 
letter will be answered, and we will be as helpful as we possibly 
can. There’s no doubt advocacy in this particular field is useful, 
and we’ll be as helpful as we possibly can. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think they 
would appreciate that, and I believe that’s . . . They’re not 

looking for core funding for rent or anything like that. They’re 
looking funding for education because as I said, there’s a huge 
. . . They used to do programs at the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] barracks and city police, explaining to them 
what the process is when somebody goes through a seizure. 
That isn’t being done any more. They just don’t have the 
funding to carry out simple education programs like that. 
 
I know there is some coverage of it in first aid courses which 
they would be going through, but this is specific to, certainly 
specific to the issue of epilepsy which . . . And there’s just a lot 
of other areas, too. Even a number of the physicians don’t know 
what’s available. And so there’s just a whole education piece 
around that. And I think that’s what they’d be looking for. 
 
I can’t speak for them. But talking to them, that seemed to be 
what they were looking for, is specific programming which 
because of a number of reasons . . . when they used to fund 
raise, that fundraising has dried up and they seem to be 
struggling right now. So I would appreciate if . . . And I didn’t 
imply that the department wasn’t going to respond to that letter. 
I’m just saying that I had talked to them over the last couple 
weeks. 
 
The other issue I wanted to talk about, and it was an issue that 
came up a couple weeks ago, was . . . because there was a week 
on it, organ and tissue donors week. And the whole issue after 
that was around whether there should be a registry. And I know 
the province doesn’t have a registry right now. I have, you 
know, you put a sticker on your health services card. You sign a 
card. You put it in your wallet. You talk to your next of kin— 
whether it’s spouse or family — what your intentions are. But 
that doesn’t always mean that is what happens in the case of a 
person being able to donate, being put in the position to donate. 
 
And they talked about a registry. Can I just hear what the 
department’s view is of a organ donor registry? And I have a 
number of other questions around that. I’m not sure of the 
whole legal issue with that but I’ll just start with the 
department’s opinion of an organ and donor tissue registry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And of course this is an important issue and I appreciate the 
support that all members of the legislature gave on the organ 
registry day that occurred here a short while ago. 
 
The organ donation program is an important part of the health 
system Canada-wide, and I understand that some jurisdictions 
— as the member has indicated, like British Columbia, Nova 
Scotia — have established registries of a sort in order to 
improve the organ donation rates. Prior to any consideration 
being made here in Saskatchewan, the department would want 
to undertake a considerable amount of consultation, both with 
those from outside the province and with those here in the 
province including health providers and others, about what the 
impact the establishment of a specific agency might have. 
 
But that having been said, the deputy minister will be meeting 
in a couple of weeks with the Canadian council for donation 
and transportation which is a national group formed by federal, 
provincial, and territorial governments to advise on organ and 
tissue donations and transplantation issues. There’s also a 
meeting of deputies coming up in June in which this issue will 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

be discussed more fully. So the question . . . the answer to the 
question is one of . . . the issue is in transition. We currently 
don’t have a registry. We don’t currently have a process for 
establishing a registry in place. We know that some 
consultation is necessary, and reviewing the work that’s being 
done elsewhere will be useful. And there are meetings 
scheduled in the very near future to discuss this issue further. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that will be interesting. And I did hear 
a little bit about the British Columbia and Nova Scotia registry, 
but really the fact that it really was ineffective. It didn’t deal 
with the issues that the associations were concerned about. 
United Kingdom has a different process completely, and I don’t 
think that we could quite get to that, where everybody’s organs 
are donated unless you say not. Whereas here, it’s the opposite 
way. 
 
But what I have learned over the last couple of days is that so 
often the card will be filled out and the sticker will be put on 
your health services card, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that 
your organs will be donated. It’s the next of kin’s final say. So 
what is the legal ramifications around that? Like why is that the 
case? That the next of kin — which is going to be an extremely 
stressful time for them — could say no, and that would be what 
is done. Like is there some legal precedent that causes that, or 
why is that so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me just say on the legal question that 
the member opposite is asking, we’ve actually — through the 
wonderful technology that’s available to us here — we’ve 
actually put in a call in the last seconds here to try and find an 
answer for the member and for the public that’s interested. 
Because for all intents and purposes the more information we 
can provide here today, the better off we all are at the end of the 
day and going forward. 
 
The comments that the member made off the start of his 
remarks having to do with the situation in British Columbia and 
situation in Great Britain — the inadequacies in British 
Columbia; we can’t go as far as Great Britain — indicates the, 
to a certain extent, the complexities in creating a registry that 
meets the needs of the people in the province, and at the same 
time, the desire for provincial governments to see that there’s 
some benefit right across Canada to an organ donation registry 
program. What happens in one province may in fact, it should 
in fact line up with what happens in any other province when 
we have a truly Canadian system. How we get there is another 
story. 
 
I can’t . . . I’m not being signalled anywhere about the legal 
answer to the member’s question. Perhaps if we’re still on this 
subject, he might raise another issue. And as I get the answer to 
his very specific legal question, I can bring that forward as it 
becomes available. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, I’d be interested to find out the answer 
because just talking to the people that are involved with this, 
they are frustrated because a person goes through all the 
processes and then eventually the organs aren’t donated because 
the family has the final say. 
 
And what they were looking at is a registry, you know, and it 
doesn’t have to be as complex as what it is in the UK [United 

Kingdom]. But if a person of sound mind goes down and 
registers and their name is put into a computer and saying, this 
is what I want to do if the eventuality ever happens to me, that it 
wouldn’t be followed through, that somebody could then 
overrule that. And that’s what they were looking at as a registry, 
that once a person has committed, that that would be seen to 
fruition as opposed to somebody coming in and changing what 
my wishes would have been. But maybe . . . I know there’s 
some answers coming on that. Maybe they’re just coming 
through the door now. I’m not sure. 
 
The other one is the issue around . . . It used to be on drivers’ 
licences. Every year when you get your driver’s licence, there 
was questions on your driver’s licence if you wanted to donate 
your organs. And that isn’t the case any more. Whose decision 
is that? Would that be the Department of Health or is that SGI’s 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]? I imagine you’re 
working in conjunction on that. But whose decision would that 
have been to stop that program? And I don’t know how long 
ago that stopped. But I do remember seeing when I would get 
my driver’s licence renewal form that there was a tab right on 
there regarding organ and tissue donation, and that isn’t the case 
any more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The question asked with regards to legal 
circumstances, I can offer the member a bit of an answer. The 
issue’s a little more complicated than it would first appear from 
the questions. I think we are aware that there’s some co-signing 
responsibilities with regards . . . like spouses will co-sign the 
donation card. And I do believe that it’s not law but practice 
within our health authorities that physicians, surgeons will want 
to confirm the request or the consent of the . . . particularly the 
spouse, confirm that that was indeed the wishes that are 
represented by the cards. I believe that this is a protection of 
physicians or facilities in ensuring that consent was indeed 
granted. So it’s more practice, legal practice, as opposed to law. 
But we will continue to have a look at this issue. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, I’d appreciate it if you could get back 
to me on any of the information you find out regarding this. 
Because again talking to the people that are involved in this 
they find that is probably the case is that, you know, the person 
has gone through all these steps with the sticker on their health 
services card and then when the physician asks a grieving 
spouse, they may reverse what the person intended. 
 
And that’s the whole point of a registry that if, you know, 
you’ve gone down to sign into a registry, maybe it makes it that 
much more acceptable for the spouse or next of kin. They’ve 
gone through this process to donate and the next of kin knows. 
 
I’m interested to find out that it isn’t set in law. It’s a practice of 
the health authorities more than anything else. I don’t know if 
you have any more to comment and if you don’t we’ll move to 
the next subject. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think just one further comment, and it 
may indeed not only be the practice of the health authorities, 
but in fact it might be the practice of the physicians who indeed 
would perform the work. And I think there’s a confirmation that 
indeed the wishes . . . 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

So it is very important that individuals who are indeed 
committing their organs for donation discuss their wishes with 
their family members, particularly their spouses. The grieving 
spouse does not want to be surprised in the hospital by this 
request. I think it would be very helpful that when the donation 
card is signed that these wishes are made very clear for spouses 
or other immediate family members, because I think we are 
aware of tragedies that occur where sometimes both spouses are 
lost and the consulting family member may be children. So to 
consult with family members I think is a very important part of 
this process. And we will make further inquiries on the legal 
aspects of this. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just one final statement is that, you know, 
we normally think of it as, you know, it’s a spouse that has to 
make that decision, but it’s not always the case. A person that 
isn’t married, you know, and that can be at whatever age; it can 
be children. When I went to the kickoff of organ and tissue 
donors week, and listening to the story of a lady from Lumsden 
whose seven-year-old girl was killed in a playground accident 
and the process that they went through, so it’s more than just a 
spouse. There’s just, as you can imagine, there are just many, 
many different examples. 
 
And I certainly do think that moving towards a registry — we 
could probably lead in this in Canada — that so many of those 
questions could be answered. It could be cleared up. Because I 
think, you know just as I said, a sticker on the health services 
card and communication between whoever, and then five years 
down the road, whether that has been talked about in the last 
five years. But if the formal process is more of a registry I think 
it would certainly benefit the province as a whole. 
 
So I’ll just turn it over to my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena to ask a few other questions. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Chair. To the minister and 
to his officials, thank you for the opportunity to answer some of 
the questions. Most of them are specific to my constituency. 
And which is . . . I don’t know how many people have the 
luxury of having at least . . . I have three different health 
regions within my constituency so it is interesting. 
 
I’m going to start with the Foam Lake centre. A number of 
years ago when there was a cutback in long-term care beds, the 
minister at that time promised that Foam Lake would be one of 
the first places to have a primary health care centre. And there’s 
been many discussions back and forth between the ministers 
and the board and the mayor of the town about this health care 
centre and waiting to see when the initial work was going to be 
started. 
 
I spoke to the mayor this morning, and he tells me that they 
have been advised there will be a needs assessment in the fall 
which is the first step. And I realize there’s always a process to 
go through. 
 
But in a small town . . . And I guess Foam Lake isn’t small. 
Within the constituency, it’s one of the larger centres. In fact 
it’s the only centre that size in my constituency that doesn’t 
have a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week emergency centre. That was 

taken away a couple of years ago. So it is a huge concern for the 
town, when they talk about growing and attracting new people 
into the town, to not have a health care centre. 
 
I know that the minister’s aware that Foam Lake is the home of 
Milligan Bio-Tech, and the work that they are doing in that area 
is groundbreaking And they employ 10 people now with huge 
opportunities. But when people look at moving out to a new 
town, there’s a couple of questions they ask. They ask about a 
school. They ask about health care. And they look at the roads. 
We’re lucky to have a great school, but the other two I’m afraid 
we’re failing on. 
 
I’m wondering has your department had any contact with 
Sunrise Health Region to talk about something that could be 
used in the meantime, before this primary health centre is set 
up, to allow Foam Lake to have a 24-7 emergency centre within 
the town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for that question. 
Every individual in the province of Saskatchewan has an 
interest in quality health care, ensuring that health care is 
delivered as close to them as possible. The system 
province-wide faces considerable pressures, both, well, 
financial and otherwise. 
 
We are developing very, very quickly in this province the 
primary care delivery model to ensure that we can provide a 
multi-disciplinary approach to health care that represents the 
best service available from each of the service providers within 
the system. 
 
This having been said, thinking about province-wide, we are 
developing a primary care network that currently has reached 
38 different communities in the province. Our budget this year 
provides us with some tools to proceed with the development of 
additional primary care sites in the province. We are working 
with communities in various parts of Saskatchewan and the 
health regions to evaluate and assess where the priorities are 
and the communities are best positioned to utilize these services 
and dealing with very specific guidelines. We are also 
reviewing those guidelines. 
 
I could make quite a speech about primary care because I am 
strongly committed to the delivery of health services through 
the primary care network, and I believe strongly that the people 
of Saskatchewan will be well-served through the full utilization 
of nurse practitioners, registered nurses, licensed practical 
nurses, and others in addition to physicians who can offer 
services in a community. 
 
So not wanting to make a speech out of the member’s question 
— her question was very specific to Foam Lake — I can tell the 
member opposite that Foam Lake, like all communities across 
the country, across the province are represented within a 
regional health authority. The regional health authorities make 
very specific decisions about their capital allocations and their 
distribution of services. Saskatchewan Health works very 
closely with the regional health authorities to deliver services, 
again within the financial means both of the province and of the 
regional health authority. 
 
It is my understanding that the authority, the regional health 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

authority in this case has at this point identified a number of 
capital needs. We are currently working on and funding on 
capital needs in Preeceville. It is my understanding that the 
Foam Lake project rates very highly in the next dollars to be 
allocated. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And before I go any 
further, I would like to thank you for the help for the individual 
that we talked about the other day. And I do appreciate your 
help. 
 
But going back to Foam Lake, you indicated that you’re 
working very quickly on this issue. And probably for the 
process that’s involved when it comes to setting up a primary 
health care centre, this is quickly. 
 
But for the people that are living out there right now, they know 
that you better get sick between 9 o’clock in the morning or 5 
o’clock at night or you’re not going to be able to go to Foam 
Lake. You’re going to have to go down one of the roads that I 
talked about to one of your colleagues last night, or you’re 
going to have to get an ambulance — which also costs 
considerably more money now after the recent announcement, 
which again is a separate issue. 
 
But what the people from Foam Lake are needing is somebody 
to say in the meantime, give us back what we had a while ago 
and that was the 24-hour emergency service. It is something 
that you . . . The minister indicated that there was additional 
dollars and that you were looking at sites right now, additional 
sites. 
 
I think that this area, and I know that you probably get a 
number of people saying, my area is the right area. But when 
you look at this constituency that doesn’t have a large centre in 
it, you’re forced to go to Yorkton or to Regina or to Saskatoon. 
It’s a long way. And there has to be some opportunities in that 
area. 
 
Last year we had a close call when the school bus with a 
number of First Nations children on it was involved in a 
accident not too far from Foam Lake, and because of the people 
that were close by there wasn’t anything, there was no major 
incidents. But it was a scare to the community, and they realize 
that there is nothing there for them. We have not only the 
reserve that has needs in the Foam Lake area but also the 
increase in the number of people who live full-time at Fishing 
Lake that are requiring hospital services. 
 
So my question again to the minister: is there anything that your 
department can do to say, we recognize there is a need in Foam 
Lake until we can get the primary health care centre set up? Is 
there something we can do the ensure that they have 24-7 
service in that town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And I know that the member made a couple of comments in her 
remarks about other communities could have similar concerns 
or even similar questions. And I know that of those who might 
be watching these proceedings today there are people in other 
communities who are indeed saying we want 24-hour care, we 
want more action taken on physician recruitment, we want . . . 
Anyway there are considerable human resource and capital 

needs in the health care system across the province. 
 
We are aware of the importance of the service and the service 
providers to the individual communities. The regional health 
authorities are those responsible for the delivery of day-to-day 
operations. That includes the establishment of needs and 
priorities throughout the region. We have 12 regional health 
authorities in the province of Saskatchewan. Those authorities 
work with the communities to ensure that there’s an 
understanding of what the expectations and needs are within 
that community and, within the resources available to the 
authorities, work out a means by which those needs and 
concerns can be addressed. 
 
The first line of contact for Sask Health with regards to the 
priorities of a region are the health authorities. So while we are 
very sympathetic to the circumstances in Foam Lake, we 
encourage the member opposite and the people of Foam Lake to 
continue to work with their local health authority, the regional 
health authority, to ensure that they have communicated the 
urgency of their needs and that the region is able to respond or 
advocate on their behalf. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I assure you that 
not only myself but my constituents have done that. And they 
know that a few years ago when there was a shortage of money 
and they needed $1million, it was easy to just whack off one 
area. And you don’t frustrate near as many people, if you say, 
okay I’m just to cut the services in this one town rather than do 
it right across their whole health care region. 
 
The regional health authority is limited with the amount of 
money they have and the minister is well aware of that. And 
they are doing what they can do. But when it comes to the big 
decisions about what should be closed, it was the government 
that stood in the House a number of years ago and said, this is 
the ones that are going to close. So it also can be your . . . and 
it’s your government that stands in the House on budget day 
and stands up and says, this is the ones that we’re going to put 
money into. 
 
And I’m hoping that before long that this government will look, 
not just at health care, but taking into consideration the other 
departments which are intertwined when it comes to deciding 
where the facilities need to be. The economic development 
that’s possible in this area can only happen if you have the 
facilities that you need to ensure that people want to live in the 
area. So I just wanted to register their concern and I know the 
minister will probably have another statement on Foam Lake. 
 
But in the meantime I’m going to ask your officials to look at 
another issue. And this one probably seems a little smaller, but 
it is a concern for an individual who has a tea house. Because 
June 30 last year I wrote to the then Health minister, asking if 
there was a government regulation regarding non-commercial 
dishwashers in tea houses, because in one of my health regions 
they approve an ordinary dishwasher in a tea house and in 
another health region they don’t give that type of approval. So 
I’m wondering if there has been any kind of . . . is there any 
kind of a policy across from your Health department that would 
give leadership to the regions on this issue? 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
There are two answers that I will provide. The first answer 
supplementary to the previous question with regards to Sunrise 
and capital and secondarily with regards to public health 
inspections and the specific tea room that the member is talking 
about. 
 
First and foremost we all are aware of the increased costs within 
the health system. The main drivers of those costs essentially 
are human resources, drugs, and technology. Capital is a driver 
but the capital costs come into play after we’ve addressed the 
human resource needs, drugs, and technology which are 
required to provide very specific services. We have renovations, 
we have new capital needs. 
 
Each of the regions have benefited over the last three years 
from increases to their budgets in order to accommodate not 
only those three, but also their capital needs. And in fact the 
budget that we are dealing with this year has not only increased 
the dollars available for capital . . . [inaudible] . . . we’re not 
funding a lot of new projects because the increase in capital is 
covering off a lot of projects that are currently in the works. 
 
The Sunrise Health Region received 9.7 per cent increase in 
their budget. That’s about $11.3 million of additional money 
this year for a total of $127.1 million for their projects and 
priorities. Even with those types of increases, the regions and 
the department are unable to meet all of the expectations and 
demands on the system. But we are very pleased that, given the 
strength of the Saskatchewan economy, we have able to 
continue to increase the dollars that are available to the system 
to try and meet increased and enhanced needs across the 
province. 
 
Specifically to the member’s question — of course she is aware 
that I wasn’t in this position when the question was first raised 
— but I am aware that over the course of this period of time, 
some review view has taken place. There’s no conclusion to this 
review at the moment. 
 
The issue has to do with providing guidance to public health 
inspectors whose job is sometimes complicated by big city rules 
applied in smaller communities. We face these challenges in the 
way in which we as a province address water quality issues and 
a number of other things, whereby the simple fact of what we 
do in some of our very small communities cannot be exactly the 
same as what is done in downtown Regina or Saskatoon. But at 
the same time, the people of Saskatchewan expect that the 
safety of their food and water environment is the same no 
matter where they are in the province. 
 
So what we have are rules and regulations with regards to 
washing dishes that public health inspectors are required to 
enforce, and when it doesn’t make sense on a practical basis, we 
have to come back and review how does that practical 
circumstance sit up against the regulation that we are charged 
with enforcing. And that review has begun. It’s taking place, 
and I don’t have any conclusion for the member at this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I am hoping 
that when the review is completed, you’ll contact our office as 
soon as possible because of course the minister had indicated 
that safety is the prime concern. Well I can assure you it’s the 

prime concern of the people that are running the business as 
well. They want to ensure that all of their customers are 
receiving not just quality food, but the safety concerns that 
surround this issue. 
 
But because the present minister wasn’t in place when I 
addressed the original letter, I had done some background work 
at that time and found out that the department didn’t use the 
Jameson test to determine bacteria count, but they do allow the 
three-step process for washing dishes. And as long as the 
process meets the standards, there’s no check at the end to 
determine if the end product — and that would be the dishes — 
meets the standards of sanitation. 
 
So when you think about it, regardless how clean the kitchen is 
or the dishwasher is, all you have to do is touch a tea towel 
when you take it out and everything could be changed. So I 
think that there are a number of issues that I’m hoping that your 
department is looking at and looking at quickly before we get 
into the really busy season again. 
 
My last question, Mr. Minister, is regarding MACSI. And I’m 
wondering if . . . I know that there was some issues around this 
area a couple of years ago and at the last I heard there was still 
no decision made on some of the work they had been 
undertaken. I’m wondering if you can give me an update on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll do my best in the limited knowledge 
that I have. The MACSI file actually falls under the authority of 
the Minister of Healthy Living Services. That having been said, 
the department responds to both ministers and some of the 
officials who would be responding to the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services have been able to provide me with some 
assistance to help answer your question so we’re not bouncing 
things around. I don’t think that assists us in any way. 
 
The Provincial Auditor made some requests. We have 
responded to all of the requests that have been made through the 
Provincial Auditor. A report has been made to the Public 
Accounts Committee. There is one issue that remains 
outstanding and that one issue is still being dealt with within the 
department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — This issue has been being dealt with for a 
number of years now. Can you give us some idea of when you 
plan on having some kind of a report that would be available 
and made public so that the whole MACSI issue can have some 
kind of a conclusion, not just for the general public, but 
specifically for the Métis people who are dealing in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The one issue that I’d mentioned earlier 
that remains outstanding is strategic planning. A lot of what 
we’ve done already, of course, has been reported to the Public 
Accounts Committee. I think the member opposite might be 
referring to another piece here. The department has made some 
referral to the police. The police have not yet responded back, 
to my knowledge. 
 
It is the intention of the department, once a police report comes 
back, we’ve had a chance to assess and evaluate what comes 
back against the issues that we’ve been dealing with, with 
regards to our Public Accounts reporting and the strategic 
planning elements, that indeed we will make this information 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

available. We will release whatever information is available. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a couple of 
questions regarding . . . there’s been lot’s of correspondence 
that’s gone on between your department and this individual, but 
it’s regarding the Spalding Orthopaedic Design Inc company in 
Rouleau, Saskatchewan and the work that he does. It has been 
an issue for a while. And I’ve certainly been out to visit Clayton 
Spalding a couple of . . . once for sure at his facility in Rouleau 
right on the Main Street of Dog River which you’ll see on most 
every episode of Dog River. 
 
But I’ve looked at the work he does, and I’ve talked to him and 
I’ve certainly heard his frustration — and it is extreme 
frustration — with the letters that he keeps receiving from the 
former minister and now yourself. And the letters say the same 
thing, which is that Wascana Rehab Centre and the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council are the two organizations that 
do this type of work, that there is no room for another company 
to do this work that has the capability of charging the 
government. 
 
There’s only two organizations: the Wascana Rehab which of 
course is here in Regina and the Abilities Council which is in 
Saskatoon, which wouldn’t be classed as a government agency, 
I don’t believe. So there is some deviation from the fact that it 
can only be government delivering this service because the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council isn’t government. Certainly it 
seems like there is an attitude from the department that they 
don’t want private business delivering this type of service. 
 
Could I please hear what the department or the minister has to 
say about this issue? 
 
[12:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And indeed I have paid some attention to this file since I took 
over the minister’s office within the department. I have no, no 
complaints about the work that Mr. Spalding is doing. He’s 
running a quality business, and he’s serving the people that he 
represents very well. He operates, as the member has pointed 
out, a private business. 
 
We have developed within the department a system that 
recognizes the publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care system and providers for the way in which we provide 
access to care and to Aids to Independent Living. And there are 
some very specific processes in this regard. 
 
Mr. Spalding has not only been the recipient of letters in this 
regard; he has met with departmental officials. The agreements 
between what Mr. Spalding wishes to do and how it fits within 
the guidelines that have been developed for providing these 
services haven’t meshed together very well. That having been 
said, we do believe that those who require the manufactured 
devices are being well served by the Wascana centre and the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council, which indeed have been 
contracted to provide these services for a considerable period of 
time. 

The bottom line in all of this is that Mr. Spalding believes 
there’s a role for the private sector in providing these services. 
We have not yet been convinced that the need exists to move 
outside of the publicly funded, publicly administered system. 
And we’ll continue to proceed with the policy that existed prior 
to my assuming responsibilities here as minister, and we’ll 
continue to discuss matters along these lines with Mr. Spalding 
should he wish to continue to press for additional service. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I certainly 
understand the government’s statement around publicly funded, 
publicly administered health care system. We can start talking 
about a number of organizations that are private that are 
contracted through this publicly funded, publicly administered 
health care system. You know, whether it’s ambulance service, 
whether it’s blood work, whether it’s low-imaging diagnostics, 
are all done contracted to private companies. I can understand 
the issue around Wascana Rehab. 
 
But you’re contracting to the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 
You’re contracting to a non-government organization. So is the 
argument that we’re just not going to contract to a private 
organization, but we’ll contract to a non-profit like the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council? Is that the position of the 
department? 
 
Because you can’t say . . . because your answer doesn’t hold 
true when you say that we are going through a completely 
publicly funded, publicly administered process here because the 
Saskatchewan Abilities Council wouldn’t fit into that category. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think that the debate over a for-profit, 
non-profit delivery of care, etc., is one that the member may 
wish to engage in at considerable length. The system in Canada 
that we are aware of currently has a degree of for-profit delivery 
or private sector delivery, and public sector delivery. In fact the 
figure that is quoted across Canada is essentially the Canadian 
system is about 70 per cent publicly funded and 30 per cent 
privately funded. That debate recognizes that there are some 
non-insured services delivered by the private sector and takes 
into account certain existing contracts for services that are not 
directly related to delivery of health care. 
 
Pharmacists, the ambulance fees for example, dentists — 
there’s a number of parts of the system that are currently being 
delivered and have been for some time because they were never 
brought into the system. 
 
In this case we’re talking about the Wascana Rehabilitation 
Centre and the Saskatchewan Abilities Council that have been 
delivering a quality service to meet the needs of the 
Saskatchewan people for a considerable period of time. There is 
not an apparent need to expand the service outside of that which 
is delivered in a non-profit way within the publicly funded, 
publicly administered system to include a for-profit or private 
sector component of an existing program. 
 
So in answering the member’s question, there is no desire to 
expand the delivery of this service to a private sector service or 
a for-profit service. The needs of those who are receiving the 
care are being met. And Mr. Spalding runs a very good business 
to meet the needs of the people to whom he is selling his 
services, with a desire to have some profit into his business for 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

his labour, for the product that he provides. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Can the minister tell me, for example 
people in the Yorkton area, do people from Wascana go up and 
service a person that would have a prescription for a orthotic in 
Yorkton? Or does that person have to come to Regina to get 
service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Answering the member’s question, there 
are currently no outreach programs from the current system so 
that individuals wishing to utilize the services of Wascana or 
the Sask Abilities Council do have to come in to the city. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I find that interesting when you were 
saying that all, you know, the two organizations — the Abilities 
Council and the Wascana Rehab — are servicing the people 
well because I know Clayton Spalding travels the province and 
holds clinics in Yorkton and certainly ends up getting work 
from people that don’t want to wait or don’t want to make the 
trip to Regina. There’s a need for that. 
 
You know, if the Wascana Rehab wants to stay just in Regina 
and the Abilities Council just wants to stay in Saskatoon . . . I 
mean, there’s a lot more to the province than that. 
 
And here we’ve got an individual that would supply that service 
at the locations. He travels to a number of communities and 
supplies that service, you know, so I would debate the fact that 
the service that is being delivered is every bit as good as what 
the minister is saying it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again I indicate that I have a 
considerable amount of respect for the work that Mr. Spalding 
has done and is continuing to do. I applaud his efforts in taking 
forward outside of the area his services to meet the needs of 
folks who are out there. And certainly there are insurance plans 
and others that are providing Mr. Spalding opportunities to 
continue to build his business. 
 
That having been said — and without getting into details of the 
discussion that has occurred between Mr. Spalding and the 
department — there remain issues of conflict in the discussions 
between Mr. Spalding and the department about what services 
are available, what dollar value would be paid for those 
services, who would pay those services. There are a number of 
things that remain unresolved in the discussions that have 
occurred. 
 
That having been said, on the basis of the proposal that’s been 
brought forward by Mr. Spalding at this point in time, the 
conclusion is — as has been stated — that there is no further 
support under the publicly funded system for the proposal that 
Mr. Spalding has made. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just one question on . . . You mentioned the 
issue of conflict. And this is a hypothetical situation. If a person 
was running, was managing a facility that was doing these 
orthotics for the provincial government, and, you know, there 
was certainly some waiting lists, would it be appropriate for that 
person then to have one or two other businesses doing the same 
thing but running privately? Would there be a conflict of 
interest there? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think it should be said that, I mean, 
neither of us are in a position to negotiate a contract from Mr. 
Spalding on the floor of the Chamber. There are interesting 
issues of discussion and debate. 
 
It is the department’s view at the moment that we have a 
program in place that’s meeting the needs of the majority of the 
people in this province. We have resources available to support 
that program and to support those who need the services. We 
are continuing to work with the regions in identifying their 
future needs and priorities, not only in this field but in other 
fields. And as a result of that, should additional needs be 
presented that need to be funded in the future, this will be 
discussed in our normal budget preparation processes. 
 
But we are confident that we are providing a service, we are 
funding the service, and we will continue to go forward on that 
basis. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I certainly don’t want to negotiate a 
contract on behalf of Mr. Spalding’s interests here on the floor 
of the legislature. But I’m sure he’d be very interested 
somewhere else to enter into that negotiation. 
 
But my question was, it was a hypothetical one, but if 
somebody is operating, is working in the . . . doing orthotics 
under the provincial government, would that be appropriate if 
that person had a separate business doing the same thing? 
 
[12:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me just say that I’ve been involved in 
the business of communications for a long time. I was in the 
media. I sat in the federal parliament. I’ve been a city 
councillor, and I represent a constituency at the provincial level. 
At every stage of my work, whether it was in the media or in 
politics, I’ve always been advised by those much smarter than 
me that one never answers a hypothetical question. 
 
And nothing could be more important in the health care field 
where we have complex issues that are being discussed on a 
regular basis. It is the detail not the generality that at the end of 
the day is important, to whether it’s settling a contract, 
negotiating a fee for service, or performing a function for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Health care is complex, but it’s also very basic. The basic 
premise is providing the best quality care to the people of this 
province within the resources available to us. I believe very 
strongly that the department is fulfilling that mandate, doing 
what it needs to do. And the member opposite can bring me all 
the hypothetical questions he wants. I want to deal with 
specifics. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Minister, we may be able to do 
that in the future. I have a specific question then regarding 
student training seats. Saskatchewan purchases orthotist training 
seats in British Columbia and offers bursaries. That bursary is 
returned in service; a return-in-service commitment to the 
public agency is what your letter says. If that person comes 
back to Saskatchewan and wants to operate . . . wants to do his 
practicum I guess it would be, it has to be through a public 
agency and it can’t be through Spalding. Is that correct? And 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2006 

what is the reasons for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The answer again can be very specific in 
this case. The answer is that the individual is receiving public 
money — the bursary is public money — and therefore the 
facility that the individual is expected to practise in would also 
be a publicly funded institution. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So in the case that there was no space 
available for him to do his practicum, and so then he turns and 
goes back to Alberta to do that as opposed to supplying that in 
Saskatchewan, is that then what the department would expect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Is the member opposite suggesting this is 
a real case, that there’s an individual involved? I’m not aware of 
this being a problem. If the member has a very specific case of 
an individual who can’t be placed in the publicly funded, 
publicly administered area here, I’d be happy to hear about it. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s certainly what I was told, that 
this case happened. The person came back to Saskatchewan. 
There wasn’t the job or the space for him to practise and he then 
. . . He could have certainly worked through a private clinic, but 
the government wouldn’t accept that. And so he was looking at 
moving out of province to carry out his work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The information that I have gathered here 
quickly would indicate that in the field of orthotics, we have a 
significant shortage in the province, and I find it very hard to 
believe that an individual would not be able to find a position in 
orthotics in the publicly funded system. 
 
The contracts that individuals who are receiving bursaries sign 
are very clear about providing in-service in return for that 
bursary within the publicly funded, publicly administered 
system, very clear in the contracts that the individuals sign. 
They are aware of this in advance. 
 
The member opposite, in raising his questions, first talks about 
practicum and then jobs. If we’re talking about job — which is 
what he referred to in the second set of questions — if he’s 
talking about job, the bursary contract is a 12-month contract. 
He has a year after leaving school to find the job in 
Saskatchewan to be able to retain the bursary that he or she has 
received. After that 12-month window expires, the contract is 
no longer applied, and the individual is relieved of his or her 
responsibility under the contract. If however the individual 
finds within that 12-month period a job outside the province or 
a job in the private sector that’s contrary to the terms of the 
contract, then they are required to repay the bursary. 
 
So while I find it somewhat incredible that a job in orthotics 
was not available, I’m also aware that the individual would 
have a 12-month window to seek employment within the 
province. And I’m sure within that period of time the jobs 
would be available. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, it has come to 
my attention that an official within your department within the 
last month or so issued a — or perhaps since the new year at 

least I understand — issued a directive to the Saskatoon and 
Regina Qu’Appelle health regions informing them that the type 
of refrigerant they are to use in their chillers needs to be 
changed. That they felt that they are banning the use of the 
refrigerant known as HCFC-123 [dichlorotrifluoroethane]. That 
it no longer is to be used and is to be replaced with another type 
of refrigerant. 
 
First of all, Minister, I guess my first question is, did that 
actually happen? And secondly, if that did happen, did the 
official in your department or officials — whoever made that 
decision — confer with the Department of the Environment as 
far as to see if they had their facts straight and that this was the 
proper directive to be giving health regions as far as the type of 
refrigerants that are being used in chillers and refrigeration 
plants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
The answer is not as simple as the question asked would make 
it appear. I will try to make this as simple as possible. The 
member opposite seems to have a number of other questions 
that he may want to ask in this regard, but I’ll start my answer 
by indicating that indeed projects funded by Saskatchewan 
Health will not be allowed to use CFCs [chlorofluorocarbon] or 
HCFCs [hydrochlorofluorocarbon] that are on a phase-out list. 
 
Public Works Canada has already adopted a policy of not 
allowing refrigerants included on the phase-out list. 
Saskatchewan Property Management follows a policy of not 
allowing refrigerants included on the phase-out list. And we’re 
in the process of formalizing that written policy back in May 
2005. 
 
So I think that in terms of trying to answer the member’s 
question, we have to phrase this in the broader perspective of 
what is and what is not appropriate in the environmental field 
and taking some direction from what Saskatchewan Property 
Management is doing, what Public Works Canada is doing. 
 
Mr. Hart: — The second part to my question, Minister, was 
prior to making that decision, did your department confer with 
the officials within the Department of Environment who would 
have some additional knowledge in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can indicate to the member opposite that 
prior to any decisions being made within Saskatchewan Health, 
consultations with Sask Property Management were undertaken, 
and consultations were made with other experts in the field. 
There are a number of manufacturers of chillers — I think 
there’s four or so — that we work with. The majority of those 
manufacturers of chillers are in complete agreement with the 
policies set in place. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, I take it by your response that your 
officials did not talk to officials within the Department of 
Environment. Now this is a fairly technical issue that I’m 
raising here. But I guess one question that I would have is, I 
believe from the information I’ve been provided that your 
officials don’t have all the information necessary to make that 
kind of a decision. 
 
Because the University of Saskatchewan recently took delivery 
of a very large chiller at their central plant, and they are using 



May 5, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

the HCFC-123 because in the overall context of an 
environmental impact, that particular refrigerant has a much 
smaller environmental impact than the alternative — the 
HFC-134a — which is much less efficient and therefore has 
much greater impact on the environment. 
 
And secondly, Minister, seeing that my time is short, are you 
aware of a major leak at the Regina General Hospital of 
refrigerant, something in the neighbourhood of 3,000 pounds, 
that happened within the last few weeks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In answer to the two questions, the 
member opposite appears to be advocating for one 
manufacturer. We have had representation from what I’m 
assuming is that manufacturer with regards to these chillers. 
The department has agreed to meet again with the manufacturer 
in question sometime in June. And we will discuss all of these 
matters with the manufacturer at that time. 
 
In answer to the second question, we are aware of a spill that 
occurred. We are also aware that the spill occurred during the 
installation of a chiller at the facility. The investigation has 
indicated that the spill was a result of a manufacturer’s defect. 
The manufacturer has repaired the circumstances. Matters have 
been taken care of, and we’re assuming that everything now is 
fine. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, just to correct something that the 
minister just said. I’m certainly not advocating on behalf of one 
manufacturer or another. I’m merely asking questions to see if 
the minister and his officials have all the information required 
to make a decision. And I would suggest from his answers that 
— I’m guessing — they may not have all the pertinent 
information. But I will pursue this at another time. Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. Knowing that 
we’re at the end of the time then, I simply say to the member 
opposite we are prepared to meet with a particular manufacturer 
who has indicated some of the things that the member opposite 
has expressed. So that consultation will occur. 
 
We, having reached the end of the time, I’d like to thank my 
officials for their attendance here today and helping to answer 
the questions raised and thank the members opposite for their 
interest. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
[13:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise and 
report progress — and in fact it may want to report extreme 
progress — but at any rate, ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. It’s been moved by the 
Government House Leader that the committee report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m instructed by the committee to report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The committee has reported progress 
and asks for leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Being the hour of 1 o’clock, this 
House does now stand adjourned until Monday at . . . I’m sorry. 
When will the committee meet again? Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. I would 
thank all members for their respectful dialogue in debate and 
look forward to seeing everyone again Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:02.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1520 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day of Midwives 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
 2006 YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
 School Safety Patrol Week 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
 Support for Canadian Troops 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1524 
 2006 World Class Players’ Cup 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1524 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Review of Infant’s Medical Treatment 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1524 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1524 
 Provision of Oxygen and Palliative Care 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
 Job Growth Statistics 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1526 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1526 
 Appointment at the Labour Relations Board 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1527 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1528 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1528 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1530 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1530 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1530 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1530 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1531 
 Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1531 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1532 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1533 
  McMorris.......................................................................................................................................................................1533, 1540 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1537 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1542 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


