






















































Hansard: November 23, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 18A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 557 
 November 23, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again to present another petition in regards to dialysis 
in the Broadview area. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement the strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good folks from 
communities of Regina, Brandon; I notice Broadview, 
Whitewood, Indian Head, Grenfell, Cowessess. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition on behalf of individuals from the communities 
of Claydon and Frontier who are concerned about the 
possibility or the delay, I guess, in getting the highway paved 
between Claydon and Robsart. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway 49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Sturgis, 
Preeceville, and Lintlaw. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with lack of funding for the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Carnduff, Glen Ewen, and Oxbow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
government funding for the cancer drug Avastin, and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Carnduff. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition to present on behalf of citizens concerned with this 
government’s propensity for gravel highways. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
undertake immediate action and provide dust suppression 
on the gravel portion of Highway No. 99 between junction 
6 and Craven. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey, Craven, Regina, Bulyea, and 
Markinch. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
several petitions of citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Quill Lake, 
Humboldt, Viscount, Saskatoon, Archerwill, Regina, Bruno, 
Englefeld, Annaheim, Preeceville, Colonsay, and Meacham. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who have concerns regarding the future of the Estevan 
Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Macoun as well 
as other areas. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from the citizens of Wilkie who are concerned 
about reduction of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly again today to present a petition with the 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the NDP’s 
[New Democratic Party] two-tier health care. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Alida, 
Estevan, and Oxbow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Jansen, Dafoe, Wynyard, and Lanigan and Lockwood. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present yet another petition regarding this government’s failure 
to fund the cancer drug Avastin. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from the 
constituency of Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to Rule 15(7) are 
hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the patient demand 
for each satellite dialysis site in the province for the year 
2002 and 2003 and subsequent years ’03-04, ’04-05, 
’05-06 and ’06-07? 
 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the patient load for 
each satellite dialysis site in the province for the years 
2002 and ’03, ’03 and ’04, ’04 and ’05, ’05 and ’06, ’06 
and ’07? 

 
And finally, I give notice that I shall on day no. 23 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the total number of 
dialysis units in Regina for the year 2003, ’03 and ’04, ’04 
and ’05, ’05 and ’06, and ’06 and ’07? 
 

I so present. Thank you. 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin, the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to stand today to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, three people who are 
articling with the Department of Justice. Karen Makohoniuk, 
Mary McAuley, and Randy King are observing today’s 
proceedings from your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are joined by 
Kylie Head, executive assistant to the deputy minister of 
Justice. 
 
Karen, Mary, and Randy are all graduates of the University of 
Saskatchewan, College of Law. These students began articles in 
June 2006 and are being exposed to a diverse and challenging 
articling experience with Saskatchewan Justice. I am pleased 
that these individuals are interested in public service and have 
chosen to article with the department. I’m sure they will find 
their time with us will equip them with practical knowledge of 
the justice system and how it operates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members to join me in welcoming 
Karen, Mary, Randy, and Kylie to the Legislative Assembly 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today is two of 
our former interns, Justin Leifso and Michel Carpentier, who I 
understand have come back to visit the legislature. And outside 
the Assembly they asked me if there was going to be a good 
show today, and I told him that there was. So I look forward to 
all members providing a good show for them. 
 
And I’d also like to join with the Justice minister in welcoming 
the new articling students. Those articling students will be 
articling for a 12-month period of time, so they will have the 
privilege of serving under two different governments. So I 
welcome them to their Assembly as well and look forward to 
working with them in a different capacity later next year. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite having gotten up, I am now compelled to do 
the same as we shared the same intern, Michel Carpentier. 
 
And I have to say it’s because of Michel’s work on facilitating a 
community process that today there is much less graffiti in the 
Cathedral district. He also did excellent work on policy and 
program issues that we worked on. So I want to welcome 
Michel as well and ask everyone to join me today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence 
Against Women 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — So close yet so far away. Mr. Speaker, since 
1981, November 25 has been observed in Latin America as an 
International Day Against Violence Against Women. 
 
Since declared, people have been gathering on this day to give 
voice to a very serious issue. So serious, Mr. Speaker, that in 
December 1999, the United Nations General Assembly adopted 
a resolution declaring November 25 the International Day for 
the Elimination of Violence Against Women. This day 
represents the absolute condemnation of gender violence. 
 
November 25 was chosen to commemorate the lives of the 
Mirabal sisters of the Dominican Republic. On that day in 1960, 
Mr. Speaker, Patria, Minerva, and Maria Teresa Mirabal were 
brutally murdered by the regime of Rafael Trujillo. 
 
Their assassination caused great public outcry and, within a 
year, the dictatorship crumbled. The sisters have become a 
global symbol of the fight against gender violence and the 
victimization of women, Mr. Speaker. When we observe 
November 25, we are commemorating the plight of the Mirabal 
sisters and all women who have been victims of violence. 
 
Violence against women is still very much a reality in all parts 
of the world. I can only hope that one day, the day will come 
when women like the Mirabal sisters will no longer be victims 
with sad stories to tell. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Judge Receives British Columbia 
Appointment 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to congratulate Judge Mary Ellen Turpel-Lafond on 
her upcoming selection as British Columbia’s new children’s 
advocate. 
 
Judge Turpel-Lafond has an impressive resumé. It includes a 
bachelor’s degree from Carleton University, a law degree from 
Osgoode Hall, a master’s degree in international law from the 
University of Cambridge, and a doctor of law from Harvard. 
 
Before being appointed as a judge in Saskatchewan, Ms. 
Turpel-Lafond practised law in Nova Scotia and here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Earlier this year the Law Society of Saskatchewan honoured 
Ms. Turpel-Lafond with its Willy Hodgson Award for her work, 
“building bridges between aboriginal and non-aboriginal 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

peoples based on the teaching of elders of respect and 
kindness.” 
 
Ms. Turpel-Lafond took an activist role in the issues of fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder, an affliction that disproportionately 
affects First Nations people. She has a strong reputation through 
Saskatchewan for being a caring and committed advocate for 
justice and fairness. Ms. Turpel-Lafond is very active in 
community events and associations. Mr. Speaker, I had the 
pleasure to serve briefly with Ms. Turpel-Lafond on the Mendel 
Art Gallery board in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Turpel-Lafond has some tremendous work to 
do in British Columbia. I’m sure she will fill her role with 
professionalism, integrity, and a strong work ethic. I hope that 
all members will join with me in congratulating Mary Ellen 
Turpel-Lafond on her selection as BC’s [British Columbia] 
children advocate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Community Caring 
 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to share 
with this legislature the good work being accomplished by the 
parishioners of St. James Anglican Church in Saskatoon. 
 
Particularly I’d like to thank Alice Kuipers for her work in 
organizing donations for the YWCA [Young Women’s 
Christian Association] crisis shelter. The crisis shelter has 22 
rooms and provides safe 24-hour, 7-day-a-week emergency 
sheltering to women, children, and youth at risk. Women enter 
the shelter due to domestic violence, abuse, addictions, mental 
health reasons, homelessness, and justice issues. In 2005-06 the 
YWCA crisis shelter housed 754 women, children, and youth. 
 
On one Sunday recently, congregation member Alice Kuipers 
distributed a list of all the things that are required by the women 
and children who come to the crisis shelter and asked people to 
purchase items on the list and bring these items to church on the 
next Sunday. The generosity in the church was tremendous, and 
there were three large containers overflowing with donations, 
including toiletries and other necessities. 
 
The next phase is organizing gifts for these children for the 
upcoming holiday season, and I expect people will be just as 
generous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there are many other religious 
organizations and community groups who are contributing to 
their communities. Especially as we approach this season of 
giving. I’d like to congratulate, encourage all community 
members who are involved in giving back to their communities. 
I’d like to invite all members to join me in thanking these 
groups for their continued good work in helping to make 
Saskatchewan the great place that it is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Recognition of Esterhazy and Area Volunteers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’d like to commend a group of volunteers in the 
Esterhazy area, the community of Esterhazy. Each year they 
hold a charity golf classic out there to raise dollars for the St. 
Anthony’s Hospital and the Esterhazy centennial care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers are in again this year and it’s just 
amazing what a small community can do when they get behind 
their health care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2001 this group raised $86,000 for their health 
care fund. In 2002, $116,000; 2003, 124,000; 2004, 116,000; 
2005, 116,500; and this year again, Mr. Speaker, 2006, that 
community raised $117,500 for St. Anthony’s Hospital and the 
centennial care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have done many things to make additions to 
the hospital and to the care home. They’ve expanded their 
emergency services for their hospital. And one of the main 
reasons they do this, Mr. Speaker, is to make their health care 
facilities very viable and very useful for the people of the area, 
especially with the mines they have there. Mosaic and formerly 
IMC were a great sponsor of this fundraiser. The local 
businesses from the surrounding communities in Esterhazy have 
been very good, but especially the volunteers that have taken 
their time and their dollars to make this a very successful 
fundraiser. 
 
I want to congratulate Marshall Hamilton, Donna McIntyre, 
Sherrian Kraft, and all the volunteers that have put so much 
effort and time into making this a success again this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

SaskEnergy Supports Vanier Cup Volunteers 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
you may know, Saskatoon is hosting the 2006 PotashCorp 
Vanier Cup this weekend and SaskEnergy is a proud supporter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the official champion of volunteers, 
SaskEnergy is dedicated to supporting events such as Tim 
Hortons Brier, the Canada Summer Games, and the Vanier Cup. 
This is one way of ensuring that special events like this make 
their way to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first time the Vanier Cup has been 
hosted outside of Ontario and we are very pleased that 
Saskatchewan has this great opportunity to showcase our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 600 volunteers and committee members will 
be part of this great event. I ask all members to join me in 
commending SaskEnergy, the official sponsor of volunteers for 
the 2006 PotashCorp Vanier Cup, for its innovative approach to 
community involvement and support of volunteers. Mr. 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

Speaker, in thanking the hard working volunteers who’ll be 
sharing this time and energy and their Saskatchewan spirit to 
make this the very best Vanier Cup Canada has ever seen. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Child Poverty 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow is the 
17th anniversary of the unanimous all-party resolution passed in 
the House of Commons to eliminate child poverty by the year 
2000. Each year it is all too clear that child poverty has not been 
eliminated. Statistics continue to show that Saskatchewan lags 
far behind in the fight to end child poverty. More than 40,000 
children live in poverty in our province, including half of all 
First Nation and Métis children. Child poverty has simply 
become a fact of life under this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this serious problem is getting worse. Food bank 
usage has increased each year under this Premier. He more than 
anyone else should know this because the Saskatoon Food Bank 
is in his own constituency. To quote the Premier in March of 
1990 and I quote: 
 

It is the sad truth that only blocks from the marble steps of 
this legislature . . . it is the sad truth that children in this 
city go to school hungry. And that’s a disgrace. 

 
It is a disgrace, Mr. Speaker, but the Premier and his NDP 
government continue to let the problem grow. They allow 
children to go to school hungry. They force mothers to beg for 
food to feed their children. These families are not a priority of 
this government and that is totally unacceptable. The members 
on this side of the House will continue to repeat the call to 
reduce child poverty. We are committed to improving the lives 
of children and family in this province. I hope the NDP 
eventually will too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Member’s Statement in Wadena News 
 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly we 
recognize that the Saskatchewan Party’s overheated rhetoric is a 
poor substitute for reasoned political debate. But occasionally, 
Mr. Speaker, some of the stuff they come up with is so 
over-the-top we just have to laugh. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the member for Kelvington-Wadena 
summing up the spring session in the May 31, 2006 issue of The 
Wadena News. She says and I quote: 
 

Spring session is over and the Government has found a 
way to spend $7.2 billion without making a real positive 
difference to your lives. 
 

Now that’s a bold statement. I mean it really puts the hyper 
back in hyperbole. According to that member, the entire budget 

of Saskatchewan, every cent, has been allocated in some way 
that will not make a positive difference in anyone’s life. All the 
funding for doctors, nurses, diagnostics, and health care in 
general, Mr. Speaker, wasted. The dollars invested in schools 
and universities and education — useless, a total wash — 
squandered without making a positive difference in anyone’s 
life. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m more than willing to give the member 
opposite the benefit of the doubt. But is she aware that her own 
paycheque comes out of the provincial coffers? Because by her 
logic, Mr. Speaker, her receiving a salary as a Saskatchewan 
Party MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] doesn’t do 
anyone any good at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Election Dates and Senate Reform 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, if there’s one thing that really bugs voters, it’s when a 
government plays games with the setting of the election date. 
We saw it again at the most recent NDP convention where the 
Premier was musing about maybe the election will happen in 
the spring; maybe it’ll be in the fall; maybe it’ll be into the fifth 
year in 2008. He’s playing politics with the election date, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Three provinces — British Columbia, the Liberals there, the 
Liberal government in Ontario, and the Government of 
Newfoundland, have already set elections dates, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve already went in this direction in terms of legislation. 
The federal government has introduced a Bill to establish set 
elections for the country. 
 
Will the Premier do the right thing? Will he support a Bill to be 
introduced a little bit later on by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that we will be presenting to give 
Saskatchewan set election dates, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the tradition 
of the party opposite, the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan have had a tradition — a long tradition, Mr. 
Speaker — of calling regular elections on or about the fourth 
year anniversary, Mr. Speaker. That is historically documented. 
 
But what we see this morning again, Mr. Speaker, is the 
contradiction. One day the Leader of the Opposition stands up 
and says call an election today, call an election today. That’s 
what he says. And then the next day he stands up and he said 
well, we should have fixed election dates. Well you can’t have 
it either way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What does he support, calling an election today or setting up 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

fixed election dates? What is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, actually one way for the 
province to get to set election dates is for the Premier to call an 
election right away because this side of the House is prepared to 
make this positive change for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have seen from this NDP government is 
games playing with the setting of an election date. I remember 
the first election I ran in was called by the then NDP premier 
for right in the middle of harvest. Do you remember that, Mr. 
Speaker? They called it in the middle of harvest because they 
knew rural Saskatchewan was angry with them. They knew 
they had lost the confidence and the support of rural 
Saskatchewan. So cynically they called it in the middle of 
harvest. His party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I would ask members 
to just take a breath, and let’s have some reasoned debate here. 
The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, his party has played 
games with the setting of an election. Will he instruct his 
members to support a Bill proposed by the Sask Party later this 
day, presented by the member for Rosetown-Elrose, to bring set 
elections to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There are a couple of observations to 
what the Leader of the Opposition has just called upon me to 
do. 
 
He just said, would I instruct my members? You know, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a New Democratic Party in this province, a 
province that believes in democracy, a province that believes 
and a party that believes in democracy within the caucus, Mr. 
Speaker — that’s point number one — as opposed to a group 
who all will stand in this legislature and vote against, with the 
exception of one, and all will vote against the democratic right 
of producers in this province to choose the future of the wheat 
board. Now how does that work, Mr. Speaker? Let’s talk about 
elections and let’s talk about democratic right. 
 
The other thing that the Leader of the Opposition just reminded 
us of was when he first ran for this legislature. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact of the matter is this member, who is now the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, first attempted to get a seat 
in this legislature when he sought a nomination for the 
Conservative Party under Grant Devine. That’s the time he ran. 
And we all remember that history, Mr. Speaker, of that 
government where they held the election date till one day after 
the legal limit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that sound you just heard was an 
entire province — or at least the viewing audience — rolling 
their eyes, sick and tired of that Premier and that government 
wanting to talk about 20 years ago when the rest of us want to 
talk about today, and we want to talk about 20 years from now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the BC [British 
Columbia] . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’d like to say good 
morning to the member for Regina Douglas Park, and welcome 
him back here to question period. Good morning to you. 
 
Another thing I think that really bothers Canadians, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that we have an unelected Senate in Canada. 
I think it’s bothersome to Canadians across the country, 
specifically to people in Western Canada. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the Senate could be a powerful ally in promoting the interests of 
provinces and for example regions like Western Canada. 
 
Later this day, Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley will 
introduce legislation to move Saskatchewan towards electing 
senators. Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier is this: will he 
support that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is too good. Here is the 
party that stands in this legislature and votes against the 
democratic right of producers in this province to chose the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board. And then they stand in 
this, then they stand here today and try and promote themselves 
as the agents of democracy on the question of Senate elections, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You bet that Senate in Ottawa, that Senate in Ottawa, if it must 
exist, if it must exist, it should be an equal Senate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Let’s . . . The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on the question of 
the Senate, you bet we talk about an equal, effective, and 
elected Senate. But I’ll tell you what. When their Conservative 
friends in Ottawa make that place equal, when they make it 
effective, then we’ll talk about electing to that body, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue of democracy and the 
debates that we’ve been having in this Legislative Assembly, I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there were members in this 
House that voted to give producers the right of choice to do 
what they wanted to do with their own — with their own 
property, Mr. Speaker. It was this side of the House. It was this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the legislation 
that will be introduced later this day . . . 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll . . . Order. We’ll just, we’ll just have to 
try this again. Order. Leader of the Opposition 
 
Mr. Wall: — I think I do. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know 
why the NDP seem to be so grumpy over the last number of 
weeks. But we’re asking them, Mr. Speaker, in this case to vote 
for common sense, vote for a pragmatic beginning to Senate 
reform. Other provinces are electing senators that the federal 
government can then appoint to the Senate. 
 
If we are going to have a meaningful Triple-E Senate in the 
country, we have to start somewhere. This change does not 
require a constitutional amendment. We don’t have to go down 
that route. It’s something constructive provinces can do. Will 
the Premier support this common sense legislation from the 
member for Kindersley, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is interesting to say the 
least, that the Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about the 
Senate of Canada. 
 
He does not want to talk about the number of jobs that exist in 
this province. He does not want to talk about credit rating 
upgrades being received by this province. He doesn’t want to 
talk about 5,000 new training opportunities being created by 
this government. He doesn’t want to talk about making life for 
Saskatchewan families. He doesn’t want to talk about building a 
future here for our youth. 
 
No. He wants to talk about the Canadian Senate and promises 
made by his Conservative party in Ottawa. 
 
Well if he wants to talk about promises made, why don’t we 
talk about the promise made to the people of Saskatchewan for 
a fair return for our non-renewable natural resources under a 
fair equalization? Why doesn’t he want to talk about that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you know you have no new policy, when 
you haven’t got a new idea for the people of Saskatchewan, you 
start talking about Senate reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Screening and Treatment for Cancer 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very 
interesting segue the Premier just gave me. A few days ago I 
urged this government to establish a colorectal screening 
program. The minister rejected the call saying the program 
wasn’t necessary. However now, the Canadian Cancer Society 
in a news release dated November 21 supports the call for 
implementation of a screening program. 
 
Will the minister today reconsider his answer, a couple days 
ago and follow along with another new idea presented by the 
Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting that the member opposite is taking credit for work 
being done by the Canadian Cancer Society, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a new low for the members opposite. 
 
But secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite again, his 
research department and himself, are misrepresenting my words 
in this Chamber and outside this Chamber. Mr. Speaker, we 
have not ruled out a colorectal screening program in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We are working, Mr. Speaker, with 
other provinces because there is currently no national screening 
program. This is not a simple matter for a simple problem, Mr. 
Speaker. We are working towards it. We have not ruled it out. 
We will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the Canadian 
Cancer Society supports our call for a screening program, Mr. 
Speaker, in their news release dated two days ago. I mean this 
government is very adept at stealing our ideas. Well here’s 
another one that they can steal which actually saves lives. 
Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in 
this province. An organized screening program would 
significantly reduce those deaths, according to the cancer 
society. 
 
I know the minister hates setting targets. We’ve heard that for 
the last year or two. But here’s a target he could set. He could 
set this province as being the leader in this area and establishing 
a screening program here in Saskatchewan as the first province 
to do it. Will he commit to that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 
talk about leadership in Canada, Mr. Speaker. As much as the 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

opposition talks to the contrary, significant progress is never 
made overnight, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has got in the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency now more professional people 
working than ever before in the history of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got one of the most comprehensive drug 
programs for cancer care in the country, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
got more equipment and technology working on our behalf than 
ever before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And more importantly, let’s look at outcomes, Mr. Speaker. For 
breast cancer we’ve got the second lowest mortality rate in all 
of Canada, Mr. Speaker. We are leaders. We will continue to be 
leaders in this country, Mr. Speaker. And we are determined 
that, even though we’ve got more to do, we will be doing more, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would agree with the 
minister in the fact that we are leaders. We have three times the 
national average for first visit to oncologist here in our 
province. We learned yesterday, Mr. Speaker, regarding breast 
cancer, that we are among the longest waits from operation to 
radiation treatment of anywhere in Canada. That’s what we lead 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s an absolute indictment 
of this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a strange combination in this province. The 
Minister of Finance can set away $1 billion for an election slush 
fund, and yet we have the longest waiting lists of anywhere in 
Canada. We have people sick and dying of cancer, where they 
have to buy their own cancer drugs. 
 
Under this government, it’s a two-tier system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the health system is under stress. Early detection and 
screening would help reduce this stress by saving lives. Will the 
government cough up a couple of million dollars from its 
election slush fund and deal with the real issues facing people in 
Saskatchewan — the longest waiting lists in cancer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
serves no purpose whatsoever to compare data that was not 
collected using the same database or during the same time 
frame, Mr. Speaker. In fact it does a disservice to all of the 
hard-working people at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency who 
have made reducing waiting times and improving care for 
cancer patients in this province a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province put an additional $10 million into 
the cancer centre this year. We are working on the national level 
with representation from the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency on 
the national body that the federal government is working with, 
Mr. Speaker. We are determined to reduce waiting times in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and improve the care of cancer 
patients. We are committed and dedicated to that and in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we will carry that out. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Excuse me. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. 
The only person that seems to believe the numbers that come 
from that side of this Assembly is the government itself, 
because other people aren’t buying their numbers. 
 
If you talk to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, they don’t 
buy the number of vacancies this government comes up with. 
They’ve done their own survey and find that we have far more 
vacancies than the government will admit. The Health Quality 
Council doesn’t agree with the numbers put forward by this 
minister. Of course his numbers are very self-serving, trying to 
make the situation look as good as it possibly can be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will he start listening to people like 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Health Quality Council 
dealing with the real numbers that people on the streets of this 
province are facing — some of the longest waits in Canada? 
When will he start dealing with those numbers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
real number that I quoted earlier is the one that the member 
should concentrate on, and that’s outcomes, Mr. Speaker. We 
have the second-lowest mortality rate for breast cancer in all of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That proves that the people that we are 
working with in the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and 
throughout the regional health authorities, Mr. Speaker, are 
doing their job to help Saskatchewan people who are afflicted 
with this tragic and horrible disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time we are making significant 
progress. We support the Health Quality Council, Mr. Speaker, 
but since the Health Quality Council’s report come out, we have 
demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, our number is about half what the 
quality council reported. We have made significant progress on 
wait times, Mr. Speaker, significant progress. We still have 
more work to do, and we will continue to do that work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Perspectives on Tobacco Control Legislation 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday this NDP government introduced legislation allowing 
lawsuits against tobacco companies for smoking-related health 
costs. Yet just a few short days ago at the NDP’s convention a 
booklet featuring a full page add encouraging marijuana use 
was found. Can anybody explain this contradiction? Why is this 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

NDP government encouraging and promoting marijuana usage? 
Why is the NDP taking money from a group encouraging the 
use of a harmful substance? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased to rise in this House to acknowledge the support 
that the Sask Party has provided for our legislation to enable 
this government to hold the tobacco companies to account for 
the damages that they are providing and causing to 
Saskatchewan people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Each and every year, Mr. Speaker, more than 1,000 people die 
in Saskatchewan due to tobacco-related illnesses. It costs 
Saskatchewan people almost $150 million each and every year 
just on health care costs, Mr. Speaker. So I appreciate the 
support that they are going to be providing. Let’s get this 
legislation passed. And let’s hold the tobacco companies 
accountable for the ravages they’ve held on Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the ad 
features a quote from the federal NDP leader, Jack Layton. Mr. 
Layton says and I quote: 
 

Our party is in favour of modernizing our marijuana laws 
and creating a legal environment where people can enjoy 
marijuana in the peace and quiet of their own home or in a 
cafe. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government went to great lengths to 
ensure that you can’t smoke a cigarette in Saskatchewan yet 
the. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP went to great lengths to 
ensure that you can’t smoke a cigarette in a café in 
Saskatchewan. Yet the federal leader of the NDP Party says you 
should be able to smoke a joint in a café. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier support this leader? To the 
Premier: should you be able to smoke up in a Saskatchewan 
café where other people including children may be present and 
harmed by second-hand smoke? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, we see again the 
inconsistency of this Saskatchewan Party. Just when they’re 

starting to make some positive contribution to Saskatchewan in 
the area of tobacco control, now they start to undercut that by 
demeaning the smoking in cafés, that somehow that that’s not a 
necessary thing. In fact even in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan had plebiscite on this issue, and 75 per cent of 
Lloydminster residents endorsed the direction that this 
government is going. In fact we led the issue on the 
Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster. And now all of 
Lloydminster including the Alberta side is now protected, and 
their youth are protected where children have access. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken a leadership role with 
the former Minister of Health and others within this all-party 
committee for tobacco control. I’m very proud to be part of this 
legislation, and I wish the Saskatchewan Party would get on 
board and stay on board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously this 
minister and this government doesn’t understand the 
contradiction. You can’t advertise tobacco products in this 
province, and yet the NDP has no problem accepting money 
from a lobby group to run a full-page ad promoting marijuana 
usage. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any sense, and it’s 
hypocritical. You can’t condemn one and endorse the other one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for health reasons if nothing else, will the NDP 
vow it will never again accept money from groups promoting 
the use of a harmful substance? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand the 
Saskatchewan Party. They are losing so badly in this House 
they now want to take the debate to Ottawa and talk about 
federal issues. I don’t understand . . . I understand why they’re 
doing this. Let’s stick to the business of what’s happening in 
this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve introduced legislation that will hold tobacco companies 
to account for the damages that they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Healthy Living 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I have a simple question for 
the Sask Party today. We’ve introduced legislation to protect 
young people, to protect Saskatchewan peoples, to hold tobacco 
companies account for the damages that they’re providing here 
in Saskatchewan. Will they pass this legislation before 
Christmas? Yes or no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is, will 
these guys stop being so hypocritical? On one hand they’re 
talking about smoking legislation. On the other hand they have 
a federal leader who says that they’re going to modernize laws 
and allow people to enjoy marijuana in a café. Now that’s a 
contradiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago the Saskatchewan Party lead the 
charge against crystal meth. We had to drag this government 
kicking and screaming . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. Order. I 
would ask members not to holler out so it interrupts the flow of 
the person who has got the floor at the time. And right now the 
floor belongs to the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. We had to drag 
this government kicking and screaming into taking action on 
drugs, and hence we have the Premier’s own resolution. He has 
Project Hope. 
 
It’s extremely disheartening to see this NDP promoting the use 
of marijuana now. And the latest trend, according to police and 
according to the kids on the street, drug producers lace 
marijuana with crystal meth making it even more addictive. Mr. 
Speaker, we have fought very hard against crystal meth. Why is 
the NDP now minimizing this fight by promoting marijuana 
usage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
. . . Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy Living 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, our focus is on making life 
better for Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan young 
people right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inconsistencies from that opposition would 
take longer than the minute that I have to finish up question 
period. The member for Saskatoon Southeast is spreading 
misinformation that there are no beds when there’s been beds 
already announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Northwest is advising 
families to go out of the province for care when there’s already 
world-leading care here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have 
the best possible chance for people to grow up free from 
addictions and they call that project no hope, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced legislation that’s going to hold 
the tobacco companies account. Will they support that 
legislation? Yes or no, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Meadow Lake on 
his feet? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated in the west gallery are four individuals that are making 
up a group that I’ll be meeting with in a few minutes. First of all 
I’d like to . . . If they’d just give a little wave. Vince Robillard 
is the director of operations of the Prince Albert Grand Council. 
Deanna McKay is the executive assistant to Grand Chief 
Michel, TeeJay Sumners is the executive secretary to Vince, 
and Doris Morin is from the Lac La Ronge Indian Band; she’s a 
councillor. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to please join me in welcoming them 
here. I’m a bit disappointed that there wasn’t a bit more energy 
here for you to see. This is a bit quiet here today. So anyway, 
please join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister to welcome the individuals here from PAGC 
[Prince Albert Grand Council]. I had the opportunity to meet 
with them earlier this week, and I found the meeting very 
interesting. We are talking about a group of people who are 
very progressive. They have lots of idea that are going to make 
Saskatchewan a better place for everybody in this province. 
And I’m sure that the work that they are doing is of benefit to 
everyone. So I’d like to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

move that Bill No. 202, An Act to amend The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act (Set Election Dates) be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill No. 202, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. When shall the Bill be read a 
second time? The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 203 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 203, An Act to provide for the Election of Saskatchewan 
Nominees for Appointment to the Senate of Canada be now 
introduced and read for a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley . . . Order. It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that Bill No. 203, The Senate Nominee Election Act 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well I don’t think any of us are really sure, 
sir, but next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I 
will table responses to written questions no. 71 to 118. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions no. 71 to 118 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

 
Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Elhard.] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
again stand in this House and discuss the lack of confidence that 
we have in this government. 
 
On I believe two Thursdays ago I had the opportunity to just 
speak for a few minutes. My colleague from Cypress Hills 
certainly got a number, quite a few remarks on the public 
record. Maybe he wanted a few more, but I ended up getting a 
few minutes at the very end of that debate. And I’m certainly 
glad to carry on today regarding the issue of confidence in this 
government. And as I was thinking . . . I only had a few minutes 
a couple of weeks ago, so I just mentioned a few things about 
how I thought this government had been operating. But since 
that time I’ve certainly had a lot more time to think. And I just 
. . . I really quite honestly wonder where to start when it talks 
about the issue of non-confidence in this government. 
 
So I don’t think I’ll have too much trouble filling the rest of the 
time that we have today when I talk about this government and 
the lack of confidence that not only the people on this side of 
the House have but people throughout the province have. 
 
And the first issue I have to talk about was an issue that we 
raised yesterday, the issue regarding population and the 
astounding numbers that this government has put together when 
it comes to population. Now I know they like to look at every 
other factor as to how this . . . how its performance is, how the 
government’s performance is, how the economy performance 
is. The one number they just detest looking at, that they don’t 
ever want to look at or acknowledge — and they didn’t 
acknowledge it yesterday when we asked the questions — were 
the issues around population and out-migration in this province. 
 
It’s astonishing that after 15 years we could have done worse 
than . . . for example the first 13 years of their mandate that the 
last two years that we have experienced could be worse than the 
first 13, Mr. Speaker. The last two years have been the worst 
out-migration in the last decade. We have lost 18,000 people 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . In a boom, as the member from 
Wood River says. We hear about the boom that they keep 
talking about and we’re experiencing because commodity prices 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

like oil and gas are high, but we continue to lose population. 
 
We’ve lost 18,000 in two years and 37,000 people in the last 
five years I believe it was — or four years since this Premier 
has become Premier. That is astonishing when you look at a 
province that is as rich in resources and potential as we have, 
that this NDP government would be chasing that many people 
out of the province. And you know they’ll always say, well it’s 
really not us. It’s not the government that’s chasing them out; 
people are leaving for other reasons. 
 
[11:00] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a province in Canada that is 
experiencing the out-migration that our province is. We have 
lost so many people in the last year and two years that it beats 
the 10-year record that this government has overseen. It’s 
unbelievable. So right with that very argument of population 
decline and the effects that population decline has on this 
province . . . Because I would say that of the 18,000 people that 
we have lost out of this province in the last couple years, I 
would bet that the average age of that population would be 
about 25 years old. I don’t have the numbers to back that up but 
I would, I would guess, I would guess that the average age of 
that population — 18,000 — would be around the 25 . . . say 
the 20 to 30 mark, Madam Deputy Speaker, which is the 
earning potential of a person’s life. That’s the most important 
part of a person’s life as far as earning potential and paying tax 
and spending money, buying homes. They’re usually big 
consumers, Madam Deputy Speaker, and those consumers, 
those big consumers are taking themselves and their families 
and moving out of this province in record numbers. 
 
If there was ever an indictment of a government it would be the 
fact that you cannot hold on to your youth. And that’s exactly 
what is happening in this province right now. They can talk 
certainly that the job numbers are looking better and the 
commodity prices are better but a fair measure of how you are 
doing as a government is how you’re doing as far as growth of 
population. And on every account this government is failing. 
 
People around the province see it. We had a very good example 
of people in Weyburn-Big Muddy. I mean there’s a community 
there that has lost a number of its youth. It’s doing well as far as 
oil and gas, but the youth are continuing to leave and it’s 
certainly . . . it causes some huge problems. It causes problems 
with health care — funding of health care. 
 
Certainly the budget is at record levels and we’re calling on the 
government at times to spend more money. But it’s a tough 
situation to be in when you continue to lose your tax base. And 
as long as you lose your tax base and costs keep increasing, 
you’re going to get squeezed. And that’s where we are; that’s 
the issue that we’re facing in this province. 
 
We have been blessed with the fact that commodity prices have 
been high. I can’t imagine the situation that our province would 
be in when we’re losing population that we are and have the 
commodity prices drop down to record lows. What would we be 
doing in this province to support health care and education had 
the commodity prices not stayed at record highs? 
 
And the issue is population loss. You cannot sustain the 

programs that we need in this province when you continue to 
lose the young people that we continue to lose out of our 
province. And I think there’s a lot of reasons why youth are 
moving out. And sometimes they want to explore and find other 
. . . you know, learn about other areas of Canada or 
internationally, but there are some issues that I think directly 
point back to the government that are chasing the young people 
out of this province. I think when they look at the government 
that has very few new ideas they say, why would we stay here 
when a government is old and tired like this government is and 
can’t come up with any new ideas? The only ideas that they do 
come up with are ideas that we’ve put in front of them that they 
choose to adopt. And well, the minister from . . . the member 
from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote is shaking his head. He 
doesn’t agree with that, but we could list . . . I could list dozens 
of ideas that they have come up with that we have put forward. 
 
Well I mean, I remember in the 1999 election campaign we 
talked about all . . . We talked about personal tax cuts and the 
government said there was no way that could be done. We 
could never look at personal tax cuts like we had campaigned 
on. And the very thing that we talked on is the exact same thing 
that this government implemented. 
 
We talked about business tax reductions in the last general 
election. Well of course the government said that could never 
be done and, three years into their mandate, they’re adopting the 
very policies that we have said, that we had campaigned on. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m certainly glad that we have 
been able to put ideas forward. Because if there was not the 
ideas coming forward from this side of the House, there would 
be absolutely nothing changed because that government seems 
to have few or no new ideas. 
 
The area that I want to talk about for most of my address here is 
health care. And certainly I’ve been raising a number of issues, 
as other members have on this side of the House, regarding 
health care. Some of the cases that have come before this 
Assembly have just been absolutely heart-wrenching over the 
last year and a half to two years that I have been the critic. And 
I know there were many, many cases that came before this 
House prior to that. 
 
I mean, the most recent one of course was the Crystal Bonderud 
case and the whole issue around her husband Doug and the 
misdiagnosis of his health problems that cost him really . . . 
quite frankly it cost him his life and, for Crystal and Doug, their 
future really. They were just recently married. 
 
And it’s a tragic story that a person in Saskatchewan would 
have to go through misdiagnosis — number one — for eight 
months, the lack of a CT [computerized tomography] scan that 
probably would have . . . probably would have identified the 
problem and that wasn’t done. And then when they finally did 
the research that they did and the work that they did and went 
out-of-province, that this government wouldn’t cover the cost 
that they incurred — the cost of the Mayo Clinic — where they 
found out that if the government had, this medical system had 
acted quickly, the tumour could have been removed early and 
the prognosis would have been much better than what it was. 
 
Unfortunately his health had deteriorated by the time they got 
down there. They had to do an emergency procedure to remove 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

the tumour and I think the rest . . . I mean we’ve talked about in 
this House, but of course we know what had happened after 
that. But it’s really an indictment again of this government and 
the way it’s handling the health care system. 
 
And there are many, many other cases, whether it’s Avastin and 
the Bob Loeppky and Terry Rak and the situations that they 
have gone through, Madam Deputy Speaker. There are some 
huge concerns with the way health care is being delivered in 
this province. 
 
So those are personal cases. And those personal cases I think 
highlight the situation that we’re in in many jurisdictions 
around our province, whether it’s in the Saskatoon Health 
Authority or the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority or many 
of the other health authorities, Cypress Hills or the Yorkton 
area. 
 
There are some huge concerns with the delivery of health care, 
and it’s mainly because of a lack of health care professionals. I 
believe that many of the situations that come before this House 
are a direct result of the shortage that we have, whether it be 
registered nurses, LPNs [licensed practical nurse], psychiatric 
nurses, general practitioners, or specialists. And we’ve talked 
about these issues for many, many years. This is not new 
information that I’m bringing forward, but it seems to be 
information that this government fails to act on. 
 
When we talk about hospital closures, and they’re temporary 
closures, but I have been absolutely amazed at the number of 
facilities that have been closed over the last number of months 
because they can’t have a full complement of doctors or 
registered nurses on staff. Whether it was Central Butte that was 
closed a couple months ago because the one nurse that they had, 
had to go I believe on disability for a little while . . . and they 
are so short-staffed as soon as one nurse left, the hospital or the 
facility had to close. 
 
I heard of another story actually last night of a nurse who has 
got severe back pain. She’s in a small community, small town 
community. And really in any other situation, she would be put 
on disability until she recuperates. But she won’t go on 
disability because if she goes on disability, it means the closure 
of their health care facility. That’s a terrible onus to put on any 
one person’s shoulders, that if you can’t look after yourself and 
take the time off . . . if you do take the time off to look after 
yourself, it means the closure of the facility in your community 
and it puts the care of others in jeopardy. It’s a huge 
responsibility to put on anyone. 
 
Whether it’s in Bengough or Vanguard — the story of the 
young fellow that broke his arm in Vanguard, the father took 
him to the hospital in Vanguard — that should never happen in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But it seems like this government right now, I mean they don’t 
have . . . or they may have one what you would class as a purely 
rural seat. They represent the cities more than anything else. 
And they seem to have turned their back on, they’ve turned 
their back on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They have health care facilities closing on a weekly basis — 
only be it temporary — when people are relying on those 

services, whether it’s the story in Vanguard or the story from 
the member from Canora-Pelly when he took his father to 
Canora and they had to say no, you can’t come in here because 
we don’t have the health care professionals to maintain the 
service of care that his father in this situation would have 
needed. 
 
So I think just in the situation of health care and the amount of 
hospital closures — albeit temporary — that we have seen over 
the last number of months, that alone would cause a person not 
to have much confidence in this NDP government. How could 
you have confidence in a government when it can’t deliver 
basic health care in rural Saskatchewan in many, many of these 
communities? 
 
But that begs the question, why is it that so many of these 
communities have to close their hospitals on a temporary basis? 
And why is that? Well it’s the very issue that we have talked 
about for as long as I have been elected. I was elected in 1999, 
and I can remember the member from Melfort as the Health 
critic talking about how we needed to start increasing the seats 
for, example, registered nurses . 
 
In 1991 when this government came to power, we had 500 
graduating nurses a year. And there wasn’t a shortage at that 
time. But under the decisions, because of decisions made by 
this government and its priorities — and I know there were 
challenges in the ’90s, definitely challenges in the ’90’s — but 
the priorities that this government . . . the decisions regarding 
priorities that this government made are what is costing us the 
problems that we are having right now in the province. 
 
We had as low as about 120 nurses graduating in one year in 
this province. When you look at the retirement levels, when you 
look at the retention levels, 120 nurses is nowhere close to what 
we need. And as a consequence of a number of years of low 
graduating classes, low numbers graduating, we’ve put 
ourselves in the situation that we’re facing today. This situation 
didn’t happen in one or two years. This situation has come 
about because of 10 years of decision making by this NDP 
government. And it’s put us in this position. Even as we speak, 
this year there’ll be about 100 and . . . No, there’ll be about 230 
nurses graduating, which is far below the demand that this 
province will need. 
 
When you look at Manitoba and what that province has done, 
they are graduating far more. And I know the members 
opposite, that they will get up and they’ll start saying, well you 
want the Manitoba program. Manitoba has two programs — 
diploma and degree. As far as comparing apples to apples, 
degree nurses . . . they graduate far more degree nurses than we 
do here in the province of Saskatchewan. So if we compare 
apples to apples, Manitoba is graduating more nurses and has 
for a number of years. 
 
And had we been as progressive thinking as they were, I don’t 
believe we would be in the problem we are right now. In fact 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses states that if we would 
retain the number of nurses over the last 10 years that Manitoba 
has retained, we would have 800 more nurses on the floors of 
our hospitals which, quite frankly, I think would allow a 
number of these facilities to operate — whether it’s Spiritwood 
or whatever community — would allow these facilities to 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

operate to their full capacity. 
 
But unfortunately the decisions made 10, 15 years ago by this 
government has put us in this position. And it’s interesting that 
the members on that side will not admit to the fact that the 
decisions they made have caused the problem we’re facing 
today. None of the elected members on that side will admit that. 
 
However many of the members that were there at the time who 
are no longer elected — albeit whether it’s the former premier, 
Roy Romanow, whether it’s former cabinet minister, Janice 
MacKinnon — many of these people are saying now the 
decisions they made through the ’90s with the 52 hospital 
closures and the reduction of health care seats, be it registered 
nurses or physicians, has caused the situation we’re in today. 
 
What also happens when we’ve made those decisions and we 
haven’t graduated enough nurses and we start relying on fewer 
to do more and more and more, is we start then having 
problems with retention. In Saskatchewan we have the worst 
retention rate. So first of all you’ve got the declining number of 
seats, training seats, so we’re declining there. Workloads are 
increasing. More and more nurses then are deciding, I don’t 
need this. I can go somewhere else and work in a different 
province or country where I don’t have the stresses that I’m 
experiencing here. So then what we end up having is the worst 
nurse retention rate at 67 per cent of anywhere in Canada. 
 
So you’ve got declining numbers of seats, more nurses leaving, 
and the government says, I don’t know why we’re having 
trouble retaining nurses. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s really 
that tough but it’s just been interesting that none of the elected 
members on the government side will stand in their place and 
admit that. 
 
[11:15] 
 
I had a very interesting talk with the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses a couple of days ago, and what they were talking about 
is that this message has been delivered to the government over 
and over and over again. I remember shortly after I was elected. 
At that time there was a minister of Health — I believe she was 
from Nutana — an associate minister who had come from that 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, who was supposed to carry the 
message, who was supposed to deliver the goods. And it simply 
hasn’t happened. 
 
It seems like that they just really turned their back on that health 
care profession and have left them really twisting in the wind 
with not enough professionals to do the jobs that they need to 
do to keep the facilities open that should be open. There are 
some huge problems when it comes to the nursing shortage. The 
other area that we’re definitely short in is physicians, be it 
general practitioners or specialists. We know that we’re 
extremely short in both of those areas, and yet the government 
has been very, very, very slow to react. We had 40 training 
seats in Saskatchewan for a very long time. Now we’re up to 60 
training seats. 
 
But let’s compare that to our neighbour, not Alberta because I 
know they don’t like that comparison. Let’s compare it to what 
Manitoba is doing. And presently Manitoba has been training 
100 physicians for a number of years where we’re finally 

getting to the 60 mark. 
 
And then when you bring out the statistic, or the number, that 
Saskatchewan is more reliant on foreign-trained doctors than 
any province in Canada, it’s no wonder. If you don’t train 
enough . . . and I mean we may never be able to train enough to 
meet all our needs. But when you don’t train enough to meet 
some of the demand, you have to rely on foreign-trained doctors 
which this government has done. 
 
And I would bet that most of the facilities that we would talk 
about — whether it’s Canora, Preeceville, or Kamsack or 
Spiritwood or Bengough or Central Butte — many, many of 
those facilities have had foreign-trained doctors in those 
facilities that finally at times get fed up and move on. They may 
come to the province and work for a few years and decide they 
want to try something different in a different province or in a 
different jurisdiction, and they move on. A lot of the impact that 
we’re seeing with these hospital closures are directly because of 
physicians moving in and then moving on a couple years later. 
And it seems to be very hard to retain some of these physicians. 
 
Tomorrow I have the opportunity of going out to Indian Head 
and meeting with a physician out there who is a foreign-trained 
doctor, has been in Saskatchewan for about three years. And 
just in the phone call that we had — the initial phone call that 
we had — he was talking about some of the concerns that 
doctors have that don’t seem to be addressed, and so the doctors 
move on. They get tired of kind of banging their head against 
the wall because some of the concerns they have aren’t being 
addressed and so they move on. And this is not uncommon. We 
have brought this up before. 
 
I can tell you of a situation where an oncologist was in this 
province and eventually moved to BC. She had some very harsh 
things to say about the way the system was being run. 
Unfortunately she said them when she was in British Columbia 
instead of . . . I think she was at wits end and probably tried to 
raise the issues and didn’t get the response that she wanted. 
 
But what I called on this government to do over and over again 
is find out why these people are leaving. It’s great to recruit but 
what we need to do is retain. We have physicians here that are 
leaving because of reasons. What are those reasons? And I have 
yet to hear from the government’s side to list off a list of five or 
six or a dozen reasons why a physician would leave the 
province, why an oncologist would leave the province. She 
spoke out after she’d left. But many leave and we don’t have an 
idea of why they’ve left. And I really believe it’s this 
government’s responsibility to find out the reasons why we are 
not able to retain physicians. And if we are unable to retain 
physicians, that we find out the reasons why that would be. 
 
So health is a huge issue in our province. Over and over again 
it’s the number one issue and I can certainly see why. We have 
people that go through the system that go through very cleanly 
and easily, but unfortunately far too many people — and I 
believe more in this province than any other province — have 
difficulty navigating the health care system. 
 
So on that alone would be more than enough cause to have no 
confidence in this government. Okay. Because certainly we hear 
it over and over again from people that come through our 



November 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

offices, that phone to our offices, that have had trouble 
navigating the health care system. 
 
You know the classic example was yesterday and the day 
before when we were talking about the issue with the Health 
Quality Council and the numbers, the weeks or days that it took 
to get treatment. And a lady watching TV was in that very 
situation and although the minister was saying, no our numbers 
were wrong, the numbers that we were citing were the numbers 
that she was experiencing. She was actually experiencing that 
type of a wait, Mr. Speaker. And it’s amazing that you bring the 
subject up again today and he still continues, the minister still 
continues to disagree with the numbers that people are actually 
experiencing in the province. 
 
He can do whatever survey he wants and even the Health 
Quality Council can do whatever survey they want. When 
people are phoning in and saying the numbers that we at the 
Sask Party have been citing are what they’re experiencing, I 
really think it’s time for the government then to start listening. 
 
One of the areas that . . . And this isn’t health care; this isn’t 
related to health care. But I really believe it’s a whole attitude 
of the government that we are seeing right now. It’s a 
government that’s been in power for 15 years. It’s a government 
that won’t admit that it’s done anything wrong. It’s a 
government that will take credit for anything that happens to be 
right and will avoid anything that was . . . that may be negative. 
It’s, at times it seems self-righteous. And I think there is 
examples of that earlier this week. 
 
And I want to touch on some of the situations or issues that 
happened earlier this week in this Assembly, and how I think it 
really shows where this government is at, how it feels about 
itself, the aura that it presents in the general public. Because 
there are reasons why people don’t vote for governments. And I 
think they are given many, many reasons from this government. 
And we saw it in Weyburn-Big Muddy. We’ll see it again in the 
future. Because it’s the attitude this government is giving off 
about what they do is right and if anybody else challenges them, 
they’re wrong. 
 
And I just think of the situation that went on earlier this week 
when we were talking about, we were talking about protestors 
outside of the credit . . . I think it’s the Teachers Credit Union 
centre in Saskatoon. And some protestors were there. And what 
members did, whether they walked by or whether they stopped 
and talked. As I said in my question, a number of members 
stopped and talked. 
 
But I remember after when we were talking about it and about a 
videotape that was taken. And members on that side thought it 
was appalling that a videotape would have been taken of them 
walking through, passed the protestors. They thought it was 
appalling and maybe I would too. I don’t know. I mean that’s a 
new area that is new. There’s YouTube now and you can put it 
on there. And maybe that’s something that just is not something 
that should be done. 
 
But they said it was appalling. They couldn’t believe how low 
the politics have gotten to be able to do something like that. But 
it was very interesting because once they went through that and 
were video taped, they got to a session that talked about the 

very same thing. They talked about what they should be doing 
in the next campaign. They showed videos of how it had been 
done in the States. They talked about the very thing that they 
were finding so appalling here in . . . that had been done over 
the past weekend. 
 
It’s funny how if they do it, it’s okay. But if anybody else does 
it, it’s absolutely terrible. You know they can’t have it both 
ways. The government cannot have it both ways. But that’s 
what happens when it’s an old and tired government. 
 
Now I was told that I have to speak much clearer than I did on 
Monday. So I’ll certainly speak clearer in that I’m not calling 
the individuals old and tired. I’m talking about the government 
being old and tired. Because I wouldn’t want that to be 
misconstrued. I mean they’re a year older than they were last 
year and so are we. But that doesn’t mean I’m talking about the 
individuals, Mr. Speaker. What I’m talking about is a 
government attitude that’s old and tired — that if we do it it’s 
okay, but if somebody else does it it’s not okay. 
 
And the minister from Regina South is not understanding quite 
what I’m saying so I’ll try and be clearer. I’m talking about a 
videotape that is on YouTube showing members of the 
government side walking passed protesters and how absolutely 
appalling it has been for some of the members. They’ve said it 
in the House here. I’ve heard the heckles back. But they walk 
through that protest only to be instructed on how to do the very 
thing that they were so angry against. The very thing. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, you know I’ve gone on the 
NDP website and some of the pictures have been there for a 
number of years. But there’s a picture of a number of . . . some 
of us from this side of the House that could not be . . . I mean 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re not flattering. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — They could be . . . Yes, that’s it. They’re 
not flattering. There’s probably even a better term for that. But 
they’re on their website. They have no problem posting . . . I 
know there’s a picture of myself, Mr. Speaker, and I have got 
my eyes three-quarters closed and my mouth wide open — I 
don’t know how they ever got that picture — but my mouth 
wide open and my eyes three-quarters closed. They’ve got the 
most grainiest looking picture of me and that’s not a bad shot, 
but it was just amazing. Now they can post that on their 
website. That’s perfectly fine to post those things on the NDP 
website. But my heavens, if we happen to take a video of 
somebody rushing through a protester, that is appalling. 
 
It’s funny how they want it only one way. You can’t have it one 
way. If you do things like that you’re going to get them done 
back. If you’re going to talk in a convention about using 
videotape to slam the members opposite, you’re going to have it 
done about yourself. How can you have it both ways? It’s 
amazing. 
 
It’s simply shocking . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well it’s 
irrelevant. No it isn’t irrelevant because you know I had a 
member, a member stand in the House on Monday and have to 
apologize for using unparliamentary language. And she was 
extremely upset. She was extremely upset. And I can see why, 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2006 

because she was hollering, not listening to the question, and 
misunderstood what the question was. So she was very upset 
that I would have besmirched her integrity. Besmirched her 
integrity. But that member had no problem . . . I mean she had 
to apologize in the House for unparliamentary language. But 
that member had no problem going out in the rotunda and 
saying some things that besmirch my reputation, that’s fine. If 
you’re going to be able to dish it out, you better be able to 
receive it. If the members are going to dish it out, they’d better 
be able to receive it. 
 
And it’s funny how you can have members talking about, you 
know, what we’re doing on this side of the House, but then we 
question and go the same way after them, and oh my heavens, 
how would you ever, why should you ever do that about me, 
talk that way about me? And that’s exactly what that member 
did. She wasn’t happy with what was said in the House, even 
though she was hollering so loud she couldn’t hear the rest of 
my question. But she could go outside and talk about me in the 
rotunda, using the language that she couldn’t use in here — 
unparliamentary language — and that for some reason seems to 
be perfectly fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t have too many minutes left, but in the 
minutes I do have left, I do want to look at where this 
government is today and kind of use an analogy. It’s kind of a 
different analogy but I really . . . Well the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone says we’re on the way up, and I guess 
we’ll see. The next test will definitely be Martensville, and 
we’ll see how far up they’re going in Martensville. 
 
But I do want to talk about how this government and this 
Premier, and compare him to an old TV show that I used to 
watch when I was a kid. And I’m not comparing literally to this 
TV show, but figuratively. That’s want I want to do, compare 
figuratively. 
 
I don’t know if any of you remember the TV show Mr. 
Dressup. And that used to be one of my favourites. In the small 
town that I grew up in we had one and a half channels of TV, 
and on the one channel we had Mr. Dressup. And I always 
remember sitting and watching that show. And I always liked 
the part when Mr. Dressup really did his namesake — he 
dressed up. He went to the tickle trunk. I never did like that part 
about Casey and Finnegan because I never really understood 
who Casey was. Was it . . . you know, what the role that person 
was playing. 
 
But anyway, I do remember the issue when Mr. Dressup would 
dress up and he would go into the tickle trunk and he’d put on a 
coat and he’d look in the mirror and he’d look at himself in this 
coat and he thought he looked pretty good. And you know it 
kind of reminded me of the Premier, putting on the coat of, oh I 
don’t know, business tax reform. It’s really doesn’t fit him very 
well. It’s not really what he’s about. But he puts this coat on as 
if it’s going to change things. He’ll put the coat on and then 
he’ll also talk . . . as far as the Premier is concerned, he’ll talk 
about greedy corporate hucksters, and they’ll try and ram 
through legislation on most available hours. But now he’ll put 
the coat on of business tax reform, thinking that people won’t 
see through who he really is. 
 
[11:30] 

He’ll put on a pair of glasses and look in the mirror and think, 
oh those look pretty good. And it reminds me of the campaign 
Imagine that the government will talk about. 
 
The government will talk about a campaign Imagine and expect 
the federal government to come through with better 
equalization, but then in a speech to their convention and to the 
media talk about the Minister of Finance from the federal 
government drinking Harvey Wallbangers when he is supposed 
to be at work. 
 
You know, you cannot have it both ways. You can’t talk about 
how we’re going to need this equalization and then on the other 
hand absolutely falsely slam the Minister of Finance. But now 
it’s okay for that side to talk about . . . and trying to draw the 
Leader of the Opposition in with that when he was on his way 
to Swift Current to a birthday party. That’s okay to say that. 
 
I don’t remember any apologies coming from that. And I don’t 
remember . . . as I talked about the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow who didn’t want her reputation besmirched, when 
you can talk about the Leader of the Opposition in those terms. 
It’s absolutely appalling coming from the Premier of the 
province. Well you can’t have it both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Pursuant to a sessional order passed by 
this House on November 9, 2006, it is my duty at this time to 
adjourn this House at 11:30 a.m. Therefore this House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:30.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................558 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................558 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................558 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................558 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................558 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................558 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................558 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................566 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................566 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................559 
 Saskatchewan Judge Receives British Columbia Appointment 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
 Community Caring 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................560 
 Recognition of Esterhazy and Area Volunteers 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................560 
 SaskEnergy Supports Vanier Cup Volunteers 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................560 
 Child Poverty 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................561 
 Member’s Statement in Wadena News 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................561 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Election Dates and Senate Reform 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................561 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................561 
 Screening and Treatment for Cancer 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................563 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................563 
 Perspectives on Tobacco Control Legislation 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................564 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................565 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 202 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................566 
 Bill No. 203 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................567 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................567 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................567 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................567 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


