






















































Hansard: October 26, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 1A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2006, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 October 26, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — Good afternoon, and welcome everyone to the 
opening ceremonies for the third session of the twenty-fifth 
legislature. 
 
I wish to inform the Assembly that I have received a 
communication from the Private Secretary to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will open the third 
session of the twenty-fifth legislature at 2 p.m. today, the 26th 
day of October, 2006. 
 
Would you please remain standing for the arrival of Their 
Honours. 
 
[At 14:01 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. His Honour was 
then pleased to open the session with the following speech as 
tabled.] 
 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, Honoured 
Guests, People of Saskatchewan. 
 
Welcome all to the opening of the Third Session of the 25th 
Legislature. Tansi. 
 
We sit in the Chamber today for the first full legislative Session 
of the second 100 years of our Legislature. On the table in front 
of us lies a traditionally crafted runner and cushion for our 
Mace, a blending of First Nations and Parliamentary traditions 
in the Assembly, just as First Nations and the people of other 
cultures now live together in Saskatchewan as neighbours under 
the Treaty relationship. 
 
We are many; we are one. A particular welcome is extended 
today to the families who have recently chosen to make their 
homes in our province, to the youth who have graduated and are 
building their futures here, and to the musicians and artists we 
will celebrate in the year ahead. Some of you have joined us 
today. 
 

WHERE WE HAVE COME FROM 
 
As this Session opens, many will remember that fifteen years 
ago, Saskatchewan was on the brink of bankruptcy. The 
financial future of the next generation was at risk. Social 
infrastructure was in jeopardy. There was much hard work and 
sacrifice in the following decade to restore the province’s fiscal 
foundation. The results have been dramatic: thirteen 
consecutive balanced budgets, fourteen credit rating upgrades 
and the significant reduction of public debt. 
 
Five years ago, our economy had reached a turning point. 
Today, thanks to the hard work of the Saskatchewan people, our 
economy is re-energized and there are now more jobs than ever 
before in our history. Our quality of life remains second to 
none, and we have a proud record of social progress. 
 

My government is committed to a plan that ensures 
Saskatchewan maintains its hard-earned designation as one of 
only three “have” provinces in this nation, and we proudly 
reflect on this accomplishment as a “have” province with a 
heart. 
 

VISION FOR THE FUTURE 
 
A year ago, my government outlined a broad future vision for 
Saskatchewan. That vision is to seek a province where no one is 
left behind on the path to opportunity, a province with an 
unbreakable social fabric, built on the foundation of diverse and 
growing communities, within a green and prosperous economy. 
 
In the year that has passed, much progress has been achieved 
toward this vision. Even more progress is planned. 
 
Ours is a province that is down to earth, but where the sky is the 
limit. 
 

FOCUS FOR THE YEAR AHEAD 
 
The focus for my government in this Session is to make life 
better for today’s Saskatchewan families, and to build an even 
better future here for young people. 
 
Four cornerstones will set the foundation for my government’s 
agenda: 

• Make Saskatchewan the best place for young people to 
live, work, and build strong futures; 

• Strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in improving public 
health care while reducing wait times and improving 
access to services; 

• Advance Saskatchewan as a leader in environmental 
protection and the green economy; and 

• Ensure that today’s Saskatchewan families benefit from 
our strong economy. 

 
MAKE SASKATCHEWAN THE BEST PLACE FOR 

YOUNG PEOPLE TO LIVE, WORK AND BUILD 
STRONG FUTURES 

 
There is no clearer calling than our collective responsibility to 
provide a legacy of opportunity for our children. My 
government’s first cornerstone is dedicated to that goal, making 
Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, work and 
build strong futures. 
 
Encouragement and support to nurture a lifelong learner’s 
success must begin early in life. These ingredients are some of 
the essential building blocks for the province’s social and 
economic wellbeing. 
 
My government wants quality options for families with 
children, and the best in early learning and child care that can 
be provided. We want all children to be able to read the books 
they carry home in their book bags from their school or local 
library. 

Investments in Education 
 
To make this happen, the province’s Literacy program will 
expand, and we will deliver Saskatchewan’s Early Learning and 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2006 

Child Care Program, despite the federal government’s 
withdrawal from its commitments. 
 
In the year ahead, investments in education will continue to 
focus on meeting the needs of families and ensuring their 
children grow into healthy and well-educated adults. 
 
As one example, Saskatchewan will invest in its 
groundbreaking KidsFirst initiative, which blends the efforts of 
health districts, school divisions, Aboriginal organizations and 
communities, and provides: 

• home visiting programs; 
• community supports; 
• early development programs; 
• pre-natal care; and 
• family supports. 

 
Toward the same goal, building on our education renewal 
initiative, new School Community Councils will provide 
parents and community members with opportunities to have 
real input and make a difference in children's learning at their 
local schools. 
 

Investments in Training 
 
As young people grow and look to their future here, in whatever 
walk of life they choose, my government is committed to 
addressing the labour market’s changing needs and will: 

• expand training opportunities to meet market demands; 
• unveil a new partnership between business, labour and our 

training institutions to provide counsel to government to 
meet Saskatchewan's evolving labour market needs; and 

• strengthen and expand our regional training model to bring 
education closer to students and better link training to 
learners, job-seekers and employers. 

 
Additionally, it will: 

• expand partnerships with First Nations and Métis to 
enhance education and skills training for Aboriginal youth; 

• continue the freeze on university tuition; and 
• host a Youth Summit that links young people, business, 

employers and government in building a bright future for 
youth in our province. 

 
During this Session, my government will also receive and act 
on a comprehensive review of access to post-secondary 
education. These actions will address essential issues for 
students and promote the exceptional range of career 
opportunities right here at home. 
 
Ours is a province with abundant career opportunities; a 
province that is down to earth, but where the sky is the limit for 
jobs in every corner. 
 
Last year, we launched a bold initiative to attract 5,000 
immigrants annually by 2008, and we are on track to 
accomplish that goal. 
 
Investments in language training, employment and other 
services will foster strong beginnings for our newcomers in 
their new neighbourhoods in this province. This includes a 
program at the College of Medicine to aid the certification of 
international medical graduates living in Saskatchewan 

My government will also reinvigorate our relationship with the 
Fransaskois community, with particular emphasis on 
immigration and employment needs of Saskatchewan 
francophones. 
 
Mon gouvernement dynamisera nos relations avec la 
communauté fransaskoise en adressant particulièrement les 
besoins des francophones de la Saskatchewan dans les secteurs 
de l’immigration et de l’emploi. 
 
In this 21st century, it is important that we continue to spread 
the word that Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work and 
raise a family. 
 
Saskatchewan is home to a diverse, robust and fundamentally 
strong economy, and our doors are open, with opportunities for 
workers here at home and from abroad. 
 
All these efforts are in support of my government’s focus in this 
Session to make life better for today’s families and to build an 
even better future here for our youth. 
 
STRENGTHEN SASKATCHEWAN’S LEADERSHIP IN 
PUBLIC HEALTH CARE WHILE REDUCING WAIT 
TIMES AND IMPROVING ACCESS TO SERVICES 

 
The second cornerstone of my government’s agenda is to work 
with health care providers to strengthen Saskatchewan’s 
leadership in public health care, while reducing wait times and 
improving access to services. 
 
Investments in health care will be the highest they have ever 
been. 
 
As the birthplace of Medicare, Saskatchewan retains its 
distinction as the only “have” province in Canada that does not 
charge its people a health care premium. 
 
To strengthen the best health care system for families, we will: 

• enhance efforts to recruit health care providers, using new 
relocation incentives in return for service commitments, 
among other initiatives; 

• increase opportunities for internationally-educated 
professionals to work right here, right now; and 

• expand the Aboriginal health workforce. 
 
To further improve health care for Saskatchewan families, we 
will: 

• continue the progress towards the development of a 
Children’s Hospital within a hospital; 

• provide support for children with mental, physical, or 
behavioural disabilities and disorders; 

• continue the implementation of the Premier’s Project Hope 
to prevent and treat the devastation caused by drug and 
alcohol abuse; and 

• work with First Nations and Métis leaders to call on the 
federal government to meet its commitment to achieve the 
targets agreed upon at the First Ministers’ meeting on 
Aboriginal issues. 

 
Our seniors and elders fought for Medicare and pioneered this 
province. They set out to create a better life for their families, 
children and grandchildren. So too, in this Session, my 



October 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

government will introduce new measures to recognize their 
dedication. 
 
Cornerstone efforts to improve health care and its delivery are 
firmly in place to meet the goal of making life better for today’s 
families and to build a future here for our young people. 
 

ADVANCE SASKATCHEWAN AS A LEADER IN 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND THE GREEN 

ECONOMY 
 
For our families to remain healthy and for our economy to 
prosper, Saskatchewan will be a leader in the protection of the 
environment and the promotion of clean and renewable energy. 
The third cornerstone of my government speaks to this goal. 
 
Saskatchewan will demonstrate national leadership in 
conserving, protecting and restoring the health of our 
environment and our diverse ecosystems. 
 
In this Session, my government will: 

• implement further steps to achieve our long-term goal of 
meeting one-third of our energy requirements through 
renewable resources; and 

• work in partnership to research the feasibility of the 
world’s first, Saskatchewan-designed, utility-scale clean 
coal generating facility. 

 
In addition, my government will: 

• implement measures to assist in energy conservation; 
• carry out a comprehensive plan to develop bio-fuels; 
• continue leadership in carbon sequestration and wind 

power development; 
• implement a plan for the mandated use of ethanol; 
• ensure a safe water supply for communities; and 
• take further measures toward our vision of agroforestry. 

 
Finally, with one-third of the organic farmers in Canada, and 60 
per cent of the land in this nation which is dedicated to organic 
farming, this province will lead the way in organic production. 
Upon completion of work now underway, initiatives will be 
introduced to expand the production, processing and marketing 
of local organic food. 
 
With our connection to the land and our commitment to 
environmental stewardship, Saskatchewan clearly demonstrates 
it is down to earth, with only the sky as our limit. 
 
All efforts in environmental protection will contribute to our 
goal of making life better for today’s families and help to build 
a future here for our young people. 
 

ENSURE SASKATCHEWAN FAMILIES BENEFIT 
FROM OUR STRONG, PROSPEROUS ECONOMY 

 
Our province has caught the eye of the world. Major 
investments are being made by national and international 
companies, including in oil and gas, diamonds, uranium, 
value-added agriculture, ethanol and potash. Our external trade 
missions and promotions, and the work of the Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, are bearing fruit. 
 
There have been significant gains made through our 

university-based capacity for research and commercialization in 
bio-technology, petroleum, medicine, pharmacy, information 
technology and greenhouse gas emission reduction. 
 
Saskatchewan’s co-operative, financial, manufacturing, 
tourism, film and video, music, small business and retail sectors 
are expanding and providing even greater opportunities for 
Saskatchewan’s young people. 
 
All of these developments and more have contributed to the 
strong economy of Saskatchewan today. 
 
The fourth cornerstone for my government within this Session 
is to ensure that Saskatchewan families will benefit from our 
strong and prosperous economy. 
 
This will take shape in many ways within their communities, 
rural and urban alike. 
 
Over the last year, business tax reforms were introduced and are 
making Saskatchewan's corporate tax structure one of the most 
competitive and business-friendly in Canada, now leading to 
more job creation and employment opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Additionally, throughout our province, Aboriginal economic 
development has significantly contributed to the growing 
employment numbers among Saskatchewan’s First Nations and 
Métis. To further this progress, a national summit on Aboriginal 
economic development, in partnership with First Nations, Métis 
and Inuit, will be held. 
 
Without a doubt, the rise in the Canadian dollar and changing 
international markets are having significant impact on two of 
our major sectors – forestry and the meat industry. 
 
During this Session, my government will work with the 
Forestry Task Force, local communities and industry partners 
toward a viable and long-term forestry sector in the province. 
Also during this Session, my government will work with the 
meat industry to evaluate our plans in light of recent changes. 
 
This cornerstone contributes to economic growth. It supports 
job creation so our young people can build strong futures right 
here. It provides real benefits for families. 
 

REAL BENEFITS FOR FAMILIES 
 
My government distinguishes itself by being committed to the 
conviction that economic progress must result in social progress 
and that should result in real benefits for families. 
 
Saskatchewan families should benefit from their earned 
success, and their pocketbooks and lifestyles should reflect that 
growth. 
 
Over the coming months, we will take important steps to make 
sure life here is even more affordable for every Saskatchewan 
family. 
 
As part of that, the commitment to the Lowest-Cost Utility 
Bundle through our Crown Corporations will continue. 
 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2006 

Real Benefits for Families 
A Fair Deal for Saskatchewan’s Non-Renewable Resources 

 
My government believes there must be a fair and equitable 
equalization formula respecting Saskatchewan’s non-renewable 
resource revenues. We are demanding fairness and full benefits 
for our families when the Government of Canada honours its 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
During this Session, my government will be relentless with 
vigorous efforts to ensure that the Government of Canada keeps 
its promise. 
 
Families will feel real benefits from Saskatchewan’s strong 
economy. 
 

Real Benefits for Families 
Public Infrastructure Renewal 

 
Families need sturdy, 21st century public infrastructure that 
meets their growing needs. 
 
Modern transportation corridors are essential to our future 
economic development and to create opportunities for our 
young people. 
 
During this Session, my government will deliver a multi-year 
strategy of road and rail, to build a transportation network that 
will serve the economy of today and tomorrow. 
 
In this Session, legislation will be passed to dedicate every 
dollar of fuel tax collected by the province from motorists 
toward the maintenance and building of Saskatchewan’s road 
network. 
 
With the opportunity presented by one-time revenues from high 
energy prices, a multi-year infrastructure fund will be 
established and will provide funding for initiatives such as: 

• the Building Communities fund for cultural and 
recreational facilities; 

• improvements to roads affected by heavy-haul traffic; 
• improvements to access to First Nations communities; and 
• improvements to the economic and social development 

capacity in our North. 
 
Further to these initiatives, my government will: 

• expand high-speed internet to more rural and northern 
communities; 

• address barriers to the movement of goods, services, 
investment and people with our neighbouring provinces 
and within Canada; and 

• work with municipalities to create an “Urban Agenda” to 
support our cities, communities and regional economies. 

 
Families will feel real benefits from Saskatchewan’s strong 
economy. 
 

Real Benefits for Families 
Safety and Security in our Communities 

 
My government is committed to a Saskatchewan where families 
feel safe and secure in their communities. 
 

Toward this goal, as examples, my government will: 
• create more targeted crime reduction efforts in 

communities; 
• continue action to protect against dangerous offenders; 
• develop a province-wide police protocol with the task force 

for missing persons; 
• introduce legislation which gives police new means to 

combat violence; 
• review legislation to ensure that everyone in the province, 

including those in First Nations communities, has an 
acceptable level of fire protection and fire prevention 
services; and 

• continue to develop a provincial anti-racism strategy. 
 

Real Benefits for Families 
The North 

 
My government believes in the vast potential and breathtaking 
beauty of Saskatchewan’s North. 
 
Within this Session our priorities will include: 

• working on the Northern Roads to Prosperity strategy; 
• moving forward in implementing our commitment to clean 

up abandoned uranium sites; 
• examining the impact of the overtime exemption that 

currently exists in northern Saskatchewan; and 
• maximizing business, training and employment 

opportunities made possible by high levels of investment in 
the North. 

 
Ours is a province with limitless potential: down to earth, 
expanding like the northern sky. 

 
Real Benefits for Families 

Working People, Working Families 
 
Working people and working families are fundamental building 
blocks of a strong economy. The health and safety of, and 
benefits for, workers are important values of my government. 
 
During this Session, my government will: 

• focus on workplace safety through the response to the 
Occupational Health and Safety Council Report; and 

• receive and respond to the report from The Workers’ 
Compensation Act Committee of Review. 

 
There will be initiatives to assist vulnerable workers to 
overcome employment challenges by responding further to the 
recommendations of the Commission on Improving Work 
Opportunities for Saskatchewan Residents. 
 
As part of our province’s commitment to improving working 
benefits for Saskatchewan people, particularly Saskatchewan 
young people, the minimum wage will increase to $7.95 on 
March 1, 2007, as part of a three-stage increase from $6.65 just 
over one year ago. 
 
Families will feel real benefits from Saskatchewan’s strong 
economy. 
 

Real Benefits for Families 
Our Families Who Farm 

 



October 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

Families who farm continue to fill the breadbaskets of the world 
even as the cost/price squeeze in agriculture continues. 
 
Over the past year, my government has made significant 
improvements to the education tax on farmland, and today’s 
farm families are gaining from that benefit. 
 
During this Session, efforts will ensure that the benefits of our 
economy continue to touch the lives of average farm families 
by fully funding the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization 
Program while negotiating for a more effective and fair national 
program. 
 
My government will also: 

• work with industry to improve risk management programs 
such as Crop Insurance; and 

• stand firm in calling for the federal government to 
announce an effective new disaster program, and to 
commit to greater support for the grains and oilseeds sector 
in levelling the international playing field. 

 
During this Session, my government will also press the federal 
government to honour its own legislation and enable farmers to 
decide the future of the Canadian Wheat Board through an open 
and fair plebiscite. The legislature will be asked to endorse that 
position. 
 
Families will feel real benefits from Saskatchewan’s strong 
economy. 
 

Real Benefits for Families 
Our Volunteers and Our Communities 

 
Community-based and voluntary organizations are the 
backbone of the high quality of life Saskatchewan families 
enjoy. Saskatchewan people volunteer more than any in Canada 
to sustain their organizations. 
 
Working with the voluntary sector, we are striving to maintain 
and strengthen our position as a national leader in voluntary 
participation. My government is deeply disappointed in the 
decision by the federal government to withdraw support from 
the Canada Volunteerism Initiative. 
 
As a national leader in voluntary participation, support will 
continue for the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative. My 
government anticipates moving forward to forge a new 
structure that will strengthen the relationship between the public 
sector and the voluntary sector. 
 
All of our efforts are toward the goal of making life better for 
Saskatchewan families and contributing to a quality of life 
second to none. 
 

Real Benefits for Families 
A Year of Music – Saskatchewan on Centre Stage 

 
It is often said that Saskatchewan people are the most creative 
and the most innovative by nature. My government believes in 
the strength of creative economies and the enhancements to our 
quality of life that are brought by innovation and the arts. 
 
In this Session, legislation affecting the Status of the Artist will 

be introduced. 
 
In 2007, we look forward to a year of celebration of the arts, 
particularly music. 
 
Building on an impressive track record in establishing a thriving 
film and video industry, a similar course for the creative 
economy of music and the arts will be charted. 
 
Working in partnership with SaskCreativeMusic 2007, and 
having recently secured the world tour of The Rolling Stones, 
there is no doubt that more excitement is on the way. 
Saskatchewan has properly reserved its place on centre stage. 
Events and programs to showcase our own wealth of musical 
talent will boom. 
 
The 2007 stage has been set for Saskatchewan to play host to: 

• the Juno Awards in Saskatoon in April; 
• the Canadian Country Music Awards in Regina in 

September; and 
• the Western Canadian Music Awards in Moose Jaw in 

October. 
 
Watch for the marquees and have the welcome mat ready as 
other announcements unfold. If you love music and good times, 
Saskatchewan will be the place to be in 2007. Nobody throws a 
party like Saskatchewan! This will be a year to be proud out 
loud. 
 
We know good times, but Saskatchewan people are also known 
for a strong work ethic. We are amongst the most productive 
and efficient workforce in this nation. To recognize this, and to 
further build a healthy balance of work and family, beginning 
this February, a new annual statutory holiday will be 
introduced. It will be known as Saskatchewan’s “Family Day.” 
 
Families will feel real benefits from our strong economy. 
 
Much has been accomplished. My government has set out a 
clear, focused agenda to benefit families in four cornerstone 
priority areas. Social progress comes from progress in our 
economy. 
 
As the provincial motto calls for unification, let us build upon 
the strength of our many peoples. 
 
We are building a province where children, regardless of race or 
culture, will be able to read the books they carry in their school 
bags. 
 
We are building a province where young people will establish 
their careers and raise their families in a healthy environment 
and with a quality of life second to none. 
 
We are building a province where the contributions of our 
seniors and elders are celebrated with the utmost pride and 
respected with dignity. 
 
We are building a province where no matter if we carry a tool 
box, a briefcase or a wireless device to work, we have ample 
leisure time to enjoy our land, our lakes, our skies, our 
neighbours and most importantly, our families. 
 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2006 

This is our province – a province we are so proud to call home; 
a province that is down to earth, with only the sky as our limit. 
 
This is our home. Saskatchewan! 
 
May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 
this Assembly in all its deliberations. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan. God bless Canada. God save the 
Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — Your Honours, Mr. Premier, members of the 
judiciary, my legislative colleagues, elders, chiefs, and special 
guests. The year 2006 represents the 100th year of the existence 
of the legislature of Saskatchewan. We commemorated this 
event last spring with a ceremony at which this Assembly was 
presented with a traditionally beaded moosehide runner and 
beaver pelt cushion to serve as a symbolic foundation for the 
Saskatchewan mace. 
 
As a follow-up to that historic recognition of the treaty 
relationship in Saskatchewan, today I am pleased to invite 
Treaty Elder Alma Kytwayhat to join me to offer a prayer on 
the occasion of the opening of this session. I also welcome 
Elder Simon Kytwayhat to follow the prayer with a drum song 
— a fitting way to mark the beginning of our next 100 years. 
 
[Prayers] 
 
[Drum song] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Elder Alma Kytwayhat and Elder 
Simon Kytwayhat. Please remain standing for the departure of 
Their Honours and for the parading of the mace. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:41.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 
the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for this session will be Glenna Coleman, Sope Ogunrinde, 
Michael Radmacher, Mandy Selzer, Nicolas Stulberg, and Kyla 
Will. Welcome to this session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: —Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Deputy Premier, the member from Yorkton: 
 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Friday, October 27, 2006. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the Deputy 
Premier, the member for Yorkton: 

 
That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Friday, October 27, 2006. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I again move, seconded by 
the Deputy Premier, the member from Yorkton: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, and seconded by the 
Deputy Premier, the member for Yorkton: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 



October 26, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put the question on the adjournment 
motion, I do have a few announcements to make. 
 
I would first of all like to thank all guests and members of the 
public for joining us here today. 
 
I want to thank the Hon. J. Klebuc, Chief Justice of 
Saskatchewan; the Hon. R. D. Laing, Chief Justice of the Court 
of Queen’s Bench; the Hon. G. T. G. Seniuk, Chief Justice of 
the Provincial Court; and the members of the judiciary for your 
attendance today. 
 
I would like to thank elders Alma and Simon Kytwayhat for 
taking part in today’s ceremony. 
 
Thank you to the Grade 8 students from Milestone, and their 
teacher for attending today’s ceremony. 
 
Welcome also to the Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School Eclipse 
Vocal Jazz Choir from Regina. I will be calling on them to sing 
for us in a few moments. 
 
I would like to thank members from Saskatchewan based units 
of the regular force and the reserve force for providing us with 
the honour guard this afternoon, as well as the 10 Field 
Regiment for the 15-gun salute. 
 
I also extend our thanks to Rhonda Kerr-White for playing the 
royal salute during today’s ceremonies. 
 
I would like everyone to join Their Honours, the Premier, the 
Leader of the Opposition, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the library 
reading room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Now I would like to welcome the Dr. Martin LeBoldus Eclipse 
Vocal Jazz Choir, under the direction of and accompanied by 
Kelly Magnusson. The choir will sing two selections for us this 
afternoon – “Ticket to Ride” and “Ipharadisi.” Ladies and 
gentlemen, the Dr. Martin LeBoldus Eclipse Vocal Jazz Choir. 
 
[The choir sang.] 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, I would like to thank 
the choir of Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School for that very fine 
performance. 
 

I have one final announcement – I ask that members and guests 
observe the following order when departing from the Chamber: 
first will be the Speaker's party, followed by His Honour’s 
special party, Premier and Mrs. Calvert, Leader of the 
Opposition, judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen's Bench, and 
Provincial Court, members of the cabinet and their spouses, 
other members of the Legislative Assembly and their spouses, 
guests. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:46.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................1 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................6 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................6 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................6 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................6 
 Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................6 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




