
















































Hansard: November 15, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 13A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 391 
 November 15, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of residents from the 
communities of Broadview, Cowessess First Nation, and 
Whitewood regarding the problem of dialysis and lack thereof 
in the area. And I would like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
today on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills concerned 
about the condition of Highway 18. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic opportunities are not lost. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Maple Creek, Consul, and Frontier. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of people concerned with the state of Highway 
310. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
I drove 310, Mr. Speaker, and understand where they’re coming 
from. The petitioners are from the communities of Kuroki, 

Foam Lake, from Margo, and from the city of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise on 
behalf of people who are concerned about Highway No. 49. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Lintlaw, 
Kelvington, and Archerwill. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Grenfell. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
who are very upset with this government’s plan of gravel 
highways. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 
gravel portion of Highway 99 between Junction 6 and 
Craven. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lengthy list of Saskatchewan citizens 
that have signed this petition. I’ll name some of the 
communities that they come from — Craven, Lumsden, Silton, 
Zehner, Regina, amongst other communities, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And today I have 
several pages of a petition of people that are concerned of the 
safety of the Bruno access on the very narrow Highway No. 5. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno and Carmel. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who have concerns regarding the Estevan Daycare 
Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from the citizens of Biggar who are concerned 
about reductions of their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
once again rise in this House to present a petition on behalf of 
frustrated parents across Saskatchewan who, for the past seven 
years, have been lobbying this government for a dedicated 
children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today live in the constituencies of 
Saskatoon Eastview, Saskatoon Sutherland, and Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Simpson, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present a petition regarding tougher sentences for sex offences 
against children. I will read a portion of the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
a known sex offender in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to present this on behalf of the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present on behalf of a constituent from Carnduff. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Carievale, Redvers, Carnduff, and all the way from Souris, 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
received. 
 
 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
four questions to the Minister of Corrections and Safety. I will 
read them. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many people were evacuated from Stony Rapids during 
the summer of 2006 as a result of forest fires? How many 
days were the evacuated people away from their homes? 
And what was the cost of the evacuation for Stony Rapids? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have exactly the same questions for the minister 
dealing with the communities of Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac, and 
Uranium City. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: in this fiscal year, is there money in the 
Department of Highways and Transportation budget to 
cover a financial settlement with the Notukeu flood group? 
If so, what is the amount earmarked for the Notukeu flood 
group? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
written questions today. I give notice that I shall on day no. 18 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company: how many STC agencies were 
closed in 2006? Which ones were they and why? 
 

In addition: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: what was the 
cost of the initial investment into Business Watch 
International, and from whom did SaskTel purchase the 
company? 
 

Also: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how much 
money did SaskTel sell Business Watch International, and 
to whom was it sold? 
 

I also: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Crown SaskTel: why 

was the remuneration of two members of the board of 
directors paid directly to CEP council in 2005? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC: what is Skills 
Canada Alberta, and why did CIC pay it $10,000 in 2005? 
 

And lastly: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC: what is the CIC 
Social Club, and why did CIC pay it $7,200 in 2005? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
children have run away from the Red Willow Centre in 
Saskatoon, for the years 2004, 2005, and 2006? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how long was 
each child gone when he or she ran away from the Red 
Willow Centre in Saskatoon, for the years 2004, 2005, 
2006? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government 
the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: what process 
and procedures does the Red Willow Centre in Saskatoon 
follow when a child runs away from the facility? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 18 ask the government the following questions: 
 

In which residential or group homes had the 41 designated 
spaces for children or youth at risk of being sexually 
exploited? 
 
To the Minister of Justice: how much money has the 
Government of Saskatchewan put into the Saskatoon safe 
house in the year 2005 and the year 2004 and the year 
2003, 2002, 2001, 2000, in 1999? 
 
To the Minister of Justice, I ask on day no. 18: how many 
homes or properties have been shut down under safer 
communities and neighbourhood regulations because of 
children’s sexual exploitation? 
 
What is the total amount of collecting fines through 
violations of the highway traffic Act for the fiscal year 
2001-2002, for the year 2002-2003, 2003-2004, ’04-05, 
and ’05-06? 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

To the Minister of Justice: could you provide a copy of the 
proposed amendments to the Criminal Code by the 
provincial Minister of Justice that would create a 
presumption that those driving a vehicle in the area 
frequented by prostitutes and have a child enter their 
vehicle are communicating with the child for the purpose 
of prostitution? 
 

I ask on day no. 18: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: could the department provide a 
list of the range of victims services, including 
compensation, that are available to sexually exploited 
children? 
 
To the Minister of Justice: how many children have 
received services under The Victims of Crime Regulations 
for the year 2002, for the year 2003, for the year 2004, for 
the year 2005? How many times has the Act cited as The 
Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse 
and Exploitation Act used in the year 2002, the year 2003, 
the year 2004, and the year 2005? 
 

[13:45] 
 
I will also ask, Mr. Speaker, on day no. 18: 
 

How many youth have received a risk assessment under 
the responsibility of the Department of Corrections and 
Public Safety in the year 2002, in the year 2003, 2004, and 
2005? 
 

I also ask, Mr. Speaker: 
 

How many offenders have attended programs under the 
prostitution offender intervention program in Saskatoon 
for 2002 to 2005? 
 

I also ask: 
 

When is it expected that student records will be capable of 
providing real-time access for greater information on the 
progress and location of students? 
 

On day no. 18 I ask the Minister of Justice: 
 

How many charges have been laid and how many 
convictions have been secured under section 2 of The 
Highway Traffic Act in 2005, 2004, 2003, 2001?  
 

And, Mr. Speaker, my last question to the Minister of Justice: 
 

How many instances have prosecutors requested victim 
surcharges in cases where children were being sexually 
exploited in the sex trade in the year 2006? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you I would like to introduce to all members of 

the House today 25 grade 10 students from the Melville 
Comprehensive School, their teachers Mr. Perry Ostapowich 
and Kim Morrison and along with Cheryl Stecyk, chaperone 
and bus driver. I want to welcome them to our legislature today. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Ostapowich has been a 
faithful visitor to this Assembly bringing his classes in on a 
regular basis, and I think that really helps them in their future 
endeavours to understand how government actually works. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that Kim Morrison who is doing 
her internship is from the town of Saltcoats or a farm near the 
town of Saltcoats. Her dad and I played hockey just a few years 
ago, Mr. Speaker — well quite a few years ago — so our 
families are very well known to each other. And I want to wish 
her the best of luck in her education degree that she’s going 
after back to university after Christmas when she finishes her 
internship. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome them here today and 
thank them for coming to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Saskatchewan Construction Association Industry Awards 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, along 
with the member for Wood River and Minister of Labour, I was 
fortunate to have attended the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association Industry Awards at the Hotel Saskatchewan. I’d 
like to take this opportunity to congratulate the recipients of 
these awards. 
 
Firstly the PCL Construction Management Inc., which has 
offices in both Regina and Saskatoon, for winning the SCA 
[Saskatchewan Construction Association] Industry Award. PCL 
also deserves congratulations for celebrating its 100th 
anniversary. 
 
Also to Alliance Energy and Sun Electric, which has offices in 
Regina and Saskatoon, for winning SCA Community Builder 
Award. 
 
Morsky Industrial Services, which is based out of Regina, 
managed to win two awards — both the SCA Innovation and 
Action Award and the Project of the Year Under $5 Million 
Award. Both of these awards were for their landslide 
remediation project. 
 
Graham Industrial Services Ltd., which has offices in Regina 
and Saskatoon, won the award for project of the year for over 
$5 million for the centennial wind power project. This award 
must have been especially satisfying to Graham because of the 
setbacks they faced due to a tornado. 
 
And finally special congratulations are due to the recipient of 
the SCA Person of the Year Award, Bryan Leverick of Alliance 
Energy. 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like the Assembly to join me this afternoon in 
congratulating all of the 2006 Saskatchewan Construction 
Association Industry Award recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Wakamow Place Wins Housing Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, every two years since 1988 the Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation has housing awards that serve as a 
national forum to share best practices dedicated to improving 
quality, choice, and affordability of housing in Canada. This 
year the housing awards theme was Best Practices in Affordable 
Housing and recognized individuals and organizations for their 
outstanding accomplishments in creating affordable housing. 
 
It was open to any individual or group in the public or private 
sector of the housing and construction industry. Sixteen winners 
were selected by an independent committee composed of 
housing experts from across Canada. And I’m pleased to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that Wakamow Place, a project of the Moose Jaw 
Non-Profit Housing Corporation, was among them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to providing safe, supported, 
affordable housing for adults who experience long-term, severe 
mental illness, Wakamow Place has a mental health resource 
centre adjacent to that that offers pre-vocational, social, and 
recreational opportunities for tenants and others who experience 
long-term mental illness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wakamow Place is the result of extensive 
community, provincial, and federal partnerships. And I want to 
congratulate all involved, in particular the Moose Jaw 
Non-Profit Housing Corporation on receiving this national 
CMHC Housing Award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort Fundraising Effort for Breast Cancer Research 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
acknowledge the outstanding contribution of the management 
and staff of George Home Hardware in Melfort, Saskatchewan. 
In honour of Breast Cancer Awareness Month in October and in 
support of a long-time employee and friend, Elaine Gural, who 
was diagnosed with breast cancer last year, this group of caring 
individuals took it upon themselves to arrange a fundraising 
effort in support of breast cancer research. 
 
They had a lot of fun, and finally the staff agreed — men 
included — that if they reached their goal to raise $5,000 they 
would all get pink ribbon tattoos. As well, Mr. Speaker, two 
employees of the local radio station, CK750, Traci Lowe and 
Scott Allan, jumped abroad and agreed that if George Hardware 
successfully raised the $5,000, Traci would get the pink ribbon 
tattoo and Scott would dye his hair pink. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, pink ribbon tattoos and pink hair are now all 
the rage in Melfort among men and women alike. The entire 
community got behind this fundraising effort and the total 
raised was $5,100. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to ask the 
members of the legislature to join me in recognizing the 
dedicated spirits of this group of Melfort individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Organics Connections Conference Held in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this week I had the pleasure of attending the 2006 
Organics Connections conference in Saskatoon. This is a 
national conference held every two years which brings together 
or connects organic producers, processors, marketers, 
researchers, and certifiers from across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday morning I had the honour of 
presenting four members of Saskatchewan’s organic 
community with Connections Organic Pioneer Awards. Paul 
Hanley has been a key source of information about organic 
farming in the province since the 1970s, and he was honoured 
with the Pioneer Organic Communicator Award. Gary Smith 
and Wilma Groenen have also been key figures in organic 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. For their tireless work in giving 
the organic farming sector some of the tools needed to succeed, 
Gary Smith was recognized as Pioneer Organic Educator, and 
Wilma Groenen as a Pioneer Organic Publisher. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Elmer Laird, whose name is synonymous 
with organic agriculture in this province, who is the founder and 
president of the Back to the Farm Research Foundation, and 
who at age 82 corresponds with a variety of media venues and 
writes a weekly column in the Davidson Leader, was 
recognized as a Pioneer Organic Visionary. Mr. Laird has also 
been nominated for a National Hero Award by Canadian 
Organic Growers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the organizers of the conference and 
especially all the recipients of the 2006 Organic Pioneer 
Awards and thank them for them for their significant 
contributions to organic farming here in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Wynyard’s Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to honour Wynyard’s 2006 citizen of the year, 
Nona Longstaff. Nona was presented with this prestigious 
award at a banquet that was sponsored by the Wynyard Lioness 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Club. It was through Nona’s tireless volunteer work in the 
community that she was nominated with this award. In fact to 
demonstrate how dedicated a volunteer she is, Nona even 
showed up in the hall earlier in the day to help set up for the 
banquet that she was to be the guest of honour for. 
 
The list of organizations that Nona has served on is extensive. 
She’s been a member of the hospital auxiliary, the Lioness 
Club, and active in crime watch programs since their inception. 
She’s chaired and held executive positions on all these 
organizations. No matter what event or fundraising is occurring 
in the community, you can be guaranteed that you will see 
Nona taking an active part, whether it be a bake sale, tea, or 
catering to a graduation event. 
 
Other organizations she’s a member of are CARRES 
[community access — respite, rehabilitation, education 
services], the Icelandic Club, the primary health care team, the 
clinic board, and the community advisory network for the 
health region. 
 
In addition to her extensive volunteer work, Nona is a respected 
member of the community. This is apparent in the heartfelt 
speeches that were given by friends and acquaintances during 
her awards banquet. I ask that members join me in 
congratulating Nona Longstaff in becoming Wynyard’s 2006 
citizen of the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 

 
Rules and Ethics 

 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, parliamentary rules dictate that 
members not intentionally mislead this Assembly. Given that 
and the large number of — let’s call them —
miscommunications that have come from members sitting on 
the opposite side of the House, we can only conclude that there 
are problems afoot other than violations of House rules and the 
Saskatchewan Party’s own code of ethics. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, on November 14 the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena said and I quote, “I’ve written to the 
Premier and asked him if he’s going to reinstate the all-party 
committee, and I’ve heard nothing.” Maybe there’s a 
breakdown in the Saskatchewan Party mail distribution system 
because the Premier responded to this issue with a letter dated 
October 12. 
 
On November 6, the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs 
said, quote, “Now I’ve been phoning every couple of weeks to 
the minister’s office, to the Department of Learning, and . . . 
[saying] where’s the capital list . . . [for the] year?” But the 
minister’s office has not received even one call from the 
member on this topic. Maybe he — what? — dialed the wrong 
number every time he thinks he phoned? 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the parliamentary rules and their 
much-touted code of ethics, we have to presume that it’s the 
Saskatchewan Party’s communication system that is at fault as 
opposed to the Saskatchewan Party itself. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Team Saskatchewan Excels at National 
Seniors Athletic Competition 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to say that our Saskatchewan team came home from the 
Canadian Senior 55-Plus Games with the second highest medal 
count of this national competition. There were 21 events offered 
in Portage la Prairie from August 29 to September 2. Organizers 
were pleased that they were in excess of 500 more participants 
this year than last year. Saskatchewan alone was represented by 
193 competitors and 72 guests, totalling 264 competitors. 
 
Grace Beattie from our very own Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency was one of these contenders, and she was proud to 
bring home a national gold medal in the 75-and-over five-pin 
bowling team. She played with Bill Harrison and Gladys Petrar 
of Dysart and Alvin and Helen Craig from Wynyard. Not to be 
outdone, in our constituency, Ray Johnson of Hendon brought 
home a national silver medal in the men’s 75-and-over 
competition. 
 
I think we should be extremely proud of our Saskatchewan 
team as they exemplify the strength and spirit of Saskatchewan 
seniors. The games are more than just an athletic competition 
for seniors. They are a celebration of the spiritual, mental, and 
physical well-being of all Canadian seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was truly a sign that our Saskatchewan 
seniors are indeed a force to be reckoned with. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Workplace Issues for Nurses 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 11, 1999 
here’s what the member from Saskatoon Nutana told the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses: 
 

Never again will we allow ourselves to get too busy with 
other vital issues to fail to listen and respond . . . If there 
are . . . workplace issues that also need to be addressed, I 
promise you that they will be addressed quickly and 
effectively. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, seven years later and after a nurses’ strike, 
this is what the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses have to say 
today: 
 

. . . the scope and destructive legacy of the Saskatchewan 
government’s mismanagement of the nursing shortage is 
simple to outline but difficult to overstate. 
 

Nurses are being burnt out. Patients are suffering. Why has this 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

government broken its promise to the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I suppose it’s a coincidence today, but this is a very good news 
day in the province of Saskatchewan, led by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. Mr. Speaker, today the announcement of an 
additional 2,500 new training spaces in the province of 
Saskatchewan, part of a $52.6 million program for education 
and training of Saskatchewan’s young people. Adding to the 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, of our $15.5 million commitment to 
training and spaces in this province, Mr. Speaker, the largest 
single investment of its kind in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand on this side of the House with 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana on this wonderful day for 
young people, for training spaces, Mr. Speaker, for addressing 
what the Throne Speech says is this government’s commitment 
to young people, to improving Saskatchewan health care and, 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure that Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, once again this government is 
long on words and short on results. According to the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, vacancies have increased by 
almost 80 per cent in the last year. Overtime is skyrocketing, 
WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] claims are through the 
roof. But even worse, patient care is being jeopardized. 
 
The nurses can’t take it any more. They’re tired, they’re getting 
sick, and they’re quitting, Mr. Speaker. When will the 
government start to address the issues that SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] is raising? When will it start to address the 
workplace issues that are causing our nurses to leave their jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
few weeks ago, in fact just a little over a month and a bit ago, 
Mr. Speaker, I announced the creation and the implementation 
of the provincial recruitment agency. And at that same time, 
Mr. Speaker, I announced the first initiatives from the nursing 
recruitment committee that I established earlier this year. 
 
And in response to that announcement, Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite said, we can give the government credit 
because it’s a first step. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a first step in a 
journey, Mr. Speaker, that we will take together to improve 
training spaces — the number of training spaces in this 

province — to improve retention and recruitment issues in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go through the initiatives that we’ve taken 
since 2001, Mr. Speaker, but we are addressing the issues that 
SUN and others have raised, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this minister talked a few days 
ago that he had taken a straw poll of nursing students and he 
told us that 90 per cent were planning to stay in this province. 
But until he guarantees full-time work — permanent, full-time 
work — until he can guarantee some mentorship for the first 
few months that they’re on staff; until he can guarantee some 
stability in the workplace so they’re not moved from ward to 
ward, from night to night, Mr. Speaker, they will not be staying. 
 
Here’s what one grad had to say after her first night at work, 
“My first night I was . . . [the only one] with 22 patients.” 
That’s a 1:22 patient-to-nurse ratio. “I want to stay in 
Saskatchewan, but I’m scared to go to work and be left on my 
own with 22 patients.” 
 
This is the reality that nurses are facing in Saskatchewan and 
because of that reality we have the worst nurse retention rate in 
Canada at 67 per cent. What does this minister plan to do to 
address the workplace concerns that we’re hearing around the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
while the member opposite is again trying to quote me, let me 
quote myself in this regard, Mr. Speaker. Ninety per cent of the 
graduate nurses from last year’s nursing education program 
have found work in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not the worst retention rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Let 
me quote something else, Mr. Speaker, from the Regina 
Leader-Post, the story coming out of Edmonton, Mr. Speaker. 
The Regina Leader-Post article, October 25, “Alberta is 
experiencing a dire shortage of nurses that will get even worse 
as new hospitals open in Calgary and Edmonton.” 

 
Quote, Heather Smith of the United Nurses of Alberta, “The 
rural regions are . . . fearful that Edmonton and Calgary will act 
like black holes,” Mr. Speaker. And the president of the United 
Nurses of Alberta says, “In fact, [Alberta has] . . . the lowest 
percentage of full-time positions in the country.” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seven years ago 
this government made promises to the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses. It promised never to push nurses into the position that 
they would have to take job action. But I can guarantee you, 
they’re getting close to that position. If this government, who 
has stolen many of our ideas over the last number of years, if it 
would have only listened six or seven years ago when the 
member from Melfort told them that they had to increase the 
number of training seats and they had to do a better job on 
recruitment, we wouldn’t be in the train wreck that we’re facing 
in our health system right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses says, “Five years of 
government denial and [the] token responses to the RN/RPN 
shortage has left Saskatchewan . . . worse off than any other 
province.” Mr. Speaker, how could his government, how could 
this government have allowed this to happen in our 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think the member opposite heard the quote that I made out 
of Alberta a few moments ago. And, Mr. Speaker, I encourage 
him to read Hansard and to hear it again. Saskatchewan now 
has, of the four Western provinces, the highest percentage of 
nurses working full-time — of the four Western provinces, the 
highest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the information 
being brought forward by Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. In 
fact that’s why I established a committee of people interested in 
the nursing field and working in the nursing field, Mr. Speaker, 
to advise this government on how to spend $25 million that this 
government put forward — brand new money just two months 
ago, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done 
already in this regard, Mr. Speaker, is to address some of the 
issues that SUN has raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree with the four recommendations made by 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why we are already taking aggressive action on 
recruitment and retention issues. That’s why we are putting 
programs in place . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. The member’s time has elapsed. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there have been 247 bed 
closures as a result of the nursing shortage in our province. We 
have heard that hospitals are closing left and right — whether 
it’s in Preeceville, Bengough, or Spiritwood — they’re closing 
left and right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the situation is only going to get worse as we see more 
nurses retiring. This is what SUN had to say: “If Saskatchewan 

had the same retention rate . . .” We don’t need to compare to 
Alberta. I know how hard they hate when we start comparing 
this government to Alberta. But this is what SUN had to say: “If 
Saskatchewan had the same retention rate as Manitoba, we 
would have 800 more . . . [nurses working in this] province . . .” 
today, Mr. Speaker. It’s shameful, the retention rate under this 
NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue had to be dealt with six and seven years 
ago when Manitoba, their NDP cousins, dealt with it. Now this 
government is finally starting to deal with the problem. Well 
it’s almost too late, Mr. Speaker. We’re spending $300 million 
on overtime. Will he not stand and admit that he’s too late on 
dealing with this subject? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
couple of things in regards to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows — or he should 
knows if his research people are up to the task, Mr. Speaker — 
that the Manitoba program is different than the program in 
Saskatchewan. And if he is advocating the Manitoba model, the 
entire Manitoba model for the province of Saskatchewan, he 
should stand up and advocate it. Secondly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
secondly, if the member opposite wants to compare us to the 
province of Alberta on an ongoing basis, let’s compare the 
whole package. What’s the equalization deal in Manitoba this 
year, Mr. Speaker? — $1.2 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Billion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Billion. Billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. If, 
with the help of the opposition and their cousins in Ottawa we 
have $800 million worth of more money in the province of 
Saskatchewan under equalization, imagine what that will mean, 
Mr. Speaker, to nursing education program in this province. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority this year has hired 215 new nurses. The Regina 
Qu’Appelle Regional Health Authority, Mr. Speaker, since 
April, 89 new nurses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his report this 
past September, the Children’s Advocate called for the 
establishment of a collaborative partnership between the Oyate 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

and the Department of Community Resources. That partnership 
was to include a shared vision on common service delivery 
principles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the advocate wanted this within 60 days. This is 
recommendation 14(06) on page 37 of the advocate’s report. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been 60 days. Since the minister did not 
provide this document yesterday, will he produce it and table it 
in this Assembly today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is 
that as we begin to work our way down this particular path and 
on this journey to help many of these children, what I keep 
telling that member opposite — and it’s a very serious issue — 
is that it’s not about him and it’s not about the political agenda 
of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. This is about 
positioning First Nations people to be actively involved in 
trying to find some healthy activity and some alternative 
lifestyle for their First Nations kids, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said this 
time and time again to that member and to that party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We should learn our lessons from the Indian residential schools, 
Mr. Speaker, in which the people of Saskatchewan and many 
people throughout the country tried to implement their solutions 
on First Nations people. That did not work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this side of the Assembly we said we’re going to engage the 
First Nations people to find solutions and that’s exactly where 
we’re going to stay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I need no lesson 
from that minister on critical issues. That’s why we bring it up 
every day in this House because we know it’s a critical issue. 
That’s why we asked for the advocate report. That’s why we 
asked for the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Has a document outlining the shared vision and common 
service delivery principles been delivered to the advocate? Has 
the minister met with the Children’s Advocate since deciding to 
stay the course with Oyate? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, my staff 
have been in constant contact with the advocate and the auditor, 
Mr. Speaker. We intend to comply, Mr. Speaker. And what’s 
really important, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, is the 
model that we have unveiled is a very exciting model and we’re 
going to start seeing good progress, Mr. Speaker, in dealing 
with this chronic problem that’s been around Saskatchewan and 
the rest of Canada for many, many years and that is children 
being sexually exploited, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And again I go back to a comment I made earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
On this side of the Assembly, I and we totally believe that 
we’ve got to have heavy First Nations involvement and to tap 
into the power and the culture and the vision of First Nations 
people when it comes to these kids. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these children . . . What’s really important is 
that we have to realize that this is 2006. We’ve got a brand new 
journey ahead of us, Mr. Speaker. It’s not the 1960s or the 
1970s where that party is mired in when it comes to First 
Nations involvement. We want to move forward. They’re our 
partners and we embrace their role, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, he and his predecessors have 
covered this up for three years. Maybe he can explain why 
there’s been no elder in the facility since August of last year. 
 
Has a new service agreement been signed with Oyate? Can the 
minister table this document in the Assembly today? How many 
meetings have taken place with Oyate on the development of 
this new service agreement? And can the minister produce a 
draft copy of service agreement models that have been used in 
this discussion? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister once again ignoring the 
advocate’s report? A 60-day deadline was set and if anything 
has been done, I haven’t seen it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that member just doesn’t 
get it and that party opposite just doesn’t get it, Mr. Speaker. 
What has the advocate been advocating; what have we been 
talking about, Mr. Speaker — is that to embrace the First 
Nations power and their abilities to make a significant 
difference and a primary difference when it comes to these 
young children involved in this particular trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From our perspective, Mr. Speaker, what is really important . . . 
We all know what needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
brand new model. We have a brand new vision, and our vision 
certainly is going to be very inclusive of First Nations people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Again I go back to my earlier point. This is 2006. We need to 
embrace that power and the ability of First Nations people to 
make a significant difference in their own children’s lives. We 
embrace that on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I begin to question their genuine concern, Mr. Speaker, when all 
they’re doing is calling down First Nations partners. And that’s 
not where we should go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — He doesn’t get it. We have asked three 
questions, to table a document that he says he has tabled the 
thing. Let us see it. Let us see the document. Where are the 
minutes from the meetings he had with the Oyate board — the 
two missing meetings, the only missing? What’s he hiding? 
What’s he covering up on this? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor also found that there had 
been honorariums incorrectly paid to board members. Can the 
minister tell me, has this money been recovered from the Oyate 
board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. Order. Order. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Community 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member knows, when we announced yesterday our plan to 
move forward, Mr. Speaker, we put some incredible resources 
to the plan. The Minister of Justice’s certainly done his part, 
Mr. Speaker, as this government has shown commitment and 
leadership when it comes to working with First Nations to find 
some of the solutions to children being exploited for sexual 
purposes here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I’ll point out to the member, in our statement yesterday we 
said we will not reopen Oyate until all the recommendations of 
the advocate and the auditor have been put in place, Mr. 
Speaker. I indicated to the media yesterday that I’m comfortable 
in the direction we’re going, that I’m confident we can come up 
with a solution and a plan, Mr. Speaker, and a true partnership, 
a collaborative partnership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what is paramount to me is First Nations have got to be 
involved. And as far as I’m concerned and this party’s 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, they will be involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana says, move on and get over it. 
Move on and get over it, when we’re dealing with children’s 
lives on the street. Well, Mr. Speaker, we won’t move on. We 
won’t get over it. And he’ll produce the documents — the 
minister of resources — to tell us what’s going on on this issue 
and stop covering it up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 

Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, when I see the crocodile 
tears of the member opposite I ask him the question . . . 
Although it’s appropriate for them to ask the minister a 
question, I’m going to ask them a question. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Speaker, several years ago that they all agreed to 
cut $50 million from the Social Services budget, Mr. Speaker? 
And they all stood up beside their then leader saying, we’re 
going to cut, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to cut $50 million from 
homeless children. We’re going to cut from families, from 
support mechanisms for the most . . . the poorest of the poor in 
this province. They were proposing that. And now they get up 
and they say, oh, no, no, no, no, we care about that. Mr. 
Speaker, if they cared about it, they’d put their money where 
their mouth was as we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 

 
Progress of Green Strategy 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we hear 
much from this government about Saskatchewan being a green 
and prosperous economy. They like to talk a lot about being 
green. In last year’s Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, they 
— this government — talked about a green strategy. They had 
held meetings across the province with many groups across the 
province, and they had this master plan. That was according to 
last year’s Speech from the Throne. 
 
Yet in this year’s Speech from the Throne we don’t hear 
anything about the green strategy, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the 
Minister of the Environment . . . The Minister of the 
Environment said the other day in his ministerial statement that, 
he said, when the green strategy is finally completed there’s 
going to be some great things. We’re wondering when that 
green strategy, if it will ever see the light of day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech this year 
builds on the campaign from 2003 where we talked about a 
green and prosperous economy. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 
been working around green issues right from that time and 
we’re continuing to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will end up with a overall green strategy which 
we will present to the public based on the work that was done 
by my predecessor through all of the consultations last year, 
through the work that we’re doing this year. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s going to be informed by the very good work by the member 
from Saskatoon and the work that he’s doing around the energy 
conservation issues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we will do is continue on the strong 
track that this party and this government has as we make 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

Saskatchewan an even greener place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — This is the same sort of answers we’ve been 
getting, and the people of this province have been getting about 
the green strategy for well over two years. There’s a term in the 
environmental groups that they use to justify, describe when 
governments talk a lot about doing green things but really 
there’s no action. They call it greenwashing, and that’s what we 
get from this government. There’s nothing but greenwashing. 
There’s talk that someday we’re going to do something, but 
there’s no action. 
 
We’ve seen a change in minister. We’ve seen changes in deputy 
ministers. And yet the minister says someday the people of this 
province are going to see the green strategy that will deal with 
things like waste management and multi-material stewardship 
programs. When is that minister going really to bring a plan 
forward, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very curious series 
of questions because, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
has distributed a pamphlet in Saskatoon where they set out what 
the Sask Party is going to do for Saskatchewan. There’s not a 
single discussion of any environmental issue in this summary. 
There’s not a single thing in here that talks about the 
environment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know from the polling in the last two or 
three weeks that environment issues have moved right up 
behind health as a concern for Canadians. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re starting to realize that they’re down the wrong 
track. It’s very clear at the federal government level that their 
colleagues have had great difficulty in responding to what 
Canadians see as very important about green issues. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to do that as a government just as we’ve 
said all through the terms of our office here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about polling, 
and I can assure that minister and those members that the polls 
tell us that we are on the right track, Mr. Speaker. The poll this 
summer in Weyburn-Big Muddy said we are on the right track, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, but what are the environmental 
groups saying about this government? They’re saying they 
don’t have a plan. That Saskatchewan on a per capita basis has 
the highest greenhouse gas emissions and this so-called green 
government has no plan to deal with any of that, Mr. Speaker. 

When will they finally quit talking about it and actually do 
something? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been quite a number of 
days in this legislature — in fact basically since I no longer had 
the Health portfolio — that I’ve had a few questions, so I really 
appreciate the chance to stand up and talk. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve listened to the opposition it seems 
like their environmental strategy, their green strategy, is to trash 
talk the province and recycle ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker, 
leave to. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
would like to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to this Assembly three guests that we 
have in your gallery. With us today we have members of the 
Real Voice for Choice, a group who is clearly standing up for 
the Canadian Wheat Board and for single-desk selling in the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the far side from me is Noreen Johns who is a 
farmer, women’s activist from Allan, Saskatchewan, been very 
involved in community and in agriculture issues over many 
years. She sits on the farm support review committee and is 
now very active in the Real Voice for Choice. 
 
With her, in the middle, is Earl Mickelson, and Earl is a farmer 
from Hagen. He is reeve of the RM [rural municipality] of 
Birch Hills and has worked tirelessly for the community there 
in trying to help get greater involvement. He has worked with 
the producer car group, the ethanol group, and he also is 
actively engaged with Real Voice for Choice. 
 
On this end, Mr. Speaker, is Lonny McKague, known to many 
for his activity, both political activity and his involvement in the 
agriculture community and particularly, Mr. Speaker, his work 
with short-line rail. And he has shown incredible commitment 
within his community and within his area. 
 
These folks are here today. We’re going to be engaging in a 
Canadian Wheat Board debate. They are here to observe the 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

debate. They have a great compassion and passion for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan and want to see the single-desk selling 
of the wheat board retained. I’d ask all to welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Lakeview on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to ask leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure today that I introduce some guests who come from 
Japan and from within our province. They are all associated 
with Hitachi and some with SaskPower. They’re working on 
various aspects of the clean coal project that SaskPower is 
interested in, as well as Hitachi’s been a strong contributor to 
our whole wind initiative in southwest Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll ask these people to stand up when they’re 
introduced. 
 
First is Mr. Takamitsu Nakazaki who is the chairman of Hitachi 
Canada Industries. Next one is Mr. Tom Kishchuk who is the 
president and CEO [chief executive officer] of Hitachi Canada 
Industries. Then Mr. Murray Daku who is the vice-president of 
Hitachi Canada Industries. Then Mr. Taiji Yoshida who is the 
general manager of international operations from Hitachi from 
Japan, and special welcome to Mr. Yoshida. Also there’s Mr. 
Kaz Shinyashiki who is the vice-president of Marubeni Canada 
Ltd., and he’s visiting us from Vancouver. And then finally we 
have Mr. Max Ball who is the manager of the SaskPower clean 
coal project. I ask all members to welcome them here to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member for Humboldt on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister on behalf of the official opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Leave is granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join with 
the minister and on behalf of the official opposition welcome 
the delegation from Hitachi from Japan here and to our 
Legislative Assembly. We’re very grateful for the presence of 
Hitachi here in our province which has been here now since the 

1980s. So welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 

Investment in Education and Training 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise before the House this 
afternoon to share with you and with all members of the 
Assembly the efforts and the progress that we’re making in 
Advanced Education and Employment to ensure we build the 
future for our young people right here. 
 
Today our government announced an additional $52.6 million 
for the education and training of Saskatchewan’s young people. 
This is a major new commitment to address the tightening 
labour market as the province’s economy continues to grow. 
 
We are delivering on our promise to expand training 
opportunities to meet the demands of our province’s vibrant and 
growing industries and businesses. This investment also helps 
Saskatchewan families today, providing our province’s young 
people with even a brighter future and more opportunities to 
learn, grow, and prosper right here at home. 
 
The investment consists of the following: $13.3 million to 
create an additional 2,584 training opportunities in the area of 
health education, trades and skills, and basic education; $4.7 
million for training equipment; $2 million to renovate and 
modernize training facilities; $2 million for northern 
development; $300,000 this year to establish the Saskatchewan 
Labour Market Commission; and $30.3 million for 
post-secondary educational capital, including, Mr. Speaker, 2.8 
million for the purchase of two mobile training labs to take 
training on the road to students and industries. 
 
We’re also very pleased to include new training opportunities 
that will be located at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology]. And, Mr. Speaker, 
regardless of what anybody says, we will work with First 
Nations and Métis people by ensuring that the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies and the Dumont Technical 
Institute, along with our regional colleges, have access to 
training dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the best part of this 
plan is the emphasis on providing training to First Nations and 
Métis students in order that they can participate in 
Saskatchewan’s growing labour market. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will work with First Nations and Métis people to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, this 52.6 million 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

investment builds on our April 2006 commitment of $15.5 
million. And, Mr. Speaker, it is the greatest total investment 
ever in training in our province’s history. 
 
More important, Mr. Speaker, the 2,500 training opportunities 
created today provide Saskatchewan learners with more than 
5,000 new, additional opportunities in this fiscal year, Mr. 
Speaker. This is good news for First Nations and Métis people. 
This is good news for our training institutions across the 
province. And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it’s good news 
for Saskatchewan’s young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, the Saskatchewan 
Party is embarrassed by the riches of attention we’ve had 
recently. As a result of this particular announcement, I can 
stand in this House proudly and say that, while I would offer 
my appreciation to the minister and her government for having 
moved in this area, they didn’t do it on their own initiative, Mr. 
Speaker. They read this right out of the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan handbook that the official Leader of the 
Opposition introduced to the public of Saskatchewan some two 
years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the best part of this particular announcement today 
I think is the over 2,500 training seats that have been allocated 
to health education, trades and skills, and to basic education. I 
also believe that the moving of some of this money and some of 
these training seats into regional colleges and technical schools 
— whether they be First Nations or non-First Nations schools 
— is a very important step in the direction that this province 
needs to take in order to help secure the labour force for the 
future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is in desperate need of trained 
workers today. And like so many other issues that have faced 
this government in the last 15 years of their tenure — in the last 
seven years that I’ve been in this House — they are late in 
coming to the realization of this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government followed the Saskatchewan 
Party plan to institute tax reductions, that we always said would 
benefit the economy, they came to it reluctantly. What they 
should have understood at that time is that when those 
incentives took hold and began to work in the economy, there 
would be an increased requirement for trained labour. Those 
two issues go hand in hand. As the economy grows, you need 
more workers. They took — reluctantly I might add — the steps 
to improve the economy, and now we’re coming to the 
realization that the jobs that were created by those changing 
economic circumstances are seriously underpopulated right 
now, and we need more attention to training in this province to 
address that particular need. 
 
So while I recognize clearly the need for this announcement and 
the additional training capacity that it will provide, I would say 
that the government has come to this realization late in the 
game. And it’s unfortunate because we’re going to have many 

jobs now go unfilled until we can see the effect of this new 
training plan take hold in our province. 
 
One additional thing I might add, Mr. Speaker, is that the $30.3 
million for post-secondary education capital spending is not 
delineated in this particular announcement. We do know that 
$2.8 million will go to the purchase of these mobile training 
labs which I believe are already in the field and working very 
effectively. So this is money, as I understand it, for training labs 
that already exist. 
 
The other money, we’re not sure, Mr. Speaker, but we suspect a 
fair amount of the $30 million will actually go the University of 
Regina’s Laboratory Building which has seen serious cost 
overruns because of inadequate planning for that particular 
facility, and did not take into proper consideration the potential 
for serious escalation of construction costs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we are quick to recognize the 
importance of additional training capacity in this province, and 
we appreciate the government taking this initiative, we do think 
that it’s a little bit too late to have met the most important 
objectives of this need. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Preventing the Sexual Exploitation of Children and Youth  

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to report today on the progress 
made by this government to prevent the sexual exploitation of 
children and youth. 
 
My government’s focus is to ensure the protection, safety, 
well-being of young people in need, Mr. Speaker, and we 
continue to use the recommendations of the all-party committee 
as a guide. To further help prevent the abuse of children and 
youth through sexual exploitation, my government is 
committing an additional $350,000 annual funding to 
community-based organizations that serve these young people 
in Prince Albert and Regina and in Saskatoon. The total 
combined, Mr. Speaker, from existing and this new money is 
$850,000 to outreach programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these organizations deliver outreach services 
where the children are, on the street. As such these 
organizations are imperative for identifying vulnerable youth. 
Mr. Speaker, these organizations also provide youth and their 
families with services that help them find alternatives to street 
life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these youth are at an exceptionally high risk of 
sexually transmitted diseases and substance abuse. These young 
people are 120 times more likely to be a victim of violent crime 
than kids of the same age who are not involved in the street life. 
 
The increased funding we announced yesterday is part of my 
government’s commitment to deliver positive interventions in 
the lives of these vulnerable youth. This funding is in addition 
to the expansion of the provincial strategy on child sexual 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

exploitation announced by Saskatchewan Justice yesterday. Mr. 
Speaker, the combined commitment of both departments is over 
$1 million annually. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of talk about Oyate in 
this Assembly and certainly in the media. Not long ago I 
committed to providing a decision about the future on Oyate. 
On September 14, the Children’s Advocate suggested a 60-day 
time frame in which to establish a collaborative partnership 
with Oyate. Mr. Speaker, yesterday was the end of the 60 days, 
and we announced our decision. 
 
To clarify, Mr. Speaker, Oyate was a five-bed facility that has 
been closed since April of this year. Mr. Speaker, Oyate will 
remain closed until I am satisfied that enough progress has been 
made and that all of the auditor and Children’s Advocate’s 
recommendations have been met. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, and most significantly, we now have a 
new agreement with Ranch Ehrlo. And as we all know, Ranch 
Ehrlo is renowned for its child welfare services and programs. 
Mr. Speaker, Ranch Ehrlo will provide assessment and 
stabilization services, such as detoxification, to sexually 
exploited children and youth starting tomorrow. The ranch’s 
expertise will help us ensure successful delivery of the services 
these children need and deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to Oyate and our partnership with the File Hills 
Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, there has been a sincere and hard 
effort to move forward on the recommendations of both the 
Provincial Auditor and Children’s Advocate over the past 60 
days. Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that enough progress has been 
made to continue our partnership with the File Hills Qu’Appelle 
Tribal Council but with some significant changes. I want to 
repeat; Oyate will not reopen its doors until all the 
recommendations have been met and until I’m satisfied all the 
issues have been dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if at any time there is non-compliance, we will not 
go forward. But today I have looked at the progress, and I’m 
satisfied with the changes to the way the services will be 
provided. This progress includes two departmental staff who are 
on the Oyate board; two additional department staff who’ll be 
transitional care and financial consultants to the board; a 
program development committee made up of a First Nations 
elder, a youth who has experienced sexual exploitation, and a 
Ranch Ehrlo representative. This program development 
committee will provide ongoing guidance to the board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the most significant change is that Oyate will 
now focus only on transitional residential care. This care will 
assist the children and the youth to return to their families and 
communities once it is deemed safe — and I reiterate — once it 
is deemed safe. This is a very important role, Mr. Speaker. This 
service will ensure long-term plans are developed for these 
vulnerable children. 
 
Over the past three years, Oyate has provided assessment and 
stabilization services as well as residential care. When Oyate 
reopens, Mr. Speaker, the facility will focus solely on follow-up 
care after their time at Ranch Ehrlo. Mr. Speaker, I would also 
like to mention that Ranch Ehrlo will lend their expertise to 
mentor and to support Oyate staff for delivering transitional 

care. 
 
As I have stated, Mr. Speaker, we recognize we were 
overreaching with Oyate. The problems are well documented 
and they continue to be given attention. We are addressing all 
of these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, as we go forward, we will continue to work with First 
Nations. Let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that the all-party 
committee on the prevention of sexually exploited children and 
youth, the all-party committee specifically recommended that 
tribal councils need to be full partners. Mr. Speaker, my 
government agrees with this recommendation, and I am 
committed to this approach for the benefit of these children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been suggested that the government’s 
involvement with First Nations is politically motivated. Mr. 
Speaker, 80 per cent of the sexually exploited children and 
youth are Aboriginal. Mr. Speaker, First Nations involvement is 
absolutely essential if we’re going to help these children. To 
deny this is to deny the lessons embedded in our history. Mr. 
Speaker, it is up to us to decide how to use these lessons to 
shape the future. 
 
I am totally committed to First Nations people caring for First 
Nations children, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that the all-party 
recommendation was absolutely right. Mr. Speaker, First 
Nations partnership is — as I’ve said many times — critical for 
these children. Among other things, it ensures that we have a 
program that respects First Nations culture and values. 
 
We are making good progress, Mr. Speaker, but there is much 
more to be done. I will not deny that. I want to continue the 
progress that we have made, with full effort, on the work that 
yet remains to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that this is not easy work. 
These are not simple matters to address. Mr. Speaker, we need 
to find solutions to the terrible issues these children are facing. 
We need programs and services that work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank absolutely 
everyone for their patience and their work as we progress to this 
point. The collective efforts of government, community 
partners, and First Nations will ensure that all Saskatchewan 
children and youth can feel safe, and more importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, be hopeful for the future. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you for 
the opportunity to respond. As the minister said, they were 
overreaching when they did this. Well, Mr. Speaker, that falls 
directly on the minister. He is in charge of the CBOs 
[community-based organization]. He is in charge of those 
children. We’ve stated many times in this House that he is the 
parent of those children. And to say that he’s overreached and 
that this has gone on for three years without intervention admits 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

failure by that minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has never been an issue of First Nations. We 
have said many times in the House and in press conferences that 
we believe that the Aboriginal content in this program is 
critical. What we have stated, Mr. Speaker, is that the board and 
the current board of Oyate has not met its obligations, and thus 
so with all the documentation, the advocate’s report, that this 
document or this issue should go back out to tender and allow 
other First Nations groups to bid on it. 
 
When the minister says that there’s progress and that there’s 
agreement between themselves and Ranch Ehrlo and the other 
groups, and yet today in this very House he was asked three 
times to produce the documentation to show these agreements 
and, Mr. Speaker, not once did he produce those documents. 
Mr. Speaker, there were original agreements that were drawn up 
between the minister and the Oyate board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I asked the deputy minister in the estimates 
there and said, name me one thing that the board has achieved. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did he say? He said they built a house. 
Not one thing about the service delivery to the children that 
were in need. Not one thing about the issues that went on there 
with the criminal checks, with the beating up of a young lady, 
and all of those things. Not one thing did he say positively. Not 
one thing could he say, that they had met one piece, one iota of 
the original service agreement. 
 
Now the minister wants to get up and tell us that there are new 
agreements but won’t produce them in the House, Mr. Speaker, 
so how do we know what these agreements are? 
 
Mr. Speaker, again we have that the minister is now putting 
staff on the board. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s three years too late. 
As a matter of fact, in the year 2005 there was only one board 
meeting between Oyate and DCRE [Department of Community 
Resources and Employment] — one meeting in a year, in a year 
that was a crisis mode. So what confidence, Mr. Speaker, do we 
have that this minister, the same minister with the same board is 
going to change anything? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would still like to see them go back out to 
tender, allow other Aboriginal groups who have the capability 
to do this to allow them to bid on it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
why wasn’t Ranch Ehrlo invited in, in the first place to bid? 
Why in Oyate did they not even have an elder on board since 
August? What confidence do we have without the agreements 
and seeing the agreements? 
 
The minister wouldn’t even say today if he’s personally talked 
to the Children’s Advocate on this. He said that his staff is. 
Well I would think that something as critical as this, as it has to 
deal with children . . . not only would he have talked to them. 
He would have met with them. He would have shown them 
agreements, got his concurrence, and the advocate would be 
here today saying he agrees. Haven’t heard that, Mr. Speaker. 
All we’ve heard is there’s an agreement between the minister 
that’s covering this up and a board who didn’t deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there are other Aboriginal groups — not 
only in this city and in this province — that could provide those 
service. And I call on the minister to do his job, protect the 

children, and go out to tender and allow another Aboriginal 
group to provide the services needed. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order please. The 
members will come to order. The Chair recognizes the Minister 
of Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, 
An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Ed and Employment that Bill No. 33, The 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, 
An Act respecting the establishment of the Saskatchewan 
Labour Market Commission be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 34, The 
Labour Market Commission Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Government 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions no. 41 through 50 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 41 through to 50 
inclusive have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 

Support for Canadian Wheat Board 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to 
speak in support of the Canadian Wheat Board and thousands of 
Saskatchewan farmers who support the single-desk system for 
marketing their grain. Mr. Speaker, at the end of my comments 
I will move a motion, seconded by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to preface my remarks with a statement 
made by the member from Kelvington-Wadena on October 31, 
2006. In her remarks, Mr. Speaker, she mentioned that our 
opinion on the Canadian Wheat Board is not relevant in this 
legislature. That’s recorded in Hansard, 114. Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder if she thinks the opinions of her constituents are 
relevant in this legislature. I wonder if she thinks that the whole 
area of agriculture and the agriculture economy is relevant in 
this legislature because, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are very, very concerned about the impact of this. 
 
And I want to read into the record an article that was in the 
Leader-Post by one of the member’s constituents. This was 
written by Mr. Leo Howse from Porcupine Plain. Mr. Howse 
starts his letter, and I quote: 
 

How ironic that our soldiers are fighting and dying for 
democracy in Afghanistan, while in our own country with 
our Canadian Wheat Board (CWB), we appear to have lost 
our right to vote . . .” 

 
Mr. Speaker, it speaks to the passion that people are feeling 
about this issue, people who are stretched to the limits, who are 
saying, how can we take another loss? And, Mr. Speaker, as a 
government in this province we must stand up for the farmers 
who in many cases have lost a voice. 
 
And in this case, Mr. Speaker, it is about democracy. It is about 
calling our federal government to task, Mr. Speaker, so that 
they will live up to their own legal obligations and that before 

they make any significant changes to the wheat board, they will 
hold a full plebiscite with a fair question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask the people of this province to judge whether or 
not this is the business of this legislature. 
 
And I want to put one more piece into that judgment that I ask 
the people of this province to make, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of the amount of money that the Canadian Wheat 
Board puts into farmers’ hands and into the people of 
Saskatchewan hands with regard to the premiums that are made 
through the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking 
at somewhere between 150 — and I’ll use the broadest range of 
figures that we get in terms of the analysis done by independent 
experts in this area, Mr. Speaker — from $150 million to $327 
million. Mr. Speaker, if this farm economy loses that on an 
annual basis, somewhere in that range, who’s going to backfill, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
I can tell you that is an issue for this province, which is already 
paying three times the provincial per capita average for farm 
and agriculture support and four times the federal per capita 
average. Mr. Speaker, it is an issue if this province and this 
farm economy were to lose another $150 to $327 million a year. 
Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan legislative business. This is 
the business of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she wasn’t alone. The member from 
Melville-Saltcoats also had an opinion that was very similar, 
Mr. Speaker. What did he say? Well, Mr. Speaker, I quote: “. . . 
[we] should ‘mind [our] . . . own business’ on what is clearly a 
federal issue” — in the Leader-Post, October 25. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a federal-provincial issue. Agriculture is joint 
jurisdiction. And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan New 
Democrats will always fight to make sure that our farmers have 
a voice at the national level and, Mr. Speaker, we will be open 
to hearing their voice at this level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, this is about the 
fundamental principles of democracy. The Canadian Wheat 
Board Act, section 47.1 stipulates that it is the right of Prairie 
farmers to choose their marketing structures, and any proposed 
changes to the Canadian Wheat Board must be put to a farmer 
vote. Mr. Speaker, that is the democratic structure that we have 
in place. It is the legal structure and we expect our federal 
government to follow the law and not to run roughshod over 
democracy in this country and over the farmers’ right to choose 
to market through this system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past few months farm groups, along with 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] governments of 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba, have been fighting to ensure that 
this very basic democratic right is retained. Where has the Sask 
Party been, Mr. Speaker? Where have they been? Well last 
year, Mr. Speaker, we had a motion in the legislature March 14, 
2006, that read: 
 

And further that this Assembly urge the federal 
government to allow the current democratic mechanisms 
in the Canadian Wheat Board Act to be the mechanisms by 
which the future of the Canadian Wheat Board as a 
single-desk seller is determined. 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

Well what did the member from Thunder Creek say, Mr. 
Speaker? He said and I quote, he said: “. . . a paragraph that 
they know we cannot and will not [discuss] in all conscience 
[cannot and will not] support,” Mr. Speaker. Cannot and will 
not support the democratic mechanisms and the right of farmers 
to choose, Mr. Speaker. That, Mr. Speaker, is a tragedy and I 
think the farmers of Saskatchewan knowing, knowing that 
that’s where the Sask Party sits on this, Mr. Speaker, they will 
not be happy; not be happy at all with their members. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want to talk about 
their economic studies that conclude that the CWB [Canadian 
Wheat Board] really could have a choice in it, Mr. Speaker, that 
there could be a dual desk. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are no 
credible studies that support that. Even the Government of 
Alberta that has spent over $1 million trying to get rid of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, even their own study that 
they commissioned out of California shows that this simply 
could not work, Mr. Speaker. A small grain company — and it 
doesn’t matter whether you call it CWB-II or some completely 
different name, Mr. Speaker — a small grain company with 
$100 million base asset and going to producers for shares just 
isn’t going to work. 
 
[15:00] 
 
How do we know that, Mr. Speaker? Well we’ve got a 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool example. And that example shows us 
just how difficult it is even when you’ve got assets in province, 
even when you’ve got port access, Mr. Speaker, that they 
recognize that in order to survive in this very, very competitive 
world with very narrow margins that they have to consolidate, 
they have to amalgamate. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why they 
have chosen to put in a bid to try and buy Agricore United, Mr. 
Speaker, because they amongst many others recognize that this 
is a very, very difficult area to operate in. So what chance 
would some new, small CWB-II that has no assets either at port 
or in province . . . how would they survive, Mr. Speaker? What 
utter nonsense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province and the farmers of this 
province deserve to hear the straight goods, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we as a government will work with the Manitoba 
government and we will work with those farmers who really 
want to make sure that the straight story is out, Mr. Speaker. 
And we will make sure that if the federal government does not 
stand up for democracy and if the federal government does not 
hold a plebiscite, Mr. Speaker, then the province of 
Saskatchewan and the province of Manitoba will make sure that 
they get that right, Mr. Speaker. We will hold a plebiscite. We 
will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think that 
come next election, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will 
find out from the farmers. They will find out during the next 
election that their rights, their democratic rights and their 
economic rights, Mr. Speaker, they will give them a message 
that those rights are not for sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are so many, so many things that are 
in jeopardy in this discussion, Mr. Speaker. This, Mr. Speaker, 

wheat board has provided significant benefit to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Conservatives have until this point 
clearly been attempting to run roughshod over their own 
legislation. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but they have been 
chopping away at the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a tradition of elections that has really I 
think made a difference — having a farmer-elected board — 
and in that tradition, the elections do give opportunity for 
people who do not stand up for the single desk to run and to 
become a part of the board. Do you know what’s happened, Mr. 
Speaker, to most of those who’ve done that? They’ve got in and 
they’ve got involved. Once they’ve got the factual information, 
Mr. Speaker, they become single-desk advocates. Once they’ve 
got knowledge, Mr. Speaker, once they have understanding of 
the system, they become single-desk advocates. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there should be something that the 
members opposite learn from that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there are cracks in the ranks of 
the federal government because there are members like Inky 
Mark of Manitoba who say that democratic principles are 
important, Mr. Speaker. And they are going to stand up against 
their own people. Why? They are going to stand up against that 
Conservative government because they believe that the 
democracy should be respected and that these farmers should 
have the right to vote on the future of the Canadian Wheat 
Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has the federal government done? They have 
chipped away at the wheat board. They have set up closed 
meetings, Mr. Speaker — closed-door meetings — with only 
their special friends invited who want to get rid of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. They have now pulled together a task force, 
given them a very, very short period to work in. And that task 
force is supposed to come up with a plan that’s going to take us 
into a positive future in that short period. What did they come 
up with? They came up with CWB-II, a grain company with no 
assets that won’t survive, Mr. Speaker. And that’s their plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all they want to do is tear the guts out of the 
Canadian Wheat Board and allow the major companies to take 
over that whole business. That’s all. And then, Mr. Speaker, 
what’s going to happen? It’ll always be a race to the bottom. 
Yes, you might get a good price today on the spot market but 
tomorrow you might be at the bottom of the line, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s the way it’ll work in an open market system. Once in 
a while you’ll win, but what’ll happen to the majority? Mr. 
Speaker, they will not win. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this system people stand up for each other. 
Farmers stand up for each other. And by marketing through the 
Canadian Wheat Board all people get the benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is vitally important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So what did they do, Mr. Speaker, as 
they chipped away at the board? 
 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Well the elections have been in place for some time, Mr. 
Speaker. The system was laid out and part way into the system 
what did the federal government do? Changed the rules, 
changed the rules part way into the election. And really cut off 
about 16,000 potential voters, Mr. Speaker. Now that creates 
significant confusion. One more attempt to gerrymander and 
undermine the board and to undermine the democratic 
processes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they did would be okay if it was done at the 
beginning of the process. We can’t fault that in terms of setting 
some parameters, but not in the midst of an election where the 
materials have already gone out. Well maybe, Mr. Speaker, 
people will be able to correct that to some extent but some will 
be disenfranchised. 
 
What else have they done as they’ve tried to chip away at the 
board and take a piece at a time, Mr. Speaker? Well we have a 
tradition also of appointed members who are appointed because 
of their expertise, that they can bring a particular expertise from 
their professional life on to the board. They can apply that to 
help make the board strong and effective. 
 
What has the federal Conservative government done, Mr. 
Speaker? They’ve fired those people with expertise and they’ve 
appointed people, farmers, who in these cases are appointed 
because of their expertise is how to get rid of the Canadian 
Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, how to undermine the Canadian 
Wheat Board. That’s it. Well they carry into it some knowledge 
as farmers, Mr. Speaker. But their main claim to fame is they do 
not want single desk on the Canadian Wheat Board. One more 
attempt to try and chip away at a democratic structure that 
provides good economic benefit to the farmers of the Prairies, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what else do they want to do? They’ve got a calculated 
attack here. They looked at all of the polling that’s been done, 
the Ipsos Reed polling, and they say, well you know, on the 
board there is a bit of a weak sister. Barley’s a little bit weaker, 
isn’t it? And they figure well if we can hive off barley, then 
maybe we’re going to have an advantage here. Maybe if we 
break off this piece, then we’ll undermine the board a little 
more effectively. 
 
So well maybe we’ll call a vote on that. Now they’re not going 
to tell us what the parameters might be on a plebiscite on 
barley. But, Mr. Speaker, are they going to include all of those 
people who for years have been doing very well selling feed 
barley, but not through the wheat board system? Will they get a 
vote, Mr. Speaker? Will the people who farm more land than 
others, will they get 2, 3, 4, 10 votes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We have a democratic structure here, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
tradition. We have a board that has provided benefit. These 
guys are doing everything they can to undermine it. And I can 
tell you that the governments of Manitoba and Saskatchewan 
will not let that happen. We will do everything we can to make 
sure that farmers’ democratic rights are honoured and respected, 
and that there is a fair question on a plebiscite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And, you know, you look at this 

federal government and you say, you know . . . They come to 
power saying that they’re there for the people, that they’re 
populist and that they’re there for the people and that they really 
want to make sure that there’s good debate and discussion. But 
what do they do to the Canadian Wheat Board, people with 
knowledge? 
 
Well let me just go back and say, Mr. Speaker, that when our 
current Prime Minister, Stephen Harper, was head of the 
National Citizens Coalition, what did he say about gag orders 
back then, Mr. Speaker? Here’s what he said, and I quote: 
 

The . . . [National Citizens Coalition] position is that such 
gag laws are unconstitutional and unenforceable. We 
intend to freely express our political opinions using our 
own resources. We encourage other organizations and 
individuals to do the same. 

 
What does he do today as Prime Minister? Puts a gag order on 
the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. The same guy that 
said no, you shouldn’t honour such gag laws. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a big insult to a society that is free and 
democratic. And I can tell you that the federal Conservatives 
have sunk to a new low as they have tried to undermine the 
democracy that farmers have enjoyed and we hope will 
continue to enjoy for decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, disenfranchising 16,000 voters, appointing people 
to the board only because they wanted to get rid of the board, 
Mr. Speaker, putting a gag order on — all of these things 
simply designed to try and undermine the wheat board to get it 
into weak shape, Mr. Speaker, and then they’re try and hive it 
off a piece at a time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will do everything we can to make sure the 
farmers have the opportunity to support the wheat board 
through their votes, through a fair and open vote. 
 
Well I want to talk also, Mr. Speaker, about some of the other 
impacts that this potential loss of the board might have, Mr. 
Speaker. If the Canadian Wheat Board is destroyed — as this 
federal government seems determined to destroy it and the 
Government of Alberta seems determined to destroy it — it will 
be a significant blow to democracy. It will undermine 
democratic process, but it will also impact the investments that 
people of this province and the provinces next to us have made, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Years past, farmers have been encouraged and invited to invest 
in agriculture, in value-add, and in their communities. Mr. 
Speaker, they have done so. Farmers have put together their 
hard-earned dollars and they have invested in inland terminals, 
Mr. Speaker. And the independent inland terminals, those that 
are not aligned with a major grain company, those that don’t 
have a port, Mr. Speaker, those inland terminals will be in 
significant jeopardy with the loss of the wheat board because 
the wheat board has provided help to those operations by 
allocating cars, by marketing board grains, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, without the board there, they are in jeopardy. 
They know it. And the investment that these farmers have made 
in these inland terminals, the investment that their communities 
have made are in jeopardy. 
 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

Mr. Speaker, not only will they be in jeopardy on that front, but 
we have many farmers in the province of Saskatchewan and our 
neighbouring provinces who have been loading producer cars. 
Mr. Speaker, without an allocation of cars from the Canadian 
Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, without their continual push to 
honour the rights of producer-car loaders, Mr. Speaker, these 
producer cars simply would not be operating at all effectively 
and people would be turning from them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in several of the opposition MLA’s [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] ridings, there are producer-car 
operations where communities have invested, again, significant, 
significant dollars not only to build infrastructure but also to 
build systems that work to make sure that farmers get a 
premium. Up to $10 a tonne for producer-car loading . . . or up 
to $10 — pardon me — a car for . . . $10 for one car, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s very . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
$10 per car, somebody’s asking. I’d like to just make it clear — 
$10 per car, Mr. Speaker, is a premium that those people are 
getting through producer-car loading. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very, very important 
that we recognize that also by marketing through the board they 
are getting 10 to $14 a premium, Mr. Speaker, 10 to $14 per 
tonne. Now add the 10 to $14 per tonne to the $10 per car, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re making significant premium by marketing 
through producer cars, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to say that if the board is not there, that if the members opposite 
who want to get rid of the board and the Conservative members 
who want to get rid of the board have their way, Mr. Speaker, 
producer cars will not be able to operate effectively. 
 
So if the producer cars aren’t operating effectively, what 
happens next, Mr. Speaker? What happens next, Mr. Speaker? 
Well I’ll tell you the next thing that happens, Mr. Speaker, is 
the short-line rail is in serious jeopardy. And if the short-line 
rail goes down, Mr. Speaker, significant, significant investment 
by farmers and by communities, Mr. Speaker, is gone — 
significant investment. 
 
And I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, do the members opposite think 
that their farmers have so much money that they can afford to 
lose those premiums, Mr. Speaker? Do they think that this 
province has so much money that we can afford to lose 150 to 
$327 million a year in returns that the Canadian Wheat Board 
provide for farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 
think it can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m sure, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that those members 
opposite would not want to be putting that kind of money in, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’ve already said over and over again, 
Mr. Speaker . . . and I would quote it, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t 
have it in front of me. But they have said over and over again 
that they don’t believe that this government should be investing 
in private business, Mr. Speaker. So they’re not going to 
provide the support to the farmers who are in trouble. That’s 
clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we believe in democracy. We believe that the 
Canadian Wheat Board is providing a benefit, a significant 
benefit to farmers. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that when we 
listen to the companies that are buying through the Canadian 
Wheat Board, like Warburtons in Britain, and when we speak to 

the companies in Japan that are buying Canadian wheat through 
the board, Mr. Speaker, we know that this board provides a 
tremendous service. And we know that those operations that are 
buying through the board don’t want to see the board destroyed. 
That is clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 
and the federal Conservatives like to say that the Ontario Wheat 
Board is an example that the board could survive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can tell you very clearly from the words, Mr. Speaker, the 
words of Dana Omland, who is the marketing manager for the 
Ontario Wheat Producers’ Marketing Board — who grew up on 
a farm near Saskatoon — he says, Mr. Speaker, these things are 
very, very different. The marketing environment is completely 
different in Ontario than it is here, Mr. Speaker. And he is 
saying very clearly that the Canadian Wheat Board could not 
operate with that kind of environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They can drive to where their sale is, Mr. Speaker. It would be 
the equivalent, it would be the equivalent, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to just 
respond. The member opposite is saying, are we inferior? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a matter of geography, Mr. Speaker, where 
they can drive right to where they’re selling their wheat, Mr. 
Speaker. We can’t just . . . Every farmer can’t get in their truck 
and drive to Vancouver and drive to the Thunder Bay port or to 
Churchill, Mr. Speaker, and move their grain that way. But they 
can drive to the end of sale in Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when that comes right from the people who 
are engaged in marketing in Ontario, who know their own 
system, Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite should listen 
and stop talking about their fantasy ideas about how some other 
kind of board might work. 
 
We have a board that works with and for farmers, and we want 
to retain that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly — clearly, 
Mr. Speaker — we want to see this board retained. We want to 
see it enhanced because, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just about having 
the Canadian Wheat Board that provided so much support to 
those farmers when it was initiated early on. 
 
I have letters, Mr. Speaker, from people in 1936 who talk about 
how important it was that this wheat board came into place and 
that they were no longer being gouged by the grain companies, 
Mr. Speaker — no longer being gouged by the grain companies. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when I look at that in 1936, I say it was 
good for those people at that time. 
 
It’s evolved. It’s evolved significantly since that time. And, Mr. 
Speaker, today we not only have a Canadian Wheat Board that 
is led by farmer elected directors, Mr. Speaker, but we have a 
Canadian Wheat Board that is looking far into the future. And 
they’ve put together their harvesting opportunities document, 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, a document that really looks at how to take 
advantage in this very challenging area of marketing grain in 
and around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that kind of direction, that kind of 
commitment that we’re getting from the farmer-elected board, 
Mr. Speaker, it will only, it will only provide better service and 
better return to farmers. 
 
I want to make one more comparison, Mr. Speaker, and that is 
to look at the Canadian Wheat Board structure and its goal. The 
Canadian Wheat Board has as its stated goal to provide the 
biggest return possible to the farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what all of the other 
companies, whether they are private or public companies, what 
they’re engaged in is trying to get the biggest and the best 
return to their shareholder or to their owner, Mr. Speaker. Not 
to the primary producer, not to the primary producer, but to 
their shareholders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So here we have market power in the hands of a farmer elected 
board. And that market power is enabling them to bring a 
significant return to the farmers of these Prairie provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. Nobody, nobody wants to see that destroyed if they 
care about the future of agriculture in these Prairie provinces. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move this following motion, seconded by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the Prairie Producer 
Coalition’s support for rights of producers, as legislated by 
the Canadian Wheat Board Act, and the resolution passed 
by 85 per cent of the delegates at SARM 2006 annual 
convention calling for the federal government to continue 
its financial support of government guarantees and 
single-desk selling of the Canadian Wheat Board; 

 
Further that this Assembly call upon the federal 
Conservative government to respect current federal 
legislation and to honour the democratic process by 
allowing all producers of wheat, barley, and durum the 
right to affirm or deny any proposed change to the 
Canadian Wheat Board through a producer plebiscite as 
stipulated in the Canadian Wheat Board Act, section 47.1. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley and seconded by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the Prairie Producer 
Coalition’s support for rights of producers, as legislated by 
the Canadian Wheat Board Act, and the resolution passed 
by 85 per cent of the delegates at SARM 2006 annual 
convention calling for the federal government to continue 

its financial support of government guarantees and 
single-desk selling of the Canadian Wheat Board; 
 
Further that this Assembly call upon the federal 
Conservative government to respect current federal 
legislation and to honour the democratic process by 
allowing all producers of wheat, barley, and durum the 
right to affirm or deny any proposed change to the 
Canadian Wheat Board through the producer plebiscite as 
stipulated in the Canadian Wheat Board Act, section 47.1. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to first of 
all, Mr. Speaker, say a few words on a personal level. Mr. 
Speaker, five years ago, Mr. Speaker, five years ago after the 
death of my father, five years ago after the death of my father, 
we went through his belongings and through his papers and 
books. And we found an interesting publication. What we found 
was a document, a pamphlet, that was put out by the Canadian 
Wheat Board in 1985 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And what I found particularly interesting in this pamphlet, Mr. 
Speaker, was the very last page because on the last page this 
pamphlet spells out the Canadian Wheat Board’s view of what 
was to happen in the future. Now remember, Mr. Speaker, that 
this was written in 1985. And I’ll read the last paragraph: 
 

While the operations of the Board have undergone many 
changes in 50 years, some things have not changed. These 
are the basics of the Board approach — sharing of market 
through the pooling system, fair allocation of delivery 
opportunity, and maintaining market clout through 
single-desk selling. The Board’s future will depend on 
Prairie farmers not losing sight of these basics, some of 
which are even more important than 50 years ago. In a 
grain world dominated by multinational companies far 
larger than the Wheat Board, massive government 
subsidies in competing countries, and centralized 
government and private purchasing agencies, Prairie 
farmers can hardly afford to give up any market clout. 
 

Written in 1985. 
 
Today we are still in a world, in a grain world dominated by 
multinational companies far larger than the wheat board. We 
still have to deal with massive government subsidies in 
competing countries, particularly the US [United States] and the 
EU [European Union]. And today more than ever, just as it was 
in 1935 and just as it has stated in this 1985 publication on its 
50th anniversary, “Prairie farmers can hardly afford to give up 
any market clout.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to a great deal of what I would 
describe as memory loss combined with historical revisionism 
from the other side of this House, and so I thought it might be 
useful to revisit history and just talk about why the wheat board 
was created in the first place. 
 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

Ironically, Mr. Speaker, it was a Conservative prime minister 
who created the wheat board in 1935. In the late 1920s there 
were three provincial wheat pools and their wheat was marketed 
through a joint selling agency, the Canadian Co-operative 
Wheat Producers Ltd. But in 1929 we know what happened. All 
three wheat pools and their central selling agency got hit by the 
stock market crash. As grain prices plummeted, they turned to 
provincial governments for financial backing and these 
governments in turn looked to the national government for a 
guarantee on initial payments. And you’ll remember, Mr. 
Speaker, this was the government of the infamous R.B. Bennett, 
the namesake of the Bennett buggy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as a Conservative, the last thing R.B. 
Bennett wanted to do was get in the way of the grain traders. 
But the situation was so bad, Mr. Speaker, that Bennett had to 
do something. So he guaranteed initial payments for grain, 
which of course infuriated the private traders. At the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, a friend of his — a guy named John McFarland — 
was appointed to head up the central selling agency for the 
pools, and he essentially became a policy adviser to Bennett. 
 
As the Depression deepened and as our ancestors struggled to 
survive out here in Saskatchewan, in the eyes of the grain 
traders down east the futures market was operating, and I quote: 
“on the whole smoothly under the abnormal strains of the past 
three or four years.” Even R.B. Bennett and his friend John 
McFarland were disgusted by the greed of these traders. In a 
letter to Bennett, McFarland said the futures market, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . has neither functioned continuously nor smoothly. The 
only way it functioned smoothly is when it’s going down. 
Most things run pretty well downhill and it is one of them. 
 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, that with farmers in the survival 
mode in those years, even the Conservative government of the 
day recognized that the open market was not operating in the 
interests of farmers and that government had to do something to 
stabilize things. So in 1935 Bennett introduced legislation for a 
government marketing board, a compulsory wheat board 
actually, which people tend to forget. But opposition from the 
grain traders kicked in and the wheat board actually started off 
as a voluntary board with a guaranteed initial price, and we all 
know it became a single-desk board under the Liberals in 1943. 
 
So what’s the history lesson, Mr. Speaker? Well today, Mr. 
Speaker, over 60 years later farmers are once again in a survival 
mode and once again we have a Conservative government in 
Ottawa. But rather than protecting farmers from the open 
market, they intend to leave farmers at the mercy of the open 
market. Rather than stabilizing the prices farmers receive, they 
intend to destabilize the grain prices farmers presently receive 
through the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Today rather than allow farmers the market power of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, these right wing ideologues intend to 
take away the last vestige of market power that farmers have 
and they are supported wholeheartedly by their Conservative 
cousins opposite. 
 
It’s very clear where the Saskatchewan Party stands. The 
member from Thunder Creek has on March 14, 2006 referred to 

the “value-added killing effect” of the wheat board. On April 
30, ’04 he said the wheat board suffocates . . . “the wheat board 
suffocates the western prairies”. The member from Humboldt 
has on June 6, 2000 referred to the wheat board as having a 
“stranglehold” on farmers. And the member from Rosetown, 
April 27, 2000 has talked about how the Canadian Wheat Board 
single desk has put, quote, “shackles on farmers”. 
 
Shackles, strangleholds, suffocating, value-added killing effect. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m betting that’s the language that was used by 
those grain traders in the 1930s in their fight against market 
power for farmers. 
 
What we have in the Saskatchewan Party is a denial of history, 
a denial of the lessons our grandparents learned the hard way. 
It’s unbelievably short-sighted. The idea that farmers can 
compete and survive individually in today’s open market is 
unbelievably naive. 
 
I have here a column from The Western Producer, February 9, 
2006 written by Wendy Holm. She says, and I quote: 
 

Welcome to the 1920s. We’ve been here before. Those 
who fail to understand the lessons of history are bound to 
repeat them. Without political leaders prepared to listen to, 
understand and defend the economic and trade interests of 
Canada’s farmers, we are all sitting ducks. 
 

And she ends by saying: 
 

Dual desk selling is code for destroying the market power 
of Canadian grain farmers and with it the economic future 
of Western Canada’s farm communities. If we don’t stand 
for something, we’ll fall for anything. Think about it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — So let’s be perfectly clear about one thing, 
Mr. Speaker, ending the single-desk marketing power of the 
wheat board will end the wheat board. So, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
talk about what happens if the Canadian Wheat Board loses this 
single-desk power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the most conservative of estimates indicate 
that Saskatchewan farmers stand to lose between 3 and $400 
million a year if the Canadian Wheat Board loses its single-desk 
mandate. And this matters, this matters to every Saskatchewan 
citizen. With high inputs, freight rates, trade injury, and low 
commodity prices — all of this compounded by weather — 
farmers have had to rely on farm support programs that we here 
in Saskatchewan pay at a level three to four times greater than 
the per capita average across this country. 
 
[15:30] 
 
If the single desk goes, you can add another 3 to 400 million 
burden that we will all carry here in Saskatchewan, farmers and 
non-farmers alike. That’s why when the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats says the Minister of Agriculture should, 
quote, “mind his own business,” I say to him and all members 
opposite that the fate of the Canadian Wheat Board most 
certainly is the business — not only of our provincial Minister 
of Agriculture — it is the business of every member of this 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Assembly and of every citizen of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, there is the simple little 
concept that right wing thinkers have always had trouble with, 
and it’s called democracy — the idea that people collectively 
and democratically run the economy, that the economy 
shouldn’t run people. The federal government — supported of 
course by big grain companies, the railways, grain traders — 
have done everything they can to subvert the right of farmers to 
decide the future of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on July 27 my wife and I celebrated our wedding 
anniversary by attending a rally in support of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. We did this in honour of my father and hers. 
Both had been teenagers during the Depression years. Both had 
farmed all their lives. Both were students of history. And both 
passed their lessons on to us before leaving this world. 
 
At the rally we listened to farm leaders from across Canada: 
from the National Farmers Union; the Canadian Organic 
Certification Co-op; Keystone Agricultural Producers from 
Manitoba; Wild Rose Agricultural Producers from Alberta; 
Battle River Producer Car Group; Mission Terminal 
Incorporated; Canadian Federation of Agriculture; as well as 
political supporters such as our Minister of Agriculture and 
Manitoba’s as well. But the crowd was overwhelmingly made 
up of farmers — 250 in all. 
 
Across the street in a closed-door meeting was the federal Ag 
minister and his selected guests. We are told about 25 in all — a 
few farmers and farm group reps, perhaps a dozen in all, as well 
as reps from the . . . representatives from the Winnipeg 
Commodity Exchange, Grain Vision, Canadian Chamber of 
Commerce, CFIB[Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business], and so on — most of them strong opponents of the 
single desk. 
 
The contrast in these two meetings speaks for itself — a public 
meeting held for the Canadian Wheat Board; a private, 
taxpayer-funded meeting against. Two hundred and fifty, or ten 
times as many people at the pro wheat board rally. And this set 
the tone for the events to follow which the Minister of 
Agriculture has alluded to — a hand-picked task force, a 
ghost-writing letter campaign, the muzzling of the Canadian 
Wheat Board from promoting its own single desk. And in the 
middle of the election for new directors of the Canadian Wheat 
Board, the Minister Strahl removed 16,000 of the 45,000 
farmers from the voting list. The disenfranchisement of those 
voters comes at a cost in dollars as well as democracy. 
 
And now we hear that a plebiscite will be held on the marketing 
of barley early in the new year but only as part of a four-stage 
consultation process to end the single-desk power of the CWB. 
Mr. Speaker, as the confusion begins to build, this is all about 
democracy, the right of farmers on whether or not they want 
their wheat board to have single-desk powers. This is the 
legislated responsibility of the wheat board Act. It is clear that 
the federal Conservative government is intent at destroying the 
wheat board, and it won’t allow democracy. It won’t allow 
farmers to get in the way. 
 

Mr. Speaker, remember the Crow. Remember the promises that 
were made during the Crow rate — lower freight rates, better 
service. Well every farmer knows how empty those promises 
were. The removal of the Crow rate costs our farmers $500 
million a year. Mr. Speaker, when they killed the Crow rate in 
1995, many old-timers, including my parents, warned us that 
the wheat board would be next. So here we are. And I do 
remember the motto at that time — save the Crow. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a time for all citizens, rural 
and urban, to save the wheat board. And so, Mr. Speaker, in 
coffee shops, kitchens, and on the Net, the debate builds. 
Individuals and groups have joined together across political 
lines — the Prairie Producer Coalition, Real Voice for Choice 
— to mobilize and advocate for farmers. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s good that we have this debate here in this Assembly. Very 
shortly we will be holding a vote on this motion, and I think this 
vote today could be not only predictable but historic. 
 
The members on this side of the House will stand in support of 
the single-desk marketing power of the Canadian Wheat Board 
and the right of farmers to decide its future. If those members 
stand to vote against this motion or water it down, they will be 
standing for an end to the Canadian Wheat Board and the 
service it has provided our farmers for over 60 years. And this 
will be remembered by the people of this province in the next 
provincial election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to relate to you some 
of the comments that are being made by farmers as they discuss 
and debate this issue of the wheat board. And so I want to read 
a few pieces from The Western Producer and they’re all from 
November 2. This is from Gordon Taylor of Landis. In his letter 
to the editor of The Western Producer he says, and I quote: 
 

As farmers we better do some thinking on who wants to 
get rid of the CWB and who is going to benefit from its 
demise. Are these multinational grain companies going to 
send any profit they make from selling our grain back to 
us? Hmm, I rather doubt it. 
 
We also better think about what we want. If the CWB 
goes, under the free trade agreement, if any if these 
companies think they have lost money competing with the 
CWB, they can sue the Canadian government for their 
losses. 
 
As a producer, you think you are a big wheel and can sell 
your grain on the open world market and come out on top. 
Just remember what dogs do to wheels. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Borgerson: — Another letter, Mr. Speaker. This is from 
Allan Fritzke, Maple Creek, Saskatchewan. He says: 
 

Let’s just hand it over to American firms such as Cargill, 
ConAgra, Louis Dreyfus and select others who compete to 
control world trade in this commodity. They will do a 
much better job and the government won’t have the 
financial millstone of the . . . [Canadian Wheat Board] 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

around its neck. 
 
It was interesting to note how share prices of elevator 
companies increased when the Conservatives won the 
election. Pure speculation based on getting rid of the . . . 
[Canadian Wheat Board]. Investors know that the grain 
companies will pocket the additional money, which is now 
being returned to the farmers by the . . . [Canadian Wheat 
Board]. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, a correction on behalf of the Minister of 
Agriculture to comments he made earlier. His correction is that 
$900 per car is the amount that he was referring to when he 
talked about the . . . or $10 a tonne which is what he was 
referring to in his speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll close, Mr. Speaker, with this quote from The Western 
Producer. This is from Rudy Ammeter, Headingley, Manitoba. 
 

All the changes we’ve seen in the last 10 or 15 years such 
as rail and elevator rationalization, loss of the Crow Rate 
and the two price system for wheat were supposed to usher 
in a brave new world in which competing countries would 
end all price-distorting subsidies and farmers’ pockets 
would be filled as never before. 
 
I’m still waiting. And the same groups that pushed for all 
these changes are now pushing for the elimination of the 
CWB. 
 

And he ends this letter by saying: 
 

I have voted Conservative for most of my life. Next time 
will be different. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the time to be able to talk on the motion that we have 
before us today on the debate about the Canadian Wheat Board. 
And by the way it’s a very controversial debate out there. Many 
of my supporters are one way. Many of my supporters are the 
other way. And I feel it’s really not. . . When I made the 
comments that the minister spoke about when I said, and I will 
reiterate what I said before, is that they probably should mind 
their business and deal with things that fall under their 
jurisdiction. I stand behind those comments again today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There is so many areas that this provincial government could 
help Saskatchewan farmers and are totally trying to deflect the 
issue away from that by causing the wheat board debate to be 
even bigger than it actually needs be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this all comes down to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan — farmers which I may mention that are 
represented by just about every member on this side of the 
House which seems completely odd compared to what the 

minister’s comments are — and the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. It boils down to those two things, the federal 
government and farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that this government is famous for 
trying to pick winners and losers but this is the height of 
hypocrisy on the part of that government when it tries to play 
one farmer against the other in the province of Saskatchewan. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, when it tries to play the livelihood of one 
farmer against the other it should not even be thought about by 
that government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you probably will expect that as I cannot 
support the motion and I want to tell you why. The first part of 
the motion says that this Assembly recognize the Prairie 
Producers Coalition supports the right of producers as legislated 
by the Canadian Wheat Board Act and, Mr. Speaker, a 
resolution passed by 85 per cent of delegates at the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 2006 
Annual Convention. 
 
Well speak about living in the past. The minister neglected to 
tell everyone in this House, and every farmer in the province 
who already knows this, that SARM has taken a different 
position. They know how controversial this issue is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, at this fall’s 
convention SARM has taken a different direction because they 
have farmers they know also are on both sides of this issue. And 
they have come to the realization that they, as a farm lobby 
group and a leader group in this province, should leave it up to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan and the federal government. 
 
But it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. This motion goes on to 
talk about single-desk selling and not giving farmers of this 
province a choice to sell their product. I might add by the way 
that they put the inputs into, that they put the fertilizer and the 
chemical, taxes, everything that’s created . . . it takes to create 
that product is theirs. But yet when it comes time to sell that 
product, what the NDP government is saying, you don’t have 
the right to who you can sell that to. You don’t have the right to 
say what you would like for that or hold that product until you 
get what you want. You are obligated to sell it under the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain a little bit how that 
works for a lot of the urban public I’m sure that does not 
understand this debate. Because what happens is, when you 
have wheat in the province of Saskatchewan under the 
Canadian Wheat Board, you sign a contract for how many 
bushels of wheat you have. But you are at the whim of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, number one, how much of that product 
that you grow in that year that they will sell for you. There’s no 
guarantee that you can sell all of your crop. If they decide 
they’re . . . only can move X number of bushels, you could be 
left . . . A year like this is a good example, where there’s piles 
of grain on the ground all over this province and may spoil if 
the Canadian Wheat Board cannot move that grain. But you do 
not have the right to move it at a lower price to somebody else. 
That right is taken away from you by the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, farmers are only asking . . . And the minister, I 
might add, talked about democracy today. Where is democracy 
when one farmer can tell another farmer how he can market his 
product? 
 
I would like to talk to the members of urban public 
Saskatchewan today. If they want to sell their house in 
downtown Regina, how would they like it if the rules were like 
this? SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation] 
will control how you sell your house. They not only will control 
who you sell it to, they will control how much you get for it. 
But they also will control . . . we may sell the upstairs this year, 
the downstairs next year, and the basement the year following. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And, Mr. Speaker, I know that’s an 
exaggeration of what’s going on here. But that’s exactly how 
farmers feel out there, that would like the choice to market the 
grain on their own behalf. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a lot of calls on this — I’m sure the 
Agriculture minister has — on both sides of the issue. I think in 
my constituency it probably works out about 50/50 — 50 would 
like to keep the monopoly of the Canadian Wheat Board; 50 per 
cent want the choice to market their grain on their own behalf 
and have that freedom and that democratic right to do so. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the younger farmers in 
the province of Saskatchewan. A lot of the calls that I’ve 
received are from younger farmers who aren’t as technically 
challenged as I am, who are on the Internet every day. They’re 
looking at markets. They market their canola. They market their 
lentils. They market their peas. They market canary seed. 
There’s no end to the markets that they tap into out there on the 
Internet and other ways, other avenues. We have brokers all 
over the province helping them sell those products. And they 
get to choose when they sell that product and for what price. 
Now we all know grain prices have been depressed. And they 
certainly don’t always get the price that they need to break 
even, but at least they get to choose the highest price they feel 
they can possibly get. That stops when you have to sell your 
wheat to the wheat board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked on a number of occasions about the 
prices and how depressed prices are. I want to give you an 
example today. The member for Moosomin did some checking 
for me today at one of his local elevators. And the prices today 
on number 1 feed wheat on the open market again, Mr. Speaker, 
is $3.45 a bushel. Feed wheat under the Canadian Wheat Board 
today is 87 cents a bushel. Now you compare $3.45 on the open 
market, 87 cents under the wheat board, plus a final payment — 
should there be a final payment — but you wait for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If that’s not a good enough comparison, Mr. Speaker, let’s take 
a look at barley prices on the open market today. Today you can 
realize 2.50 a bushel out of feed barley; under the wheat board, 
40 cents a bushel. Mr. Speaker, if we were talking 10 cents a 
bushel difference, there would probably be a good argument 
because the final payment would probably come out, counteract 

that — in fact would probably be more. But what we’re talking 
to here today is $2.10 a bushel for feed barley. Do you think or 
any other farmer in this province think that the Canadian Wheat 
Board is going to come out with a payment of $2.10? I have 
farmed for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, and in my wildest 
dreams I have never seen a payment like that for feed barley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, number 1 thirteen five protein wheat today is 2.65 
a bushel under the Canadian Wheat Board. Go back to what 
open market feed wheat is — it’s 3.45 a bushel. And what I am 
trying to put through to you today, Mr. Speaker, and to this 
legislature is all farmers are asking out there — probably half; 
we don’t know what the numbers would be — is a choice to 
make decisions that affect their families, affect their farms, 
affect their livelihood out there, to make that choice for 
themselves. And when the minister keeps talking about 
democracy on a number of occasions in his speech, where does 
democracy start and stop when it comes to be able to sell your 
own products, Mr. Speaker? 
 
A couple of letters that I’ve received I thought were somewhat 
interesting, and the members opposite might take great interest 
in this. It actually comes from a member of the ACRE [action 
committee on the rural economy] committee who was 
appointed by that government. And I know the Deputy Premier 
will take great notice in this letter. And I’d like to read it into 
the record; it’ll only take a minute or two, Mr. Speaker. And I 
quote: 
 

Dear Mr. Wartman: 
 
After listening . . . and watching your response to the 
federal government’s decision to introduce marketing 
choice for wheat and barley farmers, I must express my 
profound disappointment. 
 
As an active member of the ACRE committee for six years 
and chairperson . . . 
 

Get this: 
 

. . . chairperson of the ACRE Grains and Oilseeds 
subcommittee, I had the impression that your government 
was willing to engage in thoughtful discussion and 
innovative solutions regarding issues important to rural 
people. 
 

This is a farmer from rural Saskatchewan. 
 

I now have serious concerns regarding the lack of 
leadership and commitment that this government and you 
are demonstrating on the very important issue of 
marketing choice for wheat and barley farmers and indeed 
the future of primary grain producers in this province. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Wartman, given the very serious 
economic circumstances that Saskatchewan grain farm 
families find themselves in, how can you so . . . [officially] 
defend the Canadian Wheat Board Marketing system and 
not acknowledge that it might bear some responsibility for 
the ongoing years of negative net farm income for grain 
farmers. 
 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

I would also ask how you can seriously defend the 
outrageously distorted numbers claimed by the defenders 
of single desk marketing with regard to the benefit that 
farmers receive from the . . . [Canadian Wheat Board] 
Marketing system. 

 
What are the numbers today? He goes on to say: 
 

600 million, 1 billion? [He said] These numbers, factual or 
not [who knows; we have no idea where they came from] 
have no relevance at the farm gate. If you seriously believe 
that they do, I must ask you: Where is the money? 

 
And he’s talking about at the farm gate. This letter goes on for 
the number of points here, Mr. Speaker. 
 

You and your government are also calling for a farmer 
vote on whether or not farmers support the single desk 
marketing of the . . . [Canadian Wheat Board]. Surely you 
know that the farming community is torn on this issue. A 
vote would solve nothing. It would not diminish the 
resolve of farmers such as myself to be free to market 
wheat and barley to the buyer of our choice. It could 
potentially destroy any opportunity to . . . [meaningful] 
restructure the grain marketing system to accommodate 
the needs of all grain farmers. Furthermore a vote would 
not create one dime of new investment in the grain 
industry. 

 
And this letter goes on and on. And I thought the members 
opposite would take great heed in what this is saying because 
this is a man that they felt respectable enough to put on the 
ACRE committee, who they say — and I agree with — has 
done a good job on the ACRE committee. They better pay 
attention to what one of their own appointments are saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talked in his 
speech today about the three . . . and I think both members did, 
about the 3 to $400 million that the Canadian Wheat Board 
advantage is because we sell our grain through the Canadian 
Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, I have no idea where that number 
comes from. I would like them to produce something that would 
show me where that 300 and 400 to 500 . . . I’ve heard 600 
million. That letter before me talked about this mythical number 
that comes out of the NDP telling us the Canadian Wheat Board 
is getting us more money. They may be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve sold grain under the wheat board. I’ve sold feed barley to 
off-market. But I never knew whether the Canadian Wheat 
Board was getting us the best bang for the buck because they 
never competed for my grain. I was told who I could sell it to 
and I was actually told — when it come to wheat — when I 
could sell it, Mr. Speaker. That’s the way our system today 
works. And what farmers out there are asking, the ones that 
want choice, they want that option to be able to sell that grain 
on their own behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked before about the NDP government 
living in the past. And I’d like to just read a couple of 
comments here about the Weyburn Inland Terminal. And I 
think the member from Nutana would find this very interesting. 

And I’m going to quote, Mr. Speaker. In 1974, Roy Atkinson 
— a Landis area farmer and National Farmer’s Union President 
from ’69 to ’78 — referred to the proposed Weyburn Inland 
Terminal as an albatross around the existing systems. Well 
that’s what he felt at that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How successful is the Weyburn Inland Terminal? I would 
suggest to you today that that is one of the most successful 
group of farmers in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, why they 
are successful is we got a group of farmers that went out and 
did it on their own, built that Weyburn Inland Terminal. And 
it’s been a terrific success, and they make a profit for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, I guess when the minister 
says that their . . . you know, he talks about 1936, 1935 when 
the Wheat Board came into existence. I don’t think anybody in 
this province would disagree there was a day that the Canadian 
Wheat Board did a great job for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
They were needed. But today, Mr. Speaker, I believe things 
have changed and I believe farmers should have the choice to 
do as they so wish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could go on here and I know there’s a number 
of other speakers that want to talk today. But I think, when it 
comes down to . . . The minister talked about respect for 
farmers out there. Well I think respect works both ways. You 
don’t just have to . . . There’s a large group in the province of 
Saskatchewan would like to keep the monopoly on the 
Canadian Wheat Board and I have many of those supporters in 
my constituency. In fact some of my supporters feel that way. 
 
But on the other hand, I think we owe the respect to the other 
half — I believe it’s half — of the farmers in Saskatchewan to 
have the right to make that choice to market their grain how 
they want. And again, I go back to . . . Mr. Speaker, before I 
take my seat . . . And I will be voting against this motion. 
 
But what we’re asking is, you let the federal government and 
the farmers of Saskatchewan deal with this issue. I don’t think 
it’s fitting that this NDP government spend provincial 
taxpayers’ dollars to pick winners and losers, to lobby on behalf 
of one side or the other. Mr. Speaker, let the farmers of this 
province and the federal government decide the outcome of this 
issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the heckles from the ideologues on the other side 
who remind me that the last time that I stood and spoke on an 
agriculture issue was the eve of my mother’s funeral. And I 
reminded them at that time that I grew up on a farm. My 
daughter farms. I have relatives that farm in various places 
around this province. Does that make me an expert farmer? No, 
but it sure gives me trust that farmers, given the vote as the law 
requires, that those farmers will make the right choice. Those 
farmers have the right. They have the right by law. It’s you 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

ideologues and your federal cousins . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just remind the member 
to make his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this legislature 
we’ve moved a motion that supports the rights of producers as 
legislated by the Canadian Wheat Board Act, and we further 
call upon the federal Conservative government to respect 
current federal legislation and to honour the democratic process 
by allowing all producers of wheat, barley, and durum the right 
to affirm or deny any proposed changes to the Canadian Wheat 
Board through producer plebiscites as stipulated in the 
Canadian Wheat Board Act, section 47(1). 
 
 Mr. Speaker, that’s what this debate is about. Let there be no 
mistake. 
 
Sure we can have our opinions about whether the wheat board 
puts more money in the pockets of farmers or not, and that’s a 
good debate to have, and I intend to add a little bit to that debate 
myself. But the fundamental question is, why don’t the 
Conservatives and why don’t the Saskatchewan Party trust 
farmers on their own wheat board? Let farmers have the vote. 
Why are they so determined not to honour the legislation? Why 
are they so determined, Mr. Speaker, not to follow the law? 
 
You know, I find it ironic. Here it is; it’s — what? — 
November 15th. Here we are four days after Remembrance 
Day, Mr. Speaker, four short days after Remembrance Day. 
And I know I attended — as did, I assume, virtually every 
member in the Assembly — attended a Remembrance Day 
ceremony. And what we honoured was those brave veterans 
that fought for — what? — for choice, for democratic freedoms, 
a right to be wrong occasionally or a right to be right, but a right 
to have a say. And many of those farmers . . . or many of those 
veterans, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, were farmers. They fought 
for the right to decide, and they’re fighting for the right to 
follow the law. My goodness. What has this country come to 
when farmers have to fight to have the law obeyed so they can 
have a democratic vote? It’s unbelievably absurd. 
 
I am very proud of the comments, Madam Speaker, that the 
Minister of Agriculture made. I’m delighted that he affirmed 
that Saskatchewan and Manitoba will honour farmers’ right to 
vote if the federal government does not. And I hope it doesn’t 
come to that. I hope that the federal government follows its own 
legislation and allows farmers that choice. 
 
I was also honoured to follow the hon. member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Trew: — From Saskatchewan Rivers, thank you, and his 
very, very thoughtful remarks. And I really appreciated his 
remarks about the clout, the market clout that the Canadian 
Wheat Board provides to farmers. And I very much appreciated 
all of his speech, but that really stuck with me. 
 
You know, Madam Speaker, in the trading world, bigger is 
better. That’s the way corporations operate; bigger is better. The 
auto industry, all my lifetime, has gotten bigger and bigger and 
bigger, the smaller manufacturers falling by the wayside. And 

you either get bigger or you disappear. Ask AMC [American 
Motors Corporation]. Chrysler bought out AMC. Ask any 
number of other auto companies that are now part of General 
Motors or Ford or Chrysler or others, I might say . . . I should 
say DaimlerChrysler. 
 
Look at the retailers, the big boxes. Bigger is better. You hear 
stories, you read about for instance . . . Not to pick on Wal-Mart 
but it’s something they’re very good at. They will demand a 
certain quality, and they negotiate a very good price. For who? 
For Wal-Mart. Why? Because Wal-Mart’s job is to make as 
much money as it can. For who? Wal-Mart. Bigger is better. 
I’m not trying to . . . Wal-Mart’s very good at what they do. 
 
What do the oil companies do? What’s their job? Is it to look 
after you or me? No. Their job is to maximize profits for their 
shareholders, Madam Speaker. 
 
And the Canadian Wheat Board is a bastion of support for 
Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers. Their mandate is to 
maximize the return to farmers, and they have done it 
consistently, year in, year out. And part of how they do it . . . 
There’s many things they do, Madam Speaker, but one of the 
things the Canadian Wheat Board does, even though Canada 
controls only 18 per cent of the world trade of wheat, 18 per 
cent . . . But what they’re able to do that an individual farmer 
can’t do is the Canadian Wheat Board can sit out a cold market. 
They can sit it out. They can wait it out. And we have things 
like cash advance and there’s other things. Farmers can still 
access some initial money. 
 
But they’ll sit out a cold market, and then enter it when there’s 
a premium, and that premium is shared by all Canadian farmers 
who deliver through the Canadian Wheat Board. It’s a 
wonderful system, but it is one that allows farmers, Madam 
Speaker, to do what they do best, that is to farm the land, to 
grow the crops, to manage their farms always having one eye 
on market and what’s coming up next year and so on. But they 
don’t have to watch the market hour by hour, day by day in case 
there’s a sudden jump up or down in the price of wheat or 
barley. The Canadian Wheat Board provides that, that 
wonderful ability for farmers to do what they do best. 
 
[16:00] 
 
If you’re looking for some sort of philosophical proof as to the 
effectiveness of the Canadian Wheat Board, Madam Speaker, 
I’d simply remind all the ideologues opposite that 11 times the 
United States have tried trade attacks on the Canadian Wheat 
Board. Eleven times they’ve attacked the Canadian Wheat 
Board under the free trade Act — 11 times. Eleven times the 
Americans have been proved wrong under the Free Trade 
Agreement, but that doesn’t stop them from attacking the wheat 
board. Why do they attack it? Because it’s to their 
disadvantage. It’s to Canadian’s advantage, American’s 
disadvantage. 
 
Well it seems to me if our Canadian farmers are enjoying any 
advantage from the wheat board that should be an argument for 
any self respecting party that supports farmers or supports 
agriculture to support the Canadian Wheat Board. Why on earth 
would we go and try and do the Americans’ job — what the 
courts said they’re wrong. And yet we elect a Conservative 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

government federally, Madam Speaker, and what happens? 
They want to do away with the wheat board, just like that. 
 
And worse yet, they want to ignore the law. They want to 
ignore the law that says that any change to the wheat board can 
happen under two conditions. One, there must be adequate 
consultation regarding the Canadian Wheat Board — 
consultation with producers. Two, there must be a vote of 
producers of the grains. Well, well, well. And that’s what 
they’re running from, and that’s what their federal Conservative 
cousins are running from, is the right of farmers to vote. I say 
shame. 
 
The federal government, on top of all of that, is manipulating 
the voters list. We have the federal Minister of Agriculture, who 
has cut off, arbitrarily lopped off a significant portion. I believe 
it’s one-third of the farmers that were on the Canadian Wheat 
Board voting list and they’re just lopped off. They’re not able to 
vote. And how does that work? What a strange time to start 
tinkering and manipulating a voters list, Mr. Speaker, right at 
the time when we have one of the most critical votes in the 
Canadian Wheat Board history, a vote that questions — and in 
our case, we support — the very essence of single-desk 
marketing. And yet they deny that in every way they possibly 
can, including trying to deny a significant portion of farmers 
their right to vote. 
 
I wonder. Doesn’t the Conservative government in Ottawa trust 
farmers? Don’t they trust farmers to vote on the farmers’ own 
business, the Canadian Wheat Board? Doesn’t the 
Saskatchewan Party, the hon. member for Saltcoats, don’t you 
trust your farmers to know to vote, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think we should all have a little bit of faith in farmers. We’ve 
said it . . . All my life I’ve known that Canadian farmers, 
Saskatchewan farmers are as good as any farmers anywhere in 
the world — better than most, better than most. Why on earth 
can’t we trust those farmers with the vote on their Canadian 
Wheat Board? 
 
I am very pleased to support this motion. I’m pleased to be 
speaking in favour of it. I have already said that companies, 
their goals are to maximize profits for their shareholders. And I 
can’t say it any better than Mr. Howard Fohr who writes in his 
letter to The Radville Star on October 18 this year, 2006, and I 
quote: 
 

In an open market, we will be subject to the whims of 
large world traders and will have to take what they give us. 
The goal of grain companies is to make money for 
shareholders, not for farmers. 
 

This is just the way the grain companies are organized. That’s 
what they’re there for. He doesn’t say the grain companies are 
evil. They’re not. But their job, Mr. Speaker, is to maximize the 
profit for the grain company shareholders — simple as that. 
 
I think we’ve made this case. I have said that we are generally 
in support, we are in support of single-desk marketing. We want 
a simple question. And in fact our government, in its attempt to 
develop an unbiased, definitive question that could be put to 
producers and which would require simply a yes or a no, not 
anything more than that . . . . Our proposed question, Mr. 

Speaker, would read as follows: do you want single-desk 
selling? Do you want single-desk selling? We’re having a great 
debate around single-desk selling. Do you want single-desk 
selling or don’t you? That’s the yes or no question. 
 
I am so pleased that our motion, Mr. Speaker, supports the 
rights of producers as legislated by the Canadian Wheat Board 
Act and that we call upon the federal Conservative government 
to respect current federal legislation and to honour the 
democratic process by allowing all producers of wheat, barley, 
and durum the right to affirm or deny any proposed change to 
the Canadian Wheat Board through a producer plebiscite as 
stipulated in the Canadian Wheat Board Act, section 47(1). I 
can’t make it any plainer. We’re simply saying to the federal 
government, honour the law. 
 
I enjoyed the opportunity to speak, and I again want to thank 
the veterans this close to Remembrance Day for allowing us 
that great democratic freedom. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to enter into this very animated and 
emotional debate that the Minister of Agriculture’s put forward, 
Mr. Speaker. As we witnessed by the speakers, there’s certainly 
a lot of emotion attached to this issue, Mr. Speaker. There are 
certainly valid arguments, Mr. Speaker, on both sides of this 
issue, and the speakers on both sides of the House have 
certainly put those arguments forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However there is one dimension that I would like to touch on 
that hasn’t been touched on in this debate, and that is the whole 
area of empowering producers, Mr. Speaker. Producers are 
empowered on this issue in two areas in my mind. One is the 
empowerment in the marketplace, and we’ve certainly heard 
that debate on both sides of the House this afternoon. But the 
other area where producers can be empowered and they have 
been asking for many years to have more power is in the whole 
area of policy-making. 
 
In the area of policy, Mr. Speaker, particularly with regards to 
that segment of the industry — the grain and oilseed and pulse 
area — producers really don’t have a lot of power in policy 
making for one main reason, I think, and that is because a lot of 
policy that, ag policy that pertains to that sector is made at the 
federal level. And the reason for that is because with most 
commodities we in Western Canada and here in Saskatchewan, 
we produce way more than what we consume. In fact for most 
commodities we probably export 80 per cent of what we 
produce and only consume within Canada 20 per cent, so that 
prices for those commodities in the grain, oilseed, and pulse 
sector are set in the international market and they’re subject to 
the vagaries of farm policy in other areas of the world, in our 
competitors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know, speaking to a number of farm leaders, leaders of 
farm organizations, that the area of influence in policy making 
at the national level was one of their greatest frustrations. I 
remember a conversation with the founding president of APAS 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan], Mr. 
Terry Hildebrandt. He had spent a lot of time, him and his 
group, his executive, in Ottawa working on the agricultural 
policy framework, putting forward good alternatives and 
suggestions that would work for Saskatchewan farmers. They 
took many trips to Ottawa to meet with bureaucrats, to meet 
with the Minister of the Environment. At the end of the day all 
they received was lip service. They were . . . said oh yes, 
you’ve got some good ideas; we’ll certainly take them into 
consideration. And yet when the final decisions were made, I 
remember a conversation with Terry Hildebrandt saying that he 
was very disappointed and frustrated because of the fact that 
their suggestions were virtually ignored, or at least many of 
them were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some of that happens at a provincial level except that, Mr. 
Speaker, the producers and through their organization and as 
individuals have greater access to the policy makers and to the 
bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker. So I think a number of producers, 
when they sit down and think about this whole issue that we are 
debating about today, some of them at least I believe realize that 
this is an opportunity for them to have some real impact on an 
ag policy, on what probably is the only real ag policy that we 
have in that whole sector and that is the way we market our 
cereal grains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because in the area of grain and oilseeds and pulses, I recall the 
words of Dr. Andy Schmitz, who spoke at the ag committee 
meeting at the MLC [Midwestern Legislative Conference] that 
this province hosted in the summer of 2005. He was asked to 
speak to the agricultural committee and outline a Canadian farm 
policy. And he was allocated 20 minutes to speak and he used 
less than five because here is what he said. He said, in Canada, 
particularly with grain and oilseeds, we don’t have a national ag 
policy. All we have is a number of programs that respond to 
crisis situations. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, he was absolutely right. We have 
ag policy in the supply managed sector but we really don’t have 
a national ag policy in the grain and oilseeds sector. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a result of an unwillingness I think over the 
years for both levels of government to deal with it. 
 
It’s a difficult area. For many years those of us involved in that 
sector have heard from the federal government and from the 
provincial government that the solutions to our problems as 
grain and oilseed producers will have to be solved at the world 
trade talks, at the WTO [World Trade Organization]. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard that for 20 years and we’ll probably hear 
it for another 20 years. It’s not going to happen. The time has 
come to have a made-in-Canada solution for that sector of this 
industry. 
 
And so I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the producers of Western 
Canada look at the only long-term ag policy for their sector that 
we have had, the wheat board issue, as an opportunity to have 
some real input into making policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have, like many other members, I have 
constituents who have very strong feelings on either side of this 
particular issue, this wheat board issue and a number of . . . 
There are some in each camp I believe — in fact I know 
because I have spoken to them — who don’t want to have a 

vote on the issue. But, Mr. Speaker, I have consulted as much 
as possible with the producers of my constituency, and I have 
found that the vast majority of them want to have the ability to 
influence farm policy, Mr. Speaker. They want to have the right 
to vote on this issue, Mr. Speaker. That is what I’ve been told. I 
have done a lot of work on this issue, Mr. Speaker, and I 
believe that those statements, my statements represent the 
majority of the producers in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So if we are going to have this vote, as the federal Minister of 
Agriculture has already said, on the barley issue . . . that he said 
he will certainly have a vote before changes are being made to 
the way farmers of Saskatchewan and Western Canada market 
their barley, he’s going to have a plebiscite. So what we need to 
do, Mr. Speaker — and I believe this is what the producers of 
this province would want — is to ensure that we have a fair and 
balanced question on this plebiscite, a question that will 
accurately reflect the position of the majority of the producers 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the second thing that we need to ensure is that the voters 
list is a fair voters list, that it’s made up of actual producers and 
not of absentee landlords who really haven’t got a stake in this 
whole issue, who really don’t care about this issue, who some 
of them don’t even live in this province in fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this whole issue, Mr. Speaker, 
and I look at the motion that the Minister of Agriculture has put 
forward, I see once again this government trying to play politics 
with an issue that is so important to the farmers of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They bring forward a motion which is not . . . the first part of it 
is not accurate, Mr. Speaker. As my colleague from 
Melville-Saltcoats has said, it’s not accurate. They quoted a 
motion from the March 2006 SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] convention, but they failed 
to recognize that at the SARM mid-term convention in 
November, just last week, that SARM has backed away from 
that position. And they have said, as my colleague from 
Melville-Saltcoats has said, is that SARM’s position now is to 
let the federal government and the producers decide this issue. 
 
Well my interpretation and the interpretation of the constituents 
that I have spoke to is that they feel that the producers should be 
voting on this issue, Mr. Speaker. So I would have thought that 
perhaps the Minister of Agriculture would have had someone 
amend his motion to more accurately reflect what SARM’s 
current position is. But he failed to do that, Mr. Speaker. The 
second part of the motion I don’t have a problem with, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe that producers should have the right to vote 
on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, I have consulted widely with my constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be a member of the 
Saskatchewan Party led by the member from Swift Current — a 
party, Mr. Speaker, that has the flexibility within it and the way 
it’s structured, Mr. Speaker. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, even 
though I have these reservations about the first part of this 
motion, Mr. Speaker, I believe I have the duty as a member of 
this Legislative Assembly to accurately reflect the views of my 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

constituents, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — With respect to the motion before us 
regarding the wheat board, moved by the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, seconded by the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers, is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the ayes have it. Call in the 
members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:19 until 16:25.] 
 
The Speaker: — There’s been a motion moved by the Minister 
of Agriculture and Food, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, seconded by the member for Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the Prairie Producer 
Coalition’s support for rights of producers as legislated by 
the Canadian Wheat Board Act and the resolution passed 
by 85 per cent of the delegates at SARM 2006 annual 
convention calling for the federal government to continue 
its financial support of government guarantees and 
single-desk selling of the Canadian Wheat Board; 

 
Further . . . 

 
Order please, order please. Order please. Members have had . . . 
Order please. Members have been given full opportunity to 
debate. 
 

Further, that this Assembly call upon the federal 
Conservative government to respect current federal 
legislation and to honour the democratic process by 
allowing all producers of wheat, barley, and durum the 
right to affirm or deny any proposed change to the 
Canadian Wheat Board through a producer plebiscite as 
stipulated in the Canadian Wheat Board Act, section 47.1. 

 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 

Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper McCall 
Quennell Trew Yates 
Addley Morin Borgerson 
Hart   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 22] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Wakefield Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Kerpan Kirsch 
Brkich Dearborn Merriman 
Duncan   
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 28; those opposed, 22. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. Why is the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Asking leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
has asked leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
joining our guests from the Real Voice for Choice in your 
gallery is Fern Nielson from the northwest part of the province. 
Fern has been also very active in the agriculture community and 
is a member of the Farm Leaders Advisory Group. 
 
And we appreciate the insights that are provided by the folks 
who are in the gallery and we wish them the best in their work 
as they move forward as a Real Voice for Choice. And I’d ask 
all members to please welcome Fern and the other guests again 
to the gallery. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to introduce a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the House to introduce a motion of transmittal. Is leave 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move: 
 

That the Speaker on behalf of the Legislative Assembly 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 
the motion just passed, to the federal Minister of 
Agriculture and Agri-Food and the Minister for Canadian 
Wheat Board. 

 
I move, seconded by the Government Deputy House Leader, the 
hon. member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
Deputy Government House Leader, the member for Regina 
Dewdney: 
 

That the Speaker on behalf of the Legislative Assembly 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 
the motion just passed to the federal Minister of 
Agriculture and Agri-Food and Minister for the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 4 – The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to stand up and make a few comments regarding 
the education Bill before us, amendment Act 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the amendment is clarifying a 
number of issues in regards to The Education Act, specifically 
the issue of minority faith school divisions. And my colleagues 
and I had the pleasure of meeting with the Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association when they gave their reasons as to 

why they felt this Bill was important to them. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we also need to raise the fact that 
there are across the province of Saskatchewan — more 
specifically in rural Saskatchewan — there are a number of 
concerns when it comes to schools, the size of schools, and 
imminent closure of a number of schools across the province. 
 
And the question that I believe we raised with the school boards 
association, exactly what was the purpose of this legislation? 
Was it intended just to curb the ability of communities, 
organizations, or parental groups to challenge school closures? 
And I think in some ways that’s the reasoning for it. 
 
However I can understand as well, Mr. Speaker, that the 
purpose is to clarify the definition of what minority faiths is. 
And if I understand the minister correctly, the minister talks 
about the first series of amendments being proposed are in the 
spirit of strengthening the process for formation of minority 
faith school divisions. And they will provide enhanced support 
for minority faith communities in establishing a separate school 
division. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we look at the province and we look at 
the makeup of the province and we look at the geographic 
location that many families face in relation to the education of 
their young people, I think that it’s important that we also 
recognize that parents and schools, or parents and communities 
need to have a say, and recognition how they . . . how they 
continue to provide the educational opportunities for their 
students. 
 
As well as the school, the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association needs to have a very clear understanding of what 
the guidelines are in regards to minority faiths. As the minister 
indicated and as my colleague from Saskatoon also indicated, 
the original intent of the piece of legislation was to allow for . . . 
allowed for a separate school division in the province of 
Saskatchewan, namely the Catholic school division. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have a problem with clarifying 
those aspects of The Education Act so that it in effect closes 
some loopholes, but as well it also recognizes the fact that there 
are other minority faith groups that need to be considered in this 
whole debate, and that their opportunity to form a separate 
school division isn’t taken out of . . . isn’t removed from them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raise the question because I’ve been contacted by 
a number of groups — certainly in my constituency and I know 
many of my colleagues have as well — that have voiced great 
concern in regards to the amalgamation into the larger divisions 
and how that amalgamation is now impacting the delivery of 
education. And unfortunately as we’ve amalgamated into the 
larger school division, the ability to fund schools has all become 
a numbers game. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for us to realize that 
education of our children isn’t strictly . . . shouldn’t strictly be 
based on numbers and the ability to fund schools. I read a letter 
in response to . . . sent from one of the school divisions to . . . a 
letter that they had received from a school board Chair 
indicating, where they say, we’re all trying to provide the best 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

possible education for all the students in our school divisions 
within the existing financial realities. And then she goes on to 
say, the guiding reality is funding levels, and she talks about 
sustainability and the fact that RMs are . . . There’s a revolt in 
municipalities in regards to funding of education, because this 
government has allowed and in fact encouraged a continued 
dependence on the property owner to fund education across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And unfortunately the larger school divisions have now used 
that as an argument to close schools. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
we need to look beyond that. And I trust that at the end of the 
day this legislation — and if I’m to understand it correctly — 
does look beyond that. 
 
The minister also talked about school councils and the concern 
raised there, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the proposed new 
school councils, is the fact that a issue raised with me was I’ve 
had . . . over the years I’ve had some very strong parental 
councils in my constituency in many of my schools. And as has 
been indicated to me, it seems that their voice has not been 
heard very clearly by some of these regional boards in regards 
to the decisions they’re making. 
 
And so I would trust that when the minister talks about school 
councils actually having some involvement, that indeed that this 
legislation will do that, that there will actually be a voice that 
people have on their councils and that that voice will be heard. 
And if the regional school boards that have been put in place by 
this government, if they’re not listening, then at least the 
Minister of Education at the time will acknowledge some of the 
concerns being raised by these school councils. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while I don’t necessarily have a problem 
with the changes that are being proposed, I think it’s important 
for us to realize that . . . And we trust that these changes will 
not implement . . . or impede schools or communities or parent 
organizations who may want to look at other alternatives down 
the road. 
 
Now when I talk about the response from one of my school 
divisions to a letter from the current board and their talk about 
the funding levels and the need to make changes because of the 
funding levels and the fact that RMs are revolting, some of the 
small schools I have in my constituents . . . I know my 
colleagues as well . . . Research has been done, Mr. Speaker, 
whereby parents have concluded and ratepayers have concluded 
that they would be further ahead if they put their funding 
directly into the school. And they could adequately, Mr. 
Speaker, they could adequately put the teachers in position in 
schools and, in fact, they could actually do it at a lower rate — 
property tax rate — than they are currently being taxed today. 
 
And so I just wanted to raise the concerns that are being 
brought to my attention that every time we turn around, we’re 
told that we have to reduce because of funding levels that the 
boards of education don’t have and the dependence on the 
property tax owner . But the unfortunate part is the smaller 
school has to pay the cost and they end up having to transport 
their . . . Their children have to be transported much greater 
distances. 
 
In some cases in my constituency, those distances aren’t that 

large. But across the province there are situations, Mr. Speaker, 
where we realize some of those distances will just become 
unbearable for young people and we wonder whether or not 
they will really achieve the level of education we’re trying to 
afford them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my comments today are based more on the 
fact . . . Let’s, as we look at the legislation . . . And if I 
understand the minister correctly it’s just ensuring that we have 
a proper understanding of what the legislation means and 
closing loopholes that may be used, that we’re also aware of the 
fact that their parents and school boards, smaller school boards 
as well need to have a clarity in the legislation that indicates 
whether or not they have an ability to provide a choice and 
choose an option as to where their children are being educated. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m more than prepared to allow 
for further debate on this issue. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few 
comments about this particular legislation on this Bill. I know 
we don’t have a real problem with it, but just want to make a 
few comments. I think when a . . . Out my way when a school 
amalgamation came, it was a huge concern out in our area 
because basically we don’t have any huge centres. There are a 
lot of small schools, and everybody was worried that schools 
would be closed. That was people’s most worried thought when 
they went to the meetings before it came along. 
 
And now we’re in a big division that runs all the way from 
Davidson all the way to the Alberta border, and they were quite 
concerned about the size of it. And there was talk about, you 
know, things . . . What would happen when the school closure 
moratorium came off — would there be immediate school 
closures and that, and what would our options be? And it was 
discussed at various little meetings and probably with local 
school boards and that, and a lot of questions to me were asked. 
Well what would our options be? 
 
And I think this Bill, although I know it’s possibly closing a 
loophole, that people won’t just use that to especially open a 
faith-based school when they’re really not faith based. And they 
shouldn’t. But there’s also the other option of private schools. 
Some of them had mentioned, you know, if we could open a 
private school. Because out in our area, you take west of me, I 
mean there is huge differences between towns. I mean there’s a 
school maybe in Loreburn and Outlook and then you’re 
crossing the lake. And you have to go all the way around Lake 
Diefenbaker if some of them schools close in that area. And you 
could be looking at people being on the bus for an hour, hour 
and a half, and most people do not want their kids on the bus, 
especially small kids, for an hour, hour and a half. 
 
I was at a meeting in Kenaston this fall. The school board had a 
new meeting, which is good. I thought that they were going to 
go . . . they went to about four communities. One of them was 
in my constituency. My constituency only goes up to the edge 
of Outlook, and this particular division Sun West. And they had 
a meeting to discuss about the viabilities of schools — what the 
people and the parents in the communities thought the viability 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2006 

for schools were. And with that, they provided some 
information on what it costs to educate a student in a small 
school versus a larger school. They had different sizes. And I 
know in some of my schools they talked about . . . It costs about 
$4,900 roughly, they figured, to educate a student. In some of 
the larger centres they had it down to I think around 3,100. 
 
So I mean, actually the people in the smaller schools they get a 
little concerned. They’re hoping that they don’t just look at the 
money end of the issue, that they also look at if that school is 
closed that there is huge consult, that they consult with the 
communities, and that when they close a small school in that 
area, that basically that is a last option open and most of the 
people realize that it has to close. 
 
And I think that message was conveyed to the school trustees 
very well, at that end of it. And I hope they took that message 
home — that school closures should be the very last thing that 
you look at in the community, that you should explore all kind 
of options first to keep that school viable in any way you can. 
 
One of the other things that they’re looking at in my area is 
bringing over international students, at that end of it. In fact 
there’s a meeting in Outlook coming up on Tuesday. And I 
know that the division and some of the towns are very 
favourable of that, to help keep some of these small schools 
open. And I hope the government, at that end, Immigration and 
that, will help and assist any way they can, if these schools in 
that division works in that direction. It sounds like the school 
division is in favour of it, which is good because we should be 
exploring all kind of different options when we’re looking at 
keeping open a school, talking about . . . especially out in my 
area which there is great distances between some of these 
schools, if you close them, at that. And unfortunately due to the 
declining population, our schools are getting smaller, at that end 
of it. 
 
But yet the students are receiving excellent education out there 
with that per capita. And some of the towns I’ve got, like 
Loreburn and Kenaston and Davidson, there’s more kids going 
to university there than there probably is in the cities, going on 
to further their education. Most of these students in these small 
schools are going on to further their education which is good. 
So that speaks to even the viability of small schools out there, 
that you should be looking at just not the cost of keeping open a 
small school. 
 
We also have to look at the impact of moving students 60 miles 
in another direction to another school. In my area that’s what 
you’re looking at in some areas, that you’re looking at moving 
kids as much as 40 to 50 miles to another school if you close 
the school. 
 
So I know that if a school closure does come — and which as 
an MLA I’ve been involved in a couple of them — they always 
talk about what are the options. You know, can we open a 
private school, at that end of it, and keep it going? And that 
takes a lot of . . . I see a lot of work on the community’s part 
and a lot of dedication at that end of it. And I would hope with 
this piece of legislation that it still leaves that option open, that 
if a community wholeheartedly, if it chooses to open a private 
school that it doesn’t have to jump through too many hoops at 
that end of it. It should be allowed to move in that direction if 

the community as a whole can make it work. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, those are a few words that I wanted 
to say. I want to impart to the school division and to the 
government to always make sure that the last option to close a 
small school . . . should be the very last option to do that. That 
should be your very last option to do that. And if the 
community wants to move on to another level of schooling, 
they should be allowed to, and I think this legislation does 
allow them to do that. They have to go through the proper 
channels which is good. That’s what everybody expects. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, that’s what I have to say on this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to speak on this particular Bill dealing with The 
Education Act and particularly dealing with the changes that 
have just taken place in the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, 
resulting from the amalgamations, the forced amalgamations of 
the school divisions into — I believe it is — 12 or 13 divisions 
across Saskatchewan, excluding those that are strictly urban, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This has had a serious impact across those school divisions, 
particularly when it comes to parents’ opportunity to have input 
into the schools. And for this reason, this Bill includes the 
formation of school councils in which parents and interested 
members of the community could participate and provide 
advice. 
 
Now I do have a bit of a problem with that, Mr. Speaker, in the 
sense that the parents can only provide advice and have no legal 
standing in that sense of a governance side of the thing in 
providing that advice to their local school which they did have 
previously across rural Saskatchewan. I recognize that in the 
urban settings with a lot of the local schools they did not have 
that opportunity to provide that governance input but that was 
there across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
That has now been lost and now what this Bill does is tries to 
bring the school councils into place in those local schools 
without giving them any actual governance. Now some of the 
school divisions I’m told will allow those school councils — 
not the student councils but the parent councils — to have some 
role in governance in an advisory and maybe even stronger than 
an advisory capacity, but they won’t have the legal mandate to 
actually carry that out. So that’s a good part of the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But there is another area that deals with the separate school 
system and the development of a separate school. What is 
happening right now is that if a community wants to provide a 
separate school, if they have the proper standing — i.e., there’s 
a minority faith in the community, be that a Catholic or a 
Protestant faith, Mr. Speaker — that can say that we’re a 
minority in the community and wish to have a separate religious 
school, that at the present time, they can do so. It’s their 



November 15, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

constitutional right and the minister has to provide that. 
 
This change to the legislation will not impede that in preventing 
it, but what it will do is put in place time frames for that to 
happen. It means that they have to put in a notice by November 
1 that they wish to form a separate school, and then it would 
take place the following school year. So November 1 is the 
deadline for application for a new school to come into place 
September 1 of the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second part of this that’s not part of this 
legislation but that a number of parents have a concern with is 
in The Education Act already, and it’s the dates for notification 
of closure of a school. And presently, Mr. Speaker, that is in 
February. So the budgets, up until the new districts were 
formed, came down for December 31, January 1. And then 
notifications of school closures had to be done in February 
because they had to be done six months prior to the start of the 
school year, the subsequent school year which would have been 
in September. 
 
So what we have in place is a notification process for the 
closure of a school that is done in February for that fall. But the 
notification for the establishment of a new separate school has 
to take place before November. So you’re going to be 18 
months, if a community says we desire to have a separate 
religious school in our community based on a minority faith 
situation, from the point of time they could have received a 
notification of a school closure in that community, would be 
approximately 18 months from the school closure notice to the 
establishment of a new separate . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
that’s right. 
 
And the member from Regina Northeast is agreeing with me, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is actually what’s happening, is an 
18-month time frame that’s happening. And that is a concern 
because now The Education Act has changed to provide the 
budget process come in place August 31-September 1 Mr. 
Speaker. Previously it was December 31-January 1, with the 
closure notification of a school the next month after that in 
February. 
 
There’s no reason, Mr. Speaker, why that couldn’t be continued 
on, that with the budgetary process being August-September, a 
one-month notification would put it into October, Mr. Speaker. 
So I think there is time frames in there for the minister to take a 
look at if they wish to accommodate some of the concerns. It 
would still make it extremely difficult if someone wanted to 
utilize the closure of a school as the reason for the formation of 
a separate school division, Mr. Speaker, extremely tight but still 
theoretically possible, although I don’t know that it would be 
practically possible. 
 
So I think that’s something that the minister should take a look 
at. Otherwise it seems to be an attempt to utilize the legislation 
to put up roadblocks into the formation of potentially new 
separate religious schools, Mr. Speaker — either Catholic or 
Protestant as the case may be — for whichever the minority 
situation is in that community. So that’s one of the areas that I 
would ask that the minister take a look at, at possibly changing 
the date of notification for the closure of a school that’s 
currently operating. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move adjournment of 
debate at the present time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on second reading of Bill No. 4 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, given the time and where we 
are in the agenda, I will move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:52.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................391 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................392 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................392 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................392 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................393 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................393 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................394 
  Wartman............................................................................................................................................................................401, 419 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................402 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................402 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Construction Association Industry Awards 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................394 
 Wakamow Place Wins Housing Award 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................395 
 Melfort Fundraising Effort for Breast Cancer Research 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................395 
 Organics Connections Conference Held in Saskatoon 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................395 
 Wynyard’s Citizen of the Year 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................395 
 Rules and Ethics 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................396 
 Team Saskatchewan Excels at National Seniors Athletic Competition 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................396 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Workplace Issues for Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................396 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................397 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................398 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................399 
 Progress of Green Strategy 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................400 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................400 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Investment in Education and Training 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................402 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................403 
 Preventing the Sexual Exploitation of Children and Youth  
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................404 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................405 



 

 Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................405 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................406 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................406 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Support for Canadian Wheat Board 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................406 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................410 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................413 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................417 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................419 
  Hagel (transmittal motion).......................................................................................................................................................419 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 – The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................420 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................421 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................422 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


