






















































Hansard: March 29, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 30A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 861 
 March 29, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have in 
front of me today a petition regarding the drug Avastin, and I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I have is signed by people from 
the community, actually the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
return to the topic of crumbling highways in southwest 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals largely from the community of Prelate but also from 
the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding the drug Avastin, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

too have a petition to present today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Estevan area. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise today on 
behalf of some of my constituents who are concerned about the 
lack of a pay phone at Whitesand Regional Park, and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause SaskTel to reinstall the 
pay phone at Whitesand Regional Park to ensure 
emergency service can be contacted in a timely manner 
during emergency situations. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Theodore and 
Elfros. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to fund Avastin signed by people who are concerned 
that forcing patients to pay for this drug is an example of two 
tiered health care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition, 
and I believe they all come from the city of Saskatoon. I am 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with cancer 
relief. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise this 
afternoon to request our government to consider its decision to 
not fund the drug Avastin. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the areas of Vanscoy, Pike 
Lake, and Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the city 
of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have several pages of a petition of citizens concerned about 
the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Guernsey, 
Saskatoon, North Battleford, Muenster, and Lake Lenore. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the government’s refusal to fund 
Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signatures on the petition this afternoon are from Saskatoon, 
Langham, Tisdale, Yellow Quill Reserve, and right 
throughout the province. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today also to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this 
province concerned about the government’s refusal to fund the 
drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from constituents who are concerned about 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] government not funding the 
cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signed by the good people from Saskatoon, Vanscoy, Perdue, 
and Asquith. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition from citizens that are very concerned about the NDP’s 
two tiered health system. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by the good citizens 
of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Saskatoon 
and Leask. I so present. 
 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too arise to present a 
petition, and the petition is on the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also join my 
colleagues in calling on the government to do the right thing to 
fully fund the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Davidson and Bladworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s both a 
privilege and an honour today to rise and present a petition on 
behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the 
non-funding of the drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is from the citizens of 
Saskatoon and Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today with a petition 
regarding the funding of the drug Avastin and citizens that are 
trying to tailor a solution for the funding of that. I will read the 
prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
government’s decision not to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the good people from Martensville, 
Tisdale, Dalmeny, and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition reviewed 
yesterday has been reviewed and pursuant to Rule 14(7) is 
hereby read and received as an addition to the previously tabled 
petition being sessional paper no. 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Friday, day 32, move first reading of An Act to recognize 
First Nations and Métis Children in Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today we had a 
very significant ceremony in this Assembly and several of the 
people who attended that ceremony are here today. And it’s my 
pleasure at this time to introduce, first of all, two Speakers, the 
Speaker from Manitoba, George Hickes; and the Speaker from 
the Northwest Territories, Paul Delorey. 
 
Also accompanying them are his Deputy Clerk, Bev Bosiak 
from Manitoba, and Clerk John Quirke from Nunavut. 
 
So I ask the members to welcome them to our meetings here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Also in the Speaker’s gallery I would like to 
introduce at this time Judge David Arnot, who is here. He’s 
from the Office of the Treaty Commissioner, and his partner 
Linda Arnot is here. Also with them are Colleen Cameron and 
Ken Horsman from the Office of the Treaty Commissioner. 
And seated right behind them . . . 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Seated right behind them is a member of our 
judiciary, Judge Gerald Morin, and with him is Sherri 
Robinson. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And seated behind them is Chief Helen Bear 
from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. Helen Ben, thank you. 
Just for the record Helen Ben, Chief Helen Ben. Thank you 
very much. 
 
I also notice a former intern of ours, Kevin Chernoff, in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
And I think we have a couple of school groups who are here. 
Over on the east gallery is I believe the students from Carry the 
Kettle First Nation, along with Bob Loewen and some of their 
drivers and chaperones. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And in the west gallery we’ve got students 
from Thunderchild First Nation, and I believe this is . . . am I 
right there, first of all? Is that the group? All right. I think 
they’re here with their assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Any further introduction of guests? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to join with you in welcoming the 
Thunderchild First Nation students here today as well. Mr. 
Speaker, after the last boundary redistribution of constituencies, 
Thunderchild came into the riding of Meadow Lake. It’s on the 
very, very edge of it but it’s now part of the Meadow Lake 
riding. So this is the very first time that I’ve had the honour of 
having visitors from Thunderchild in this Assembly as 
constituents of mine. 
 
In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if they’re all 
there but there were 18 students in total when we started. Some 
may still be wandering around the building eating stew, I’m not 
sure. It was very good by the way, Mr. Speaker. They are with 
the adult learning centre visiting from Thunderchild, as I said. 
Along with them is their instructor, Glenn Sklaruk, and 
chaperone, Pam Milliken, and they made the long trip down 
here today and I’m so pleased at that, to join in the special 
ceremony today with the new mace runner. 
 
And I want all of my colleagues to please join me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if I could as well, there is 
one other person seated with the delegation up there. She might 
be a bit embarrassed if I introduce her because she works in my 
office, but Angela Merasty . . . many won’t know this, but was 
very, very helpful in arranging all of the events around today as 
well. And I know you will know that, Mr. Speaker. She worked 
with the department and she worked with your office and with 
many people in the building, along with organizing many of the 
attendees here today. So I want to particularly acknowledge 

Angie and thank her, and introduce her to the Assembly, 
probably for the first time even though she’s been in my office 
for quite a while. So, Angie Merasty. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well I’d like to join 
you, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming the 14 students from the 
Nakoda Oyade Education Center on Carry the Kettle First 
Nation. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Bob Loewen 
and Bill Cheers, and I certainly want to extend a warm welcome 
to this group of students. 
 
As I was chatting with Mr. Loewen earlier this afternoon, in the 
last redistribution Carry the Kettle became part of the 
Moosomin constituency and, you know, when boundaries 
change sometimes it’s hard for people just to keep up as to 
where they are. But it’s a pleasure to welcome the students and 
I look forward to meeting with them in the future as well. 
Please join me in welcoming the students and the staff to the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join others in welcoming Tribal Chief Helen Ben to the 
Assembly. Helen and I attended Ernie Studer high school, very 
small town in northwestern Saskatchewan, in Loon Lake, and 
neither of us has changed. She looks exactly the same and I 
have the same amount of hair. 
 
And I have a lot of fond memories of Helen, particularly a trip 
in grade 6 to Jasper and Elk Island National Park, and she can 
fill in all the other details. There was 60 other kids with us, but 
I’d just like to say how very proud I am of her and the 
leadership that she’s providing her people in that area and to 
welcome you to the Assembly today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Symbols Honour Treaties and Shared History 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, today, the 100th anniversary 
of the first sitting of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, 
we want to commemorate the treaty signed with First Nations in 
this great province. As we saw this morning, Mr. Speaker, the 
Assembly has been presented with a remarkable gift. The 
beaded moosehide runner and beaver pelt cushion made by 
Cree artist Florence Highway will now support the gilded mace 
during sittings of the legislature. The traditional beadwork on 
the moosehide runner depicts the sun, grass, and a river — gifts 
given to human beings by the Creator for nourishment and 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

sustenance. The sun, grass, and river also represent the 
commitment between the Creator, the First Nations, and the 
Crown that the treaties will last forever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the runner, mace, and cushion lying together serve 
as an important tribute to the agreement made years ago 
between First Nations and those who travelled to this land. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to remind everyone in the Chamber here 
today that we all enjoy treaty rights such as access to land and 
the promise of peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite the members to join me in 
thanking Chief Alphonse Bird for representing all First Nations 
here today and for joining the Assembly in honouring the treaty 
agreements of Saskatchewan. May the mace runner and beaver 
pelt cushion rest here for as long as the sun shines, the waters 
flow, and the grass grows. Ēkosi tēniki. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d also 
like to acknowledge Mrs. Florence Highway and her beautiful 
crafted, beaded moosehide mace runner and the beaver pelt 
cushion. It’s truly a wonderful piece of art. I know that all 
members of the Assembly feel very fortunate to have this 
treasured piece as a permanent part of the legislature when the 
House is sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the sun and the grass and the 
river on the mace runner symbolize a commitment between the 
Creator and the First Nations as well as a commitment between 
First Nations and the Crown and that the treaties will last 
forever as long as the grass grows and as long as the river 
flows. The images on the mace runner bring the province’s past 
and the future together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can learn so much about other cultures through 
their art work, through their literature, and through their 
traditions. And we have very many, many talented First Nations 
artists in Saskatchewan. So I urge everyone in this legislature 
and all members in the galleries, if they haven’t already done 
so, to read a book by a First Nations author, to go to a First 
Nations art show, to support First Nations artists because art can 
lead to a better understanding of people and of their culture. 
And when we have a better understanding of each other, we can 
live together in harmony and we can learn from each other as 
we continue our journey through life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have had the honour of working with Métis and First Nations 
people as a teacher in Northern Saskatchewan, as a 
teacher-educator in Prince Albert’s SUNTEP [Saskatchewan 
urban native teacher education program] centre, and now as the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. For these reasons and along with all members, I am 

extremely pleased to see the addition of the mace runner and 
cushion as permanent additions to the furnishings of this 
Assembly. 
 
As has already been mentioned, Mr. Speaker, these gifts serve 
as a tribute to our shared history based on the treaty relationship 
and the important role that Aboriginal people have played in the 
history of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, they will also serve 
as a reminder that although some Aboriginal voices are 
presently heard in this Chamber, we still have a long way to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took close to 100 years before the Saskatchewan 
legislature saw its first Aboriginal cabinet minister, Keith 
Goulet. There have now been three, including the current 
ministers of Northern Affairs and Community Resources. It 
took nearly 100 years for a First Nations woman to be elected to 
this legislature, the member from Cumberland. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a new day, and I have every hope and 
every confidence that the beginnings made in this legislature’s 
first century will come to fruition in the next as more and more 
Métis and First Nations people take their seats in this Assembly. 
 
These gifts celebrate our past, our present, and give us great 
hope for the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Saskatchewan’s First Premier 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
great pleasure today, as we celebrate the 100th anniversary of 
the first sitting of the Saskatchewan legislature, to pay tribute to 
Saskatchewan’s first premier, Walter Scott. 
 
From a career in journalism that included ownership of the 
Moose Jaw Times, the Regina Journal, and the Regina Leader 
newspapers to the premiership of the new province of 
Saskatchewan, Walter Scott left an important legacy for those 
of us here today who are fortunate to participate in the public 
life of this great province. 
 
As an MP [Member of Parliament] in the Laurier government in 
Ottawa, Scott was influential in the development of the 
government Bills that created the new provinces of Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. Walter Scott was named as the province’s first 
premier in September 1905, then elected in the first general 
election on December 13, 1905. The Scott government was 
re-elected in 1908 and 1912 by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the premier, Scott laid the foundation for our new province 
through his efforts to build the infrastructure and public 
administration necessary to capitalize on Saskatchewan’s 
potential, in addition to supervising construction of this 
Legislative Building and creating the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is a significant legacy. And I would ask the members to join 
me in paying tribute to Walter Scott and his accomplishments 
as Saskatchewan’s first premier. Thank you. 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Women in Government 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, since the first sitting of the 
Saskatchewan legislature 100 years ago, it is good to recognize 
the role of women in government has progressed. 
 
The earliest days of the 20th century saw absolutely no 
participation of women in the Government of Saskatchewan. It 
was not until 1916, 10 years after the inauguration of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that women were permitted to run in 
provincial and municipal elections. 
 
It was not until 1919, three years later, that Sarah Katherine 
Ramsland became the first woman to become a member. 
Slowly, Mr. Speaker, the participation rate of women in 
government increased. 
 
In 1982, 76 years after the founding of Saskatchewan, the 
province saw the appointment of its first women cabinet 
ministers. Saskatchewan appointed Sylvia Fedoruk its first 
female lieutenant governor in 1988, after 83 years as a province. 
And I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to serve with you as the first 
woman presiding officer of the Assembly. In the 
commemorative brochure before us, one woman is included — 
our Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk. 
 
Interestingly, Mr. Speaker, the longest serving woman in the 
history of the Saskatchewan legislature is none other than my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Nutana. And as 
mentioned in this morning’s historical occasion, our member 
from Cumberland is the first First Nation woman cabinet 
minister. 
 
There are currently 10 women members representing 
approximately 18 per cent of the total members. And though 18 
per cent is a significantly larger percentage than zero of 100 
years ago, there are fewer female members today than there 
were in the early 1990s. Mr. Speaker, we have a long way to go 
to reflect our 52 per cent of the population. As we celebrate this 
first 100 years, let us commit to achieving equality in all our 
governing bodies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

100th Anniversary Marked by Recurrent Themes 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I join my 
colleagues in speaking about our great province on this the 
100th anniversary of the first legislative sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 100 years ago Saskatchewan was a land of hope 
and promise where thousands upon thousands flocked to this 
province to seek a better life for themselves and their families. 
History shows that the government of the day was an ambitious 
one, a result of the needs of provincehood and the inflowing 

population. Some of the issues facing this first government 
were those of education, the provision of medical care, and 
municipal government. Mr. Speaker, the more things change, 
the more they stay the same. 
 
One of the issues debated that first session was the location and 
design of the provincial capital. It was a hotly contested battle 
between Regina and Saskatoon, and also Prince Albert and 
Moose Jaw. In fact, Mr. Speaker, newspaper clippings from the 
day recorded back and forth debate between boosters of each 
city and the newspaper editors. They spoke of their strengths in 
terms of location and natural advantages, and even how they 
had better weather than the other. Some things never change. 
And neither does the hope and optimism of the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan’s second century we need a 
government just as ambitious to fulfill the promise of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Territorial Administration Building 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, as members will know, today is 
the 100th anniversary of the first sitting of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. However many may not know 
where the inaugural sitting of the legislature actually took place. 
It took place at the Territorial Administration Building on the 
west end of Dewdney which was home to the first sitting of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on March 29, 1906. 
 
The administration building was completed in 1883 on the same 
site as the Indian office and another government office building. 
Mr. Speaker, the North-West Territorial Council first met in the 
Territorial Administration Building in 1883, the same year 
Regina was declared a town and became the capital of the 
massive land mass of the North-West Territories. 
 
In accordance with the Saskatchewan Act, Saskatchewan 
became a province in September 1905. Regina was named the 
temporary capital of the new province, Mr. Speaker, but was 
decreed and affirmed as capital on May 23, 1906. The 
Territorial Administration Building was home to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan until the opening of the Legislative 
Building on October 12, 1912. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a historic occasion for the province 
of Saskatchewan. May it be the first of many centennial 
commemorations to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

Plans for Population Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under this 
NDP government Saskatchewan is now suffering its worst 
population loss in years. In fact Saskatchewan’s population has 
now fallen to its lowest level since 1982 — interesting date, 
that, Mr. Speaker — thanks to the failed policies of this NDP 
government. 
 
And what did the Industry minister yesterday say in response to 
this? He said he hopes things will turn around, and if they don’t, 
he’ll be disappointed, Mr. Speaker. What a government of 
action, what a plan of action that is. The house is on fire. He 
hopes that the fire will go out, and he’s disappointed, Mr. 
Speaker, if it doesn’t, apparently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the province needs now is an 
enterprise-friendly plan. It needs a growth agenda. And so we 
ask again, to the Premier of this province, to stand, take to his 
feet and address the most pressing issue — the out-migration of 
people from this province — and answer the question: why is 
his government, why is the NDP driving out people from this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the 
Opposition says that he hasn’t seen a population drop like this 
in years, I think the years he must be referring to are the late 
’80s, early ’90s when they were in power, which was the largest 
population drop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition wants to 
mock me for saying I hope that the situation will improve. And 
what we share with the people of Saskatchewan, unlike the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is hope and faith in the 
future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re going to continue to instill hope 
in the people in the province, Mr. Speaker, but not just that. The 
Leader of the Opposition says to take action. We have been 
taking action, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan. He has no plan. He 
has no credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province 
also have hope and faith. They have hope that soon — and very 
soon — there will be a provincial election because they have 
faith that when that happens, there will be a brand new 
government in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because, because in no small part, due in no 

small part to these numbers, Mr. Speaker. According to the 
government’s own information, the net interprovincial loss of 
8,218 is more than double the net loss experienced in 2004. It’s 
the largest since 2001. That is this Premier’s record, Mr. 
Speaker. 2005 was our centennial year, and in that year the 
Premier has managed to post this population out-migration 
record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how is that possible? How could 
we be losing so many people in the middle of an oil boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we will not build the 
economy of Saskatchewan with empty rhetoric. We will not. 
We will not build the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
with endless complaining, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
taking action. We’re taking action in the area of taxation, oil 
and gas, mining, and will be taking action when my colleague, 
the Minister of Finance, introduces the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we will see, Mr. Speaker, because if the Minister of 
Finance introduces a plan to grow the economy of 
Saskatchewan, the question I want the Leader of the Opposition 
to answer, Mr. Speaker, is, will he support such a plan, yes or 
no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s getting a little 
impatient. Very soon, in a number of months he will soon be 
able to ask questions from this very chair, Mr. Speaker, when 
he replaces the current Premier as the leader of that party and 
after the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are the actions that they have taken. We have 
the highest taxes on investment on the continent, Mr. Speaker. 
In the last provincial budget, they actually increased the capital 
tax owed by the oil and gas sector. No wonder production is flat 
in the middle of a boom. That’s also the action of this 
government. 
 
We have a labour legislative environment that’s not competitive 
with the rest of the country. And here are the results, Mr. 
Speaker — the lowest population since 1982; 8,800 young 
people between the ages of 15 and 29 we have lost in one year. 
How is that possible? 
 
To the Premier, Mr. Speaker, will he please explain to the 
people of this province how he is managing to squander all the 
potential of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, before the Leader of 
the Opposition finishes counting his chickens before they’re 
hatched, he could explain to the House how it is he says 
production is flat in the middle of an oil boom. You know, the 
only thing flat here, Mr. Speaker, is the question being put by 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Because I want to say this to . . . Everybody should know, Mr. 
Speaker, that when that leader has been pressed about his plan, 
what has he said? He’s said two things. Number one, I’m going 
to appoint a committee if I’m elected premier — which is never 
going to happen — to advise me what to do. That’s his first 
plan. His second plan, Mr. Speaker, he says, I’m a different 
brand. That’s what he says. That’s his plan. We don’t know 
whether it’s Bacardi or Seagrams, but that’s not a good enough 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. He might want to look just to his 
right, just to his . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister who just answered 
might want to look to his right to see who captain Bacardi 
actually is. Remember that, Mr. Speaker? A number of years 
ago, who took the free trip with the liquor company up north on 
their fishing boat? Why it was that member’s seatmate right 
over there. Maybe he wants to talk to him about his favourite 
brand of libation. 
 
What we want to talk about today, Mr. Speaker, is the future of 
this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve lost 8,800 young people 
under the NDP government between the ages of 15 and 29. 
We’ve posted the worst out-migration record in the country. 
Manitoba is beating this NDP government if you can believe it, 
Mr. Speaker. And the minister goes out yesterday and says, well 
he hopes things will get better, and if they don’t, he’ll be 
disappointed. Then he comes in here, Mr. Speaker, with no real 
answers, just politics and rhetoric — no real plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to get up and respond on 
the most important question facing this province right now — 
the loss of our people. Will he do that? Will he explain to the 
people how this NDP government is managing to drive people 
from this province in the middle of a boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well if anyone would understand rhetoric 

and recognize it, it would be that Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. Because I want to repeat for the benefit of the Leader 
of the Opposition, we have hope. And we’ll be disappointed if 
we don’t turn these numbers around — yes, Mr. Speaker — but 
we’re taking action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re taking action in oil and gas. We’re taking action in 
mining. We’re taking action in personal taxation. And I say to 
that Leader of the Opposition — because, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
going to have the opportunity to ask questions from that side of 
the House — and so I say to the Leader of the Opposition once 
again, if the Minister of Finance produces a plan of more action 
in the budget for growth and opportunity and the young people 
of this province, is he going to support that plan when he has a 
chance to do so, yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Waiting Lists for Training 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. The minister was recently forwarded a message 
concerning the wait time for the electrician program at the 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] Palliser Campus. The message told the story of a 
young man who paid his $30 application fee and received the 
following reply, quote, “Your projected start date is more than five 
years.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government so seriously underfunding 
SIAST, thereby preventing Saskatchewan young people from 
getting the timely training that they need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I want to say to the members opposite is that SIAST 
delivers 192 educational programs in the province to over 7,300 
full-time students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in addition to SIAST, which has a 
number of pre-employment support programs for electricians in 
the province, there are also a number of programs at our 
regional colleges. And in fact there are four regional colleges 
that do have openings in the pre-employment program for 
electricians in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the message that was sent to the 
minister goes on to say that there is absolutely no wait time at 
the college in Medicine Hat. Now if you want to become an 
electrician, you can get right into their program. 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

Mr. Speaker, the author of the message believes that if her son 
goes to Alberta for this training, he’ll never come back. Mr. 
Speaker, based on the population numbers we’ve been hearing 
lately, I think that woman’s absolutely right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message concludes by asking what steps this 
government is taking to keep our Saskatchewan youth right here 
in this province. I think that’s a great question, Mr. Speaker. So 
I ask this of the minister: what is her government prepared to do 
to help SIAST eliminate its waiting list? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier in my 
answer, there are a number of training positions in our regional 
college system. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if the member wants 
to, he can advise his constituent that there are openings at 
Watrous through the Carlton Trail Regional College, Weyburn 
through the Southeast Regional College, Moosomin through the 
Southeast Regional College, and also Meadow Lake. They 
actually have openings, Mr. Speaker, and the young person 
could apply to those programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan should 
not have to wait five years to gain admission to a SIAST 
program. If there’s openings elsewhere, maybe somebody could 
offer them the courtesy of that particular information. By 
making people or suggesting to people that they wait five years, 
this government is actually encouraging young people to leave 
our province. Nowhere is this more evident than in southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister set a target for reducing the wait 
times in the electricians program and all other SIAST programs, 
or is she prepared to just watch and wait as young people 
continue to leave the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. What I wanted to say to the 
member opposite, and maybe he didn’t hear the answer to his 
question, there are four programs in the province through the 
regional college system. There are pre-employment programs, 
and they are available for young people if they wanted to go 
into the pre-employment program. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, if you want to become an apprentice 
electrician, if an employer is prepared to hire you, you can go 
directly as an indentured apprentice and then get into the 
journeyman’s program, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell the member 
opposite, there is absolutely no wait-list for anyone who is an 
indentured apprentice that is doing their coursework in the area 

of electronics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Treaty Education in Schools 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today we celebrated the first 100 
years of the legislature with the acknowledgement that we’ve 
taken some small steps with First Nations people, but with the 
understanding we have a long way to go in building 
relationships. Today as we celebrated the treatise documents 
signed by two sovereign nations, these documents define the 
relationship that we have as two peoples. They are fundamental 
to the creation of this province and the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the exception of one optional course in grade 
12, there is little in our schools that directly relate to treaties. 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government make treaty education 
mandatory in schools so that all children can learn first-hand 
about the important documents that are the foundation on which 
Saskatchewan was built? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite really 
needs to get her facts straight. The member from Saskatoon 
Eastview began the treaty-in-the-schools program a number of 
years ago. It’s very successful. The Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner, whom I just met with recently, spoke about the 
improvements that have been made, the training that is 
continuing with teachers so that they have the resources and the 
capability to teach these classes in the schools in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

School Attendance Registry 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the key word that I used was 
mandatory. It is not a course that everybody can take, that they 
have to take. It is something that you can if you want to take. 
But we’re saying that you have to have it in Saskatchewan if 
you’re going to know about the province and what it was built 
on. Not every schoolchild has that option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning Chief Bird spoke eloquently about 
the disparities that exist between our peoples. To quote the 
chief: poverty cannot be masked by a runner and a pillow. 
 
Chief Bird urged us to look and see what we could do to 
eliminate these disparities. In that vein, Mr. Speaker, we now 
see a huge disparity between First Nations children and other 
children in terms of schooling. Right now there are more than 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

1,000 school-aged children in Saskatoon alone, many of whom 
are First Nations, not attending school. 
 
In September there was supposed to be a registry that would 
ensure that schools would know both on- and off-reserve if 
children are in school. So my question to the minister is, how’s 
that tracking system working? What is the outcome to date? 
And does this minister actually have a plan to ensure that 
children attend school so they can have skills to succeed in the 
future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite actually jumped over a number of topics. To 
give her a quick response, I will say again that the teaching of 
treaties in the schools is progressing along very well. There was 
information kits that were provided by the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner that were provided to all the schools, and 
training will continue in the education field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers need to have the expertise and the 
resource behind them and the understanding of the materials 
they’re teaching before you can jump in and begin teaching 
children in your classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next portion that the member asked about was 
the tracking system. It is moving ahead as we had projected it 
would be and is in place in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Housing Concerns 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we still have to see a real will to 
make a difference here. Everything that this minister talks about 
is something that they plan on doing and hope it will happen, 
just like they plan on having 35,000 fewer students in the 
school system over the next 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing is also a crucial issue for Aboriginal 
people living on- and off-reserve in Saskatchewan. In a recent 
column, Doug Cuthand notes off-reserve First Nations people 
are subject to slum landlords and poor housing. And it involves 
the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total amount allowable for housing in 
Saskatchewan cities right now for a family of two is $415. 
Where can anybody live for $415, Mr. Speaker? And in the 
North, only single moms are eligible for social housing. So 
what does that encourage someone who’s living in a crowded 
home to do? Mr. Speaker, people are being left behind. 
 
And the Kelowna accord acknowledges there is provincial 
responsibility for First Nations people. Why does this 
government allow poor housing conditions to continue in our 
province and what is their plan to improve the conditions? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
take the question as the Minister Responsible for Sask Housing 
and to point out that this government has done more to help 
families build independence, Mr. Speaker. And we will 
continue that work, Mr. Speaker. And I can point out that many 
of our efforts is going to be working closely with the federal 
government to make sure that First Nations and Métis people in 
the province have a voice and make sure that people out there 
know that there is a struggle to get housing issues addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are part of a framework agreement with the 
federal government to make sure that the people of 
Saskatchewan — all people of Saskatchewan — have access to 
good, affordable, decent housing. We’ll continue working 
away, unlike that opposition, Mr. Speaker, that has no 
credibility on this issue. And the first time in ten years I’ve sat 
here, we’ve had a question on Aboriginal people in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Condition of Highway 55 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 55 is a major economic 
link from Prince Albert through the Carrot River area and on to 
the Manitoba border. It then travels on to The Pas. Mr. Speaker, 
this highway is the only access road for the residents of Shoal 
Lake and Red Earth. For anyone who has travelled this road 
east from Battle Heights, they know what a horrible state of 
disrepair it is in. A recent article in the Nipawin Journal 
describes it like this, quote, “In springtime, potholes cause the 
road to deteriorate into gravel soup.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us if his department will ever 
get around to fixing this road? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member opposite for the question, and I want to say to him that 
this government is well aware of the condition of Highway 55. I 
can tell you that I have met with the chiefs from Red Earth and 
Shoal Lake, and they’ve made me directly aware of this issue 
some time back. 
 
I would want to say to that member that we have allocated some 
money for northern roads. We have allocated and will allocate 
some money in the new budget. And we will be putting forth a 
capital project list. I can tell the member opposite that we are 
well aware of the circumstance of that road, and we’ll act in due 
course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, Shoal Lake Chief Marcel Head 
has been lobbying the NDP government to pave Highway 55 
from the treeline east to the Manitoba border for some time. 
Chief Head made a presentation to the Premier in Shoal Lake 
last summer and then met with the NDP caucus in September. 
He has received very little response from this government. He 
recently told the Nipawin Journal, quote: 
 

“They did mention that Highway 55 was a priority but it 
turns out, in terms of the priority list . . . it’s way, way, 
way low at the bottom.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, again, will this minister commit today to fixing 
Highway 55 so that the people of Red Earth and Shoal Lake can 
have a high-quality road linking them to the rest of the 
province, the services they require, and the services they want 
to provide? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say that the chiefs of both Red Earth and 
Shoal Lake have made the condition of their road available and 
knowledgeable to this government. We understand the 
conditions of the road. I would want to say that the Premier has 
met with them. And I would want to say that that member will 
in all likelihood have a chance to support a budget. So I would 
ask that member: if it’s part of our budget this spring, will he 
support the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, this winter the Highways 
minister told the Nipawin Journal, quote, “ . . . I am very 
interested in Highway 55.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you interest is all well and good, 
but I’m sure the residents of Red Earth and Shoal Lake want a 
bit more than interest. In fact here’s what Chief Marcel Head 
had to say about the government’s inaction on Highway 55, 
quote: 
 

“I’ve been patient and my patience is running out . . . We 
are tired of being ignored.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this Assembly when he will 
stop ignoring the people of Shoal Lake and Red Earth? Can 
Chief Head and all the people of these communities expect an 
announcement on Highway 55 in the upcoming budget? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me say to that member the 
comments I made were, I believe, around November. Now the 
Department of Highways hasn’t built many roads this winter. 
They normally don’t during the winter. So I want to say to that 
member if he’ll be just a little bit patient, this Finance minister 
will bring down the budget which will deal with taxation. It’ll 
deal with roads. And it’ll deal with schools. And it’ll deal with 

all of the things that budgets do. 
 
So if the member is so truly concerned with Highway 55, will 
he give this House today his commitment that he will support 
the budget if in fact Highway 55 is part of our expenditure 
plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the question. 
When the Premier was on his bus tour did he not see the 
condition of the roads in the northeast part of the province? Mr. 
Speaker, the Northeast wants to be part of the new west. They 
want to be part of the North that needs to be opened up for the 
economic development of the province. And Chief Head has 
said he’s been very patient, but his patience is running. out. 
 
Again to the minister, will the people of this area expect an 
announcement on Highway 55 in the upcoming budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite are looking for yes or no answers. And I guess . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — My question is, if Highway 55 is 
part of the budget, will he support it, yes or no? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, these members travel from far and 
wide, from north to south across this province making promises, 
making commitments. And, Mr. Speaker, when this government 
puts in place a plan that deals with debt reduction and it deals 
with tax reduction and it deals with more money for schools and 
more money for hospitals and more money for roads, Mr. 
Speaker, what does the Saskatchewan Party opposition do? Mr. 
Speaker, they do exactly what they will do again this year: 
they’ll stand up and vote against all of the good initiatives that 
the people of Saskatchewan put forward in their annual budget. 
They’ll vote against it every time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 46, The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 now be introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 46, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time?  
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 47, 
The Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Business Names Registration Amendment 
Act, 2006 . . . Order please. 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 47, 
The Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to questions no. 597 and 598. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 597 and 598 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Symbolic Gifts Presented on Occasion 
of 100th Anniversary 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. At 
the close of my remarks today, I will move a formal motion, 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, to recognize the 
historical significance of this day — the 100th anniversary of 
the first sitting of the legislature of Saskatchewan — and to 
recognizing, by motion, the importance of First Nations peoples 
and of treaty to the creation and endurance of our province by 
acceptance of the generous gifts that were received in this very 
special ceremony that were held this morning in the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when 100 years ago the first session of the 
Legislative Assembly convened in this magnificent building 
which we call home today — for the legislature was not even 
under construction; in fact the blueprints hadn’t even been 
drawn up and this area of the capital city we now know as 
Wascana Park was known at that time as the old Sinton 
property and Wascana Lake was simply a reservoir used I am 
told as much for anything else as for watering livestock — 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, much has changed in the past 100 years 
but much endures as well. 
 
For example whether the first sitting of the first session of this 
legislature had occurred here on this property or as it did a few 
blocks north on Dewdney Avenue in the old territorial building, 
that first sitting would have taken place on Treaty Four land. 
Mr. Speaker, this is indicative. We are all heirs to the treaties. 
We are all beneficiaries of the treaties and of the treaty 
relationships established over 100 years ago. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the treaties allowed for peaceful settlement and 
development of this country through the promise of land and 
rights to First Nations people. They were agreements entered 
into in good faith between nations, between peoples, in order 
that a new nation might emerge. They have therefore been 
justly called the first instruments of Confederation. Mr. 
Speaker, the treaties are vital, living, and sacred undertakings 
that define relationships between proud nations and proud 
peoples. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, it was our privilege . . . Most 
members of the legislature were able to take part in two very 
special ceremonies honouring those relationships. A smaller 
number of us were able to take part this morning in a ceremony, 
a pipe ceremony, with First Nations chiefs, with elders, and 
with veterans. It was then our privilege to take part in one of the 
most historic ceremonies that this venerable Chamber has ever 
witnessed. Never before, Mr. Speaker, in the 100-year history 
of this legislature has such a group of people come together 
united in a common understanding of and belief in the 
importance of the First Nations foundations of this province and 
our enduring treaty relationship. Mr. Speaker, it was an honour 
for all of us to be a part of that celebration this morning and we, 
as elected members of this legislature, are moved by the gifts 
which are now prominently displayed on the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as identified in members’ statements today and 
earlier this day, Florence Highway of the Pelican Narrows Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation has fashioned these beautiful gifts — 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

the distinctive runner and the beaver pelt cushion. They stand, 
Mr. Speaker, now as part of this Chamber, an enduring symbol 
of the treaty relationship between the First Nations people of 
this province and those who are the sons and the daughters of 
immigrants who have come from across the globe. 
 
These gifts, Mr. Speaker, will forever serve as a reminder to all 
of us who should work in this Assembly, have the privilege of 
being elected to this Assembly, and should stand for the 
thousands of people who visit this Chamber each year, they 
should serve as reminder of the historic and significant role of 
First Nations peoples and the treaties in the creation of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of this legislature over its 100 years, 
there have been many historic debates take place in the 
territorial building first and then in this Chamber and in the 
corridors and hallways of this building. Historical debates, Mr. 
Speaker. We have debated in times of Depression and drought. 
We have debated in times of war and peace. We have debated 
issues of medicare and hospitalization. We have debated the 
role of the Crown and public enterprise. We’ve debated 
privatization. There have been many, many historic moments, 
Mr. Speaker, in the 100 years of this legislature. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, today another historic moment took 
place. First Nation peoples, we the descendants of immigrant 
peoples have stood together to recognize that we are all treaty 
people. We are all descendants of those who were signator to 
the treaties who established first of all this province, now 
named for the Cree word fast running water or swift moving 
waters, the great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, there is history. We celebrate 100 years of 
history, but we make a little history that we hope and pray will 
carry this province into its second century and far beyond. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, I move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and celebrate the 
accomplishments made and the historical significance of 
this day, that being the 100th anniversary of the first 
Legislative Assembly sitting; and further, 
 
that this Assembly recognize the importance, 
contributions, and relationship between the treaties and the 
creation of Saskatchewan as a province, by the acceptance 
of the gift of a beaver pelt cushion and beaded runner 
made by Ms. Florence Highway, Pelican Narrows, Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and celebrate the 
accomplishments made and the historical significance of 
this day, being the 100th anniversary of the first 

Legislative Assembly sitting; and further, 
 
that this Assembly recognize the importance, 
contributions, and relationship between the treaties and the 
creation of Saskatchewan as a province, by the acceptance 
of the gift of a beaver pelt cushion and beaded runner 
made by Ms. Florence Highway, Pelican Narrows, Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to second 
the motion presented just now by the Premier of Saskatchewan 
on this . . . It was a very historic morning. 
 
And at the risk of being repetitive, because we did have a 
chance to make a few brief remarks this morning, I do want to 
reiterate the fact that, you know, there are occasions in this 
House where I have marked quietly that I may or may not want 
to remember this long into the future or share it with grandkids, 
one particular event or another. This event this morning was not 
one of those. It’s one that we’ll want to share with our kids and 
our grandkids. 
 
And you know, I think of the picture that was took on the stairs 
just after this ceremony and even the photos taken in here and 
the words recorded for posterity by Hansard. And it’s 
something that each and every member can be proud of for 
having participated in a real and direct way. 
 
I have not had the chance yet to extend a formal congratulations 
and thanks to the member for Cumberland for her role in 
ensuring that this happened today, and I want to do that on 
behalf of the official opposition. It was an excellent idea. 
There’s no other way to put it. And its fruition, I think, is a 
testament to the entire Assembly, to the First Nations who 
participated, and it’ll last for many, many years to come. 
 
I would also be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not acknowledge at 
this time my colleague, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, 
the opposition critic for First Nations and Métis affairs. Her 
work has been certainly unprecedented in our party in the area 
of First Nations and Métis affairs, and you know, I think that 
public policy has benefited from her zeal, her desire. But more 
importantly her colleagues have benefited from that in terms of 
education and awareness and our own commitment to support 
her and her endeavours to further the cause of First Nations and 
Métis people in our province. So I would like to thank her as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are celebrating two pretty important things 
today — the Assembly itself 100 years old, the Throne Speech 
100 years ago today. That first session wasn’t a long one, there 
on Dewdney Avenue. It was a nine-week session. Members 
debated and passed about 26 Bills. Although actually they’d 
been, maybe have been more busy than we’ve been so far this 
spring from what we’ve seen so far, but I’m sure that’ll change. 
I’m sure there’ll be many more Bills to come. 
 
Most of the Bills were administrative in nature as you can 
imagine, Mr. Speaker. They laid the groundwork for the future 
of the province. They laid the groundwork for the operations of 
the government itself. Saskatchewan’s first decade, those first 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

few years would have been . . . I can’t imagine the excitement. 
Even though this building was not yet used, even though they 
were meeting over in the territorial buildings in Dewdney 
Avenue. Can you imagine the excitement? 
 
The province had been allowed into Confederation by the 
federal government along with our neighbour to the west of us. 
And there must have been a lot of excitement in this room from 
those first members as they debated and they talked with 
excitement about the future of Saskatchewan. There was pride 
in finally becoming a province. The headline of the Regina 
Leader-Post screamed: “Hail Province of Saskatchewan.” 
 
Our first premier, Walter Scott, who represented the 
constituency that includes Swift Current, was a visionary; he 
was a leader. And we benefit from his vision and his leadership 
as we just look around this Assembly and as we all know, the 
direct hand he had in the design of this building even choosing 
the carpet that some members wish maybe he would have chose 
differently, for example the member for Cannington. But 
certainly we benefit from his vision and his drive. 
 
Walter Scott felt Saskatchewan would be home to millions of 
residents. He said, quote: 
 

This province has as yet less than one million souls and 
there is plenty of room for at least ten millions. Just as sure 
as the sun shines there will be within this Province alone 
some day a population running into the tens of millions. 

 
He said that in 1910. And you know, Mr. Speaker, as we gather 
in this Legislative Assembly to mark the first session 100 years 
ago, we should share in that optimism. We should share in that 
vision for the province because truly, truly the potential of 
Saskatchewan relative to any other place on earth — never 
mind other provinces, never mind Alberta — is limitless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some would argue that today 100 years later, it’s 
prudent to mark that our potential has not yet been reached for 
whatever reason. And that’s the subject of political debate 
perhaps in this House as to why that’s happened and how that 
could change. In fact we heard maybe a little bit of it earlier 
today. And I think we’re going to hear a whole lot more of it in 
the coming weeks and months. But as we remember 100 years 
ago in that session I think we ought to redouble . . . We ought to 
confirm, affirm our determination to live out the sentiments of 
Walter Scott and his vision that the potential of this province is 
immense and yet unrealized. 
 
As I mentioned this morning, the first Throne Speech talked 
about 26 million bushels of wheat produced. The first 
legislature was as proud of agriculture as it is today, Mr. 
Speaker. MLAs complained about a lack of federal support for 
agriculture in that Throne Speech, if you can imagine. Mr. 
Speaker, they spoke of a massive proposed expansion of the rail 
line network that would develop rural areas of the province. 
Rural transportation was the subject that was discussed in that 
Throne Speech. There were thousands of immigrants flooding 
into our province, part of the world’s largest human migration. 
These hard-working people settled the harsh terrain and staked 
out a future. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, today quite by contrast, we see thousands 

of people leaving Saskatchewan. And they’re not leaving a 
province that doesn’t have anything to offer. They’re leaving a 
place that has much to offer, but for various reasons — we 
would argue because of 60 years of the kind of leadership 
we’ve seen — we see people leaving today. One hundred years 
ago they were coming into the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier’s right. This legislature has seen many debates and 
many great achievements. Although John G. Diefenbaker 
introduced the first federal Bill of Rights, Saskatchewan 
debated the first provincial bill of rights regarding citizens 
against discrimination. 
 
And yes it’s true I think in large measure because of the work of 
volunteers in health care region no. 1 in southwest 
Saskatchewan — where many would argue, many would argue 
medicare was pioneered — because of that effort, the debate 
eventually came to the Legislative Assembly here in 
Saskatchewan, and the then CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] government indeed brought it forward for the 
province of Saskatchewan. And then what followed was 
medicare for the entire country. And that should be noted by 
any fair-minded member of this House, that that is an important 
date in the history of Saskatchewan, in the history of Canada, in 
the history of medicare, those countries and jurisdictions that 
have medicare around the world. 
 
I would add though, Mr. Speaker, this: it’s important to mark 
the contribution of amazing social programs — that part is true. 
It’s important for us to say, look this government gave to us 
important social programs. But so too is it important then to 
note that that same government and that same philosophy took 
away the ability of our province and our economy to afford 
those very social programs 60 years later. And that’s an 
important matter for debate as well, Mr. Speaker. As we mark, 
as we mark 100 years of history in the Legislative Assembly, 
that’s an important part of the debate. 
 
Well the member for Regina South doesn’t think that’s worthy 
of this motion. The Premier just got up and said, we’ve had 
many great debates in this Assembly; we agree to disagree; we 
respectfully disagree — that’s one of the debates we’ve had. 
That’s one of the debates we’ve had — that medicare was a gift 
to the country that came from this province but, Mr. Speaker, 
that the cost might have been economic policy for the province. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s very reasonable. 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
place where we honour debate. And we honour today 100 years 
of debate. There are some members maybe in the House that 
don’t want to have that debate. We do. For the record, we do. 
And when the debate’s over, we’ll probably meet and shake 
hands outside in the rotunda — at least I will. And I know 
maybe the member for Regina South is a little grumpy these 
days, but I hope he’ll shake my hand too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so we mark, we mark here the debates of this 
Assembly and the achievements of this Assembly. We honour 
those who went before us from all different parties, who worked 
hard on behalf of their constituents, who fought hard for their 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

ideas. And we honour them over the first 100 years. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And as the Premier has pointed out, today is also about treaties. 
Today is also about recognizing the covenant that the treaties 
are for our province and for all the peoples of Canada. 
 
I can say to this Assembly that not too many years ago if I 
would have been in a room and asked a question that anyone 
who is a signator to the treaty should raise their hand, I’m not 
sure I would have put up my hand. I didn’t think of it in those 
terms, Mr. Speaker. And I was at a meeting like that actually. 
And there was a question like that asked, and I didn’t. And the 
presenter made it pretty clear and laid out the history of the 
treaties and made it easy for anyone in that room to understand 
that it takes two nations to sign a treaty. It takes two 
governments, two peoples to sign a treaty. 
 
In this case we honour the First Nations who for their part 
signed the treaties and the Queen, the Crown, all of us, all of the 
descendants of those people who signed on behalf of the 
Crown. We’re all signators to the treaties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I found the words of Chief Bird particularly compelling in that 
he reminded all of us that this beautiful beaded piece of art that 
lays now on the table of this Assembly and the cushion that the 
mace rests on, they’re wonderful pieces of art and they’re good 
symbols. They’re reminders of these treaties. They remind us 
all that these are living things, that they need to be honoured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we all recognize that 
they’re not just symbols. As Chief Bird said today, they have to 
remind us to act. We all have to resolve that they are going to 
force us to, cause us to act maybe on the issue of treaty 
education, Mr. Speaker, maybe on some of the issues that were 
talked about today in question period. And I think that’s the 
most important legacy of today’s ceremony, even more 
important than the pictures and the Hansard that will record 
what happened — the actual symbols and what the symbols will 
remind us to do, what they will remind us of, these treaties. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of the members of the official 
opposition, I want to say this. I’ve talked to a number of the 
members, not all of them because there wasn’t a lot of time 
between the end of the ceremonies and when we had to come in 
here for question period, for orders of the day. But I will say 
this that every member I talked to on either side and those who 
participated in the program, they all said the same thing. It was 
one of the best days they’ve had since they were elected. 
Everyone felt good about what we did here all this morning — 
all of us. 
 
And I think that’s quite something because getting everyone to 
say the same thing in this Assembly isn’t always the easiest 
thing to do. So we appreciate the chance on our side of the 
House to not only participate this morning, but also to 
participate in this debate. And it’s my honour to second the 
motion of the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Cumberland, the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
I am privileged and deeply moved to stand today to speak in 
support of this motion. Mr. Speaker, not only does this motion 
recognize the noble history of this Assembly, but it also 
recognizes the role of First Nations and the treaties in building 
Saskatchewan. Our leader spoke eloquently this morning about 
the relationship amongst our peoples and our governments. We 
should take those words to heart. 
 
Young children sang our national anthem to us in not one, not 
two, but in three languages representing our many Canadian 
cultures. I will remember their voices fondly. 
 
And it seems to me I can still hear the drums from this morning 
ringing in this chamber, drums that sang of honour and respect. 
It seems to me that they sang not only for our proud past, but 
also of our bright future together in this province. I hope that 
song echoes here for generations to come. I will carry that song 
in my heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was also moved this morning at the presentation 
of a mace runner and cushion designed by Florence Highway of 
Pelican Narrows, member of the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 
which is very near my home community. Through her choices 
of materials and shape and colour, Ms. Highway reminds us of 
the economic history of the relationship between our 
governments. She reminds us of the gifts of the Creator and that 
we must share these gifts for the benefit and wellness of all 
peoples. 
 
This mace runner and cushion are a physical reminder of the 
ties that bind our governments. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we 
also have living reminders of those ties. It is a matter of great 
pride for me that I stand not only as an elected member of this 
Assembly, but as a First Nations person. As Aboriginal people 
progress in our economy I look forward to seeing them also 
progress in our government. I anticipate seeing more of them as 
members in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very appropriate that we remember the 
treaties as we celebrate the 100th anniversary of this Assembly. 
This government has accomplished much in 100 years but we 
know that there is more to do. Yesterday in this Assembly 
several members spoke about the gaps faced by First Nations 
and Métis people — gaps in education, in economic 
opportunity, in quality of life. We do not take this challenge 
lightly, Mr. Speaker. This is why I am proud to say that our 
government will continue to work with Aboriginal people to 
improve their lives. 
 
Saskatchewan supports the Kelowna accord which opens a new 
era of service delivery for First Nations. This government has 
offered to host a national economic summit on First Nations 
issues for which planning is already under way. Our province 
has shown leadership in furthering economic development, not 
just for but in partnership with First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Indeed our province’s northern strategy emphasizes this 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

co-operative attitude. The northern strategy was developed with 
the help of First Nations, Métis, and municipal leaders. And our 
shared vision is that the people of northern Saskatchewan will 
possess the means to address their own aspirations. With 
respect for northern people and their cultures, our government 
works actively with communities, Aboriginal authorities, 
businesses, and industry to promote the social and economic 
development of the North. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, this government highly values the 
contributions of First Nations, not only in the past but as we 
work together for a better future — a future where everyone 
benefits. We will not agree all of the time, that is true, but if we 
remember the spirit of the treaties we will move past those 
disagreements. Together we will build another proud century 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
As my colleagues have noted, the treaties are about honour, 
respect, and trust. Though the drums are now silent, those 
values must sing in this Assembly and in all of our work. I 
humbly ask you all to remember that song. I ask that you 
support this motion. Thank you. Tēniki. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to join in the 
debate today. Today is an interesting and wonderful day in our 
legislature. It’s the 100th anniversary of the first legislature. 
 
In 1906 the MLAs met for the first time and shared eternal 
optimism and took great pride in our new province. 
Saskatchewan still needs that hope and optimism today. There 
was a promise for our province that is still as yet unfulfilled. 
Saskatchewan must tap into its unlimited potential to secure its 
greatness in the future. First Nations people and economy, 
resources, agriculture, and knowledge-based economy — all 
must become part of our new Saskatchewan as we move into 
our second century. Premier Walter Scott had a great vision for 
our province that would grow the province into tens of millions 
of people. That as yet has not happened. 
 
The first great debate in this legislature was where to place the 
capital. It started the friendly rivalry between Saskatoon and 
Regina. And speaking as one of the road warriors that travels 
often between Saskatoon and Regina I wish it was a debate that 
would have been won the other way, but unfortunately we are 
not in a position to rewrite history, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
heavy legislative agenda, we all enjoy working in the House, 
and the travel is something that goes with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had many great debates in this Chamber. 
We have debated many things. We have debated health care, 
Crown corporations, and economic policies. In recent times I 
have not always been happy with the outcome of those debates 
but I have always had respect for the process that has taken 
place and respect for the members that participate in the 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have today celebrated a significant role in 
our relationship with First Nations People. We had the 

presentation of the mace runner and we met with First Nations 
people and had a sweetgrass ceremony — pipe ceremony — in 
this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the treaties are the base on which Saskatchewan 
was built and on what it will grow from. The treaties had two 
founding principles: one, the harmony on how our two diverse 
cultures are going to share the land and live together; the second 
one is the education of First Nations people. This is something 
that we have not done adequately and, Mr. Speaker, is 
something that we can at best regard as a work-in-progress. We 
have to develop and work for respect and understanding 
between our two nations. 
 
The First Nations chiefs and elders knew that the old economy 
of buffalo hunting was drawing to a close. They knew that 
education would be a key for the future of the First Nations 
people. The Crown and new settlers were supposed to aid in 
that education. The promises of the treaties has not been 
accomplished. For Saskatchewan to reach its full potential, the 
First Nations people have to be involved in our economy. There 
has to be consultation and relation building with First Nations. 
This would be a start in fulfilling the sacred treaty agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also heard today one of the most impassioned 
speeches from the Treaty Commissioner that I’ve heard. I have 
enormous respect for the Treaty Commissioner and the work 
that his office undertakes, and I want to take this opportunity to 
recognize the excellent work that’s done by Judge David Arnot 
and his office. That office has made immeasurable progress in 
building bridges between our two peoples and developing an 
understanding where there wasn’t one before. He has done a 
commendable job in raising the awareness of the treaties and 
their importance in our daily lives. He has been an ardent 
supporter of the treaties and the relationship which they 
embody. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, treaty education in our schools 
should be mandatory. They are part of the foundation that built 
this province. Mr. Speaker, I said in the House yesterday and 
I’ll repeat it again today: I am like many people of my race. I 
spent the first 30 or 40 years of my life without knowing that I 
am governed by treaties, without having been taught or learned 
the treaties. I went through the Saskatoon public school 
education system. I went through the University of 
Saskatchewan, practised law in the city for over a decade before 
I had any understanding of treaties. 
 
And unfortunately my experience is all too typical. And it’s 
something that we should undertake, as we go into our second 
century, as something that we have to change. We want to see 
that our children at the earliest age learn treaties and learn to 
understand treaties and respect and develop an appreciation for 
how our two peoples must live together and share the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations view the treaties as a covenant. They 
are viewed as the highest moral level. They are covenants 
between the Crown, First Nations, and the Creator. The treaties 
are of mutual benefit to both signatories of the treaties. They are 
the basis for all relations between First Nations and non-First 
Nations people. The treaties are as much for the First Nations as 
they are for the non-First Nations people. 
 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

The mace runner that was presented today provides a new 
beginning for relations between First Nations and legislators in 
Regina. Mr. Speaker, that ceremony that we enjoyed today and 
the pipe ceremony that was held earlier today should be 
regarded not just as something that happened, but should be 
regarded as a wonderful start to what can happen and what must 
happen in this province. There must be real action to move on 
real social issues that affect all citizens of this province, and in 
particular First Nations people. We have to reinvigorate the 
relationship by closing the economic gap between our peoples. 
The treaties task us as legislators with both duties and 
responsibilities to respect and recognize the importance of 
treaties. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
for me a special honour to enter into what I consider as an 
historic debate in these very, very special chambers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think, like so many others of us here, it is a day 
that causes me to feel extremely humble. And as we have 
participated this morning in ceremony, before the legislature 
convened this afternoon and in the events of this day, like 
others here, this is a day that I will long remember and cherish. 
As has been said by others already, for me as well, this is a day 
that I will want to share not only with my children, but I hope 
some day with grandchildren and with great-grandchildren, as 
we mark on this day the 100th anniversary of a time exactly 100 
years ago this day that members came together for the first time 
in the newly created province of Saskatchewan to be assembled 
in their legislature. 
 
When they came together 100 years ago, Mr. Speaker, they 
came together to represent dreams of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And over the course of the past century, much 
has been done out of these chambers, Mr. Speaker, which has 
made a difference, which has reflected the dreams and the 
aspirations of the people of this great province who sent our 
ancestors to these chambers to represent them and the best 
interests of our province. 
 
From the debates of the floors of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 
remind us, have come some things that have changed not only 
the quality of life for the people of Saskatchewan, but literally 
not only for the country but for the continent. It was from 
debate in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, that the first 
comprehensive human rights Act in all of North America was 
born. It was, Mr. Speaker, from the chambers of this Assembly 
that the first comprehensive workers’ compensation Act in all 
of Canada was born. It was, Mr. Speaker, from debate in this 
Assembly, and by rule and by decision of this Assembly, that 
the first arts board like the Saskatchewan Arts Board — the first 
arts board of its kind in all of North America, protecting the 
interests of the creative spirit of our people — was born. 
 
And it was, Mr. Speaker, it was from these chambers that many 
would argue the greatest gift of the people of Saskatchewan to 

the people of the nation was created. It was after much intense 
debate and vision and the spirit of belief in the future and the 
goodwill of people acting together with their government as an 
instrument, that medicare for our nation was born. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will recognize. as has been acknowledged 
earlier in debate. that out of that came a defining characteristic, 
not only for Saskatchewan people, but a defining characteristic 
of Canadian citizenship in the birth of medicare from here. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that in an important and maybe 
kind of oblique sort of a way, something else was born. It was 
from this Chamber that the decision was made to adopt the 
motto of this great province which binds us together in such an 
insightful way that we celebrate today. It is from this Chamber, 
Mr. Speaker, that the motto of our great province, “from many 
peoples, strength” was born. 
 
And as 100 years ago today, Mr. Speaker, as it was 100 years 
ago, it is not that we come here to look back because the 
relevance of this place is always about this place, is looking in 
one direction and in one direction only, and that is to the future. 
The people of Saskatchewan always have and always will send 
us not to look back, but to understand and then to look ahead 
and decide in the building in the future of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us had the opportunity over lunchtime 
with our buffalo stew and bannock to reflect on a number of 
things. And the table I was at, one of the people who was here 
and appreciated so deeply the ceremony that was here this 
morning, and said to me, so how is tomorrow going to be 
different? How is tomorrow going to be different? 
 
And I shared with her a conversation that some colleagues and I 
had yesterday in this Chamber when we looked over at the table 
and saw the mace placed on top of that red velvet cushion and 
we said yesterday, this is the last time. At the end of the first 
century of the sitting of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, this is the last time that the mace, the symbol of 
the authority of the Legislative Assembly in our democratic 
province, will be placed on that red velvet cushion. And what is 
different about tomorrow, because tomorrow begins today. 
 
What is different about tomorrow is that from now in perpetuity 
as we come to take our place in this Chamber, no matter where 
our desk is located, when we come in, the first thing that we 
will see is that beautiful beaded runner and that beaver pelt 
cushion and the golden mace together. And it will symbolize for 
us in perpetuity, Mr. Speaker, that on the foundation of the First 
Nations people of this place we now know as Saskatchewan is 
built our democracy. 
 
The mace, which symbolizes the authority of the legislature and 
all that democracy can do is there, connected together with the 
foundation and the recognition that for centuries, for centuries 
before Saskatchewan entered into Confederation this place, 
Saskatchewan, was inhabited and nurtured and cared for, this 
land was cared for by First Nations people who welcomed, who 
welcomed those who were new — and many from the European 
countries — to this land and aided them in settling the plan that 
we called the settlement of the West in those days, and 
eventually became the birth of the province of Saskatchewan in 
the great nation of Canada. 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

And so as others have said today, so conscious we all are it is a 
reminder that all of us, all of us are and always will be treaty 
people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, today is really about the 
future. It’s about tomorrow. And I’d like to think of myself as a 
practical person. I think we all would like to do that. And as we 
reflect on one of the great challenges that faces us in this 
province and in other provinces across the nation today, we 
recognize that there is across the nation a labour shortage, a 
skill shortage. It affects our province, and it is of concern for us 
on both sides of this House as it is in every other House within 
the nation. It is largely affected, Mr. Speaker, by the social 
phenomenon of the early retirement of the baby boomers. And 
so we say, so where to from here? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the context of today I am an optimist because I 
understand that in this province, in this province we have a 
special opportunity that is unique to us. It is a fantastic strategic 
advantage for us to take advantage of as we build our future and 
our economy for our people together. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
great advantage for the province of Saskatchewan is the First 
Nations, the Aboriginal, the First Nations and Métis young 
people of Saskatchewan today because the truth of the matter is 
we have been blessed with a baby boom of our own that is 
experienced by the Aboriginal young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is in their dreams and it is in their hearts 
and it is in their minds and their brains and their labours that we 
will build the second century of Saskatchewan as a province. 
 
I believe to the core of my being that the future well-being of 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan is intimately 
connected to the future well-being of the Aboriginal peoples of 
our great province. And it is, Mr. Speaker, something that gives 
me a great deal of optimism and confidence about the future. 
 
Before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I want to say how 
conscious I am and how proud that, in participating in this 
debate, I’ve been able to share the floor in this debate with the 
first First Nations woman to serve in the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan — the Minister of Northern Affairs, the hon. 
member for Cumberland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — But let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker — the 
first First Nations woman. She’s the first. But she’s just the 
first. And I think this province, as we move forward to our 
second century, one of the characteristics of our future is that 
this Assembly will come to be served in many constituencies by 
many First Nations peoples who will be part of directing the 
future of our province as we build it together. 
 
And so I look forward to a second century as a province in 
Saskatchewan where we are bound together by common 
purpose and with a sense of optimism, and recognizing that we 
live in a land that has been blessed abundantly by the Creator. 
We have been blessed with abundance in natural wealth in our 
natural resources, in the wonderful resource of clean air, of 
clean and abundant water, and of our forests — all of which 
were cared for for thousands of years by First Nations people 
before we were born as a province in the great Confederation of 

Canada. 
 
And I recognize as we move forward it will be because we will 
continue to be blessed by the greatest resource of all — our 
people — working together in the symbol of this runner and this 
beaver pelt cushion and the mace together, symbolized by the 
great motto of our great province, “from many peoples, 
strength.” 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I proudly say that I will be voting 
in favour of the motion that is before this House today. Ēkosi. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m also 
honoured to stand in this House with the many people who have 
made remarks about our first century as a legislature and as our 
first opportunity to look forward to tomorrow. 
 
I’d like to start by thanking those who are responsible for today. 
I know there are very many of them but the one who . . . Every 
good issue starts with a good idea and so I would like to also 
thank the Minister of Northern Affairs, the member from 
Cumberland, for her idea. I know that along with that, there’s a 
lot of people who’ve done work to make sure that today 
happened. But I really commend you for doing this. And I think 
it’s made a difference not only to us as legislators but to our 
children and to the many who are watching today to realize that 
we do have a common desire to make things different. 
 
It’s impossible not to be moved by the realization that today we 
are making history and the kind of history that we can be proud 
of. And I think that that’s not often happening in this House. 
And so I’m honoured to be part of today’s celebrations. 
 
When I look at the mace runner with the intricate beaded work, 
I wonder how many hundreds of hours that piece of work 
involved, how many hours Ms. Highway spent on that, and 
what she was thinking of when she was doing it. And then I 
have to ask myself, did the legislature spend that many hours 
discussing the issues that Florence dealt with in her life, that her 
and her family and her neighbours are dealing with? 
 
And I’m afraid that maybe the answer isn’t yes. Have we really 
thought about what people like Ms. Highway was doing and 
what she had to deal with in her life? I’m hoping that we do, but 
I guess I can’t be certain that in the last 100 years we’ve done 
that work. If we haven’t, then I guess I’m not proud of what 
we’ve been doing. 
 
Today we spoke in the House . . . or I asked the question about 
mandatory treaty education because I think it’s very important. 
It’s important not just to me and my children and my 
grandchildren, but it’s important to every child in Saskatchewan 
— First Nations or non-First Nations — and every adult. I 
know that we don’t change things overnight, and we always 
have to start with our children. But perhaps if our kids are 
learning it in school, they’ll help dispel some of the notions that 
they hear at home —that fact that 57 per cent of the people 
think that we can get rid of treaties. That number was 



March 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

astonishing and disappointing to many of us who understand 
that the treaties is the foundation of what we built our province 
on. And I think it’s important that we do step up to the plate and 
ensure that through the school system, there is an education to 
enlighten everyone — First Nations and non-First Nations. 
 
My colleague talked about Judge Arnot and the work that he’s 
done in raising the awareness of the treaties and the importance 
of the treaties. I’ve had an opportunity to speak with him many 
times, and I know how very committed and dedicated he is to 
this work. He’s got lots of people with him who are doing the 
same job. And when you go into the office that he has in 
Saskatoon, it’s going into another world where you have the 
feeling that he’s looking at the big picture. And too often when 
we come into the legislature, we’re worried about the issues of 
today and we aren’t looking at the big picture. So I really would 
like to thank him for his work as well. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Today I was honoured to be in the Assembly when the chief of 
the First Nations spoke. I think that was the probably the first 
time that’s happened in this Assembly, and that’s something 
that’s also going to go down in history. I listened to his words 
when he spoke about the disparities between First Nations and 
non-First Nations, and I know he spoke with heartfelt words. I 
know that that is from the basics of his being, the reason why he 
does what he does as an elected person, the same as all of us do. 
There is no reason to do it for pay. There is no reason to do it 
for any other hope than that tomorrow can be different. 
 
In the travels that I and many of my colleagues have had, we’ve 
seen the disparities between First Nations and non-First Nations 
people. And we are . . . people try and put us in a box saying 
that it doesn’t matter, that we don’t care. 
 
Everybody who is a parent, everybody who has family 
members, everybody who is doing this job cares. And we can’t 
go forward as a province until we are equal and we’re walking 
side by side with every one of our citizens in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House, and again today, members 
mentioned the economic summit of First Nations leaders that’s 
going to come from the Kelowna accord that I understand this 
Premier is talking about. Whenever you have people talking 
about making a difference in First Nations people’s lives, I 
commend it. 
 
But I dare suggest that today in this Assembly we had a number 
of chiefs, a number of leaders in the First Nations nation who 
could give a lot of advice. It doesn’t have to take a lot of time. It 
doesn’t have to be a great big summit. Some of the things we 
can start moving at with today by talking to the people who live 
the life every day that we’re trying to fix. We don’t have to start 
another bureaucracy. 
 
And the member opposite talked a minute ago about the 
wonderful opportunity we have, because in Saskatchewan we 
have a whole lot of First Nations people — the largest 
percentage in Canada — that are ready to fill the skills 
shortages that we have in Saskatchewan. I agree. My only 
concern is we have to ensure that they are educated and skilled 
so they’re ready to take on those challenges. Saskatchewan has 

lost over 8,000 of their young people in the last while. We can’t 
afford to lose any more. We have to be working with all of our 
young people to ensure that there is a future for all of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we talked about treaties, and we talked 
about the past 100 years, and we celebrated our past. 
Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, is a new day and I hope we talk about 
— in the first day of the new century — about new hopes and 
about new dreams and about how everyone is going to make a 
difference in this province. For some of our people, they are 
hoping that the next 100 years is better than the last 100 years 
for them. 
 
Today we’re acknowledging that there is a promise for 
tomorrow. As legislators I believe we have a duty to ensure that 
the mace runner and the beaver pelt that is on the Table will 
influence every one of our decisions. I’ll look forward to the 
following days and weeks and months and years when all of us 
work together to ensure that the promise of Saskatchewan is 
finally filled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Premier, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and celebrate the 
accomplishments made and the historical significance of 
this day, that being the 100th anniversary of the first 
Legislative Assembly sitting; and further, 
 
that this Assembly recognize the importance, 
contributions, and relationship between the treaties and the 
creation of Saskatchewan as a province, by the acceptance 
of the gift of a beaver pelt cushion and beaded runner 
made by Ms. Florence Highway, Pelican Narrows, Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Call in the members for a 
recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:19 until 15:28.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the Premier, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and celebrate the 
accomplishments made and the historical significance of 
this day, that being the 100th anniversary of the first 
Legislative Assembly sitting; and further, 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2006 

that this Assembly recognize the importance, 
contributions, and relationship between the treaties and the 
creation of Saskatchewan as a province by the acceptance 
of the gift of a beaver pelt cushion and beaded runner 
made by Ms. Florence Highway, Pelican Narrows, Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. 

 
Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 50] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Wartman Forbes Prebble 
Crofford Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Taylor Junor Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson Wall Toth 
Elhard McMorris D’Autremont 
Krawetz Draude Hermanson 
Stewart Chisholm Hart 
Harpauer Gantefoer Eagles 
Weekes Huyghebaert Allchurch 
Kirsch Brkich Merriman 
Morgan Kerpan  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
50; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried unanimously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the Assembly for 
a brief introduction of a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members. In 
your gallery, we’ve just been joined by constituent of mine, a 
fairly famous constituent of mine, certainly in our community 
and across the province. Joining us today is our mayor for Swift 
Current, Her Worship Sandy Larson. 
 
Sandy is obviously a leader in our community. But in her career 
with SaskTel, in her vocation and in her avocation, she has been 

a leader. And her leadership has been recently nationally 
recognized. She was recently in Ottawa to receive the Canadian 
Women in Communications Award, among her other 
achievements. And I just wanted to take the chance, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce her to the Assembly. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome her here, to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would also welcome Her 
Worship here. 
 
And recognizing the spirit of harmony that exists in the 
chambers, we should probably leave before it all breaks down. 
And I therefore move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:33.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................863 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................863 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................863 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................863 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................863 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................863 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................863 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................863 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................864 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................864 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................864 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................880 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Symbols Honour Treaties and Shared History 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................864 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................865 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................865 
 Saskatchewan’s First Premier 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................865 
 Women in Government 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................866 
 100th Anniversary Marked by Recurrent Themes 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................866 
 Territorial Administration Building 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................866 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Population Growth 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................867 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................867 
 Waiting Lists for Training 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................868 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................868 
 Treaty Education in Schools 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................869 
 School Attendance Registry 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................870 
 Housing Concerns 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  



 

 Condition of Highway 55 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................870 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2006 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 Bill No. 47 — The Business Names Registration Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................872 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................872 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................872 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Symbolic Gifts Presented on Occasion of 100th Anniversary 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................872 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................873 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................877 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................878 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................880 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


