




















































Hansard: March 30, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 31A  THURSDAY, MARCH 30, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 881 
 March 30, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I have a 
petition to present to the Assembly this afternoon. The petition 
is regarding the drug Avastin and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from, it 
looks like, Saskatoon and Delisle. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I return again today 
to the subject of Highway 32 which runs from the community 
of Cabri through to Leader and is in very rough shape. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and to make necessary repairs to 
Highway 32 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These two pages of petition, Mr. Speaker, are signed by 
individuals from the community of Cree Lake primarily, their 
community being serviced by Highway 32. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Martensville and 
Saskatoon area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition dealing with the government’s decision not to fund 
the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of 
Saskatoon, and I’m happy to be able to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
pages of a petition of citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Warman, 
Vonda, Saskatoon, and Sturgis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are very concerned about the government’s implementation 
of a two-tier health system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon and 
Warman. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition today from constituents who are opposed to the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government not funding the cancer 
drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and Delisle. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Colonsay 
and Asquith. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to read a 
petition on the drug Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also join my 
colleagues on calling the government to fully fund the drug 
Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 
Assembly today and read a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed primarily by 
citizens from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned that the Department of Health officials have 

incorrectly reported the cancer drug Avastin as experimental. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and 
Warman. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to Rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

New petition concerning pay phones at Whitesand 
Regional Park, that’s sessional paper 641; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 7, 64, and 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: is 
management of the department aware of any allegations of 
fraud or other illegal activity within the department or its 
agencies in the year 2002-2003 such as information 
received from employees, former employees, customers or 
clients, suppliers, or others? And if so, what is the nature 
of the activity? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 36 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: how 
did management of the department monitor any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 36 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: did 
management of the department have established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or 
detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 36 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: what 
did management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 36 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2002-2003? And if so, what is 
the nature of this activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 2001-2002 
and 2000-2001. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: is the management 
of the Department of Rural Revitalization aware of any 
allegations of fraud or any other illegal activity within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2002-2003, such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 

 
I also have a similar question for 2002 and 2001. I so present. 
 
And also, I also give notice on day no. 36: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: did the 
management, Department of Rural Revitalization, have 
established programs or controls to negate fraud risks or 
help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2003? 

 
I also have similar questions for 2002 and also 2001. 
 
Also to day no. 36: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: does management 
of the Department of Rural Revitalization have any 
knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or illegal 
activity within the department during the year 2003? 

 
I also have similar questions for 2002, 2001, and 2000. 
 
Also on day no. 36: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: what did the 
management, Department of Rural Revitalization, find as a 
result of its monitoring of any established programs and 
controls to fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2003? 

 
Also similar questions, 2002, 2001, 2000. 
 
Also on day no. 36: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: how did 
management of Rural Revitalization monitor any 
established programs and controls to fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2003? 

Also similar questions, 2002, 2001, 2000. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Public Service 
Commission: how many of the employees who were 
involved in the fraud cases reported by the Department of 
Finance’s news release issued on March 21, 2006, still 
remain employed in the government departments, Crowns, 
agencies, or boards? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure, a great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of this 
Legislative Assembly a number of people that are seated in 
your gallery. 
 
We’ll begin with a young woman, a Regina entrepreneur, who 
recently sought the nomination in Weyburn-Big Muddy and 
acquitted herself very, very well. Her name is Terrill Young, 
and she’s joined us in the Assembly today. Terrill, I wonder if 
you could just give us a wave. I’d like to welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It was a great night in Weyburn the other 
evening. We may hear more, a little bit about that, a little bit 
later on in routine proceedings, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll be 
talking about, no doubt later, talking about the next MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, and he’s joined us in your gallery as well, along with 
his wife. I’d like to welcome, through you, and invite members 
to also welcome Dustin Duncan and his wife Amanda to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very 
pleased today to introduce two special people to me, Mr. 
Speaker. Seated in your gallery are my constituency assistant, 
Shelley Meyer, and her husband, Hans. 
 
Shelley and Hans made the trip down today from still 
snowbound Carrot River to visit their legislature. Mr. Speaker, I 
know that all of us in this legislature and anybody who is 
involved in politics, regardless of where they are, puts a 
tremendous amount of responsibility upon our CAs 
[constituency assistant], and they all do a very, very good job. 
 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

And I’d like to thank Shelley for that today on behalf of all the 
people of Carrot River Valley. And we’d like to welcome them 
here to their legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nominates Candidate for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
spent a lot of great evenings in Weyburn but none finer than the 
one this past Tuesday night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — This past Tuesday the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy nominated their next Sask Party candidate 
and the future MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
It was a standing-room-only of over 400 people that packed 
McKenna Hall. A youthful and energetic crowd selected Dustin 
Duncan as their candidate to represent the Saskatchewan Party 
and certainly to be the next MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
Dustin was one of three excellent candidates, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve met Terrill; the other one was Audrey Trombley. 
 
It’s very significant though, this was the only contested 
nomination of the three major parties that would be running 
down there. I think it does send a sign that the other two parties, 
the Liberal Party and the NDP Party, cannot find two members 
in their party that would want to run against each other to 
represent that particular area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it has something to do with what’s going to happen after 
that by-election because I guess they just didn’t want to take the 
whupping that Dustin is going to be putting on them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Nearly 700 memberships were sold in this 
contested nomination. There was a huge turnout and a buzz in 
the crowd, Mr. Speaker. The buzz in the crowd was people 
ready to roll up their sleeves and go to battle with the only one 
member from the NDP Party that would step forward, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re ready to go to battle and win the next 
by-election in Weyburn-Big Muddy. All they’re waiting for is 
this government to screw up the courage and call it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

North Saskatoon Business Association’s Awards Night 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I, along 
with the Minister of Industry and Resources and the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview, attended the North Saskatoon Business 
Association’s 9th Annual Business Builders Award Banquet. 
And I had the great pleasure of presenting the Team Builder 
Award, sponsored by SaskTel, to the Saskatoon Inn Hotel and 
Conference Centre. 
 
All in all it was a very, very positive evening, Mr. Speaker, with 
a capacity crowd and a palpable feeling of optimism for the 
future. The Business Builder Award recognizes business 
success, hard work, and commitment to excellence. All 
nominees are to be congratulated for their contributions to 
Saskatoon’s and Saskatchewan’s economic viability and 
sustainability. 
 
Other recipients of 2006 Business Builder Awards were The 
Energy Doctor, who received the Job Creation Award 
sponsored by SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology]. Winner of the New Direction Award, 
sponsored by SaskPower, was Perdue Oasis Golf & RV Resort. 
The Management Quality Award, sponsored by Hitachi, went to 
Ecol Laser Services. CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce] sponsored the Small Business Award, and it went 
to Champetre County Wild West Resort. 
 
Winner of the Export Award, sponsored by Nextrade Finance, 
was International Road Dynamics Inc. The Business Builder 
Award, sponsored by ICR, went to Advantage Collision & 
Paint. And, Mr. Speaker, the Member of the Year, sponsored by 
Cameco and Ecol Laser was Brian Hnatiw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the nominees and winners of the 2006 Business 
Builder Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Condolences to Ehman Family 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to offer my condolences to the Ehman family on the recent 
death of Gerry Ehman. Gerry Ehman was born in Cudworth in 
1932. He grew up in Cudworth and Vonda and attended St. 
Peter’s College in Muenster. 
 
His hockey career started in 1950, and in 1952 he turned 
professional. His career lasted 19 years and included over 1,300 
professional hockey games with different teams, including the 
old Edmonton Flyers of the Western Hockey League and five 
teams in the National Hockey League. 
 
He was a member of the Toronto Maple Leafs in 1964 when 
they won the Stanley Cup. 
 
His playing career ended in 1971 with the old California 
Golden Seals. He worked with the St. Louis Blues, then joined 
the New York Islanders in 1976. He was the Islanders’ top 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

scout and assistant general manager, retiring from this position 
in 2002. 
 
One of the players he spotted was Bryan Trottier of Swift 
Current who also had a very successful career in the NHL 
[National Hockey League]. Gerry, along with Bryan, were part 
of the New York Islanders when they won four consecutive 
Stanley Cups in the early 1980s. 
 
Gerry was as solid as a Saskatchewan thoroughbred, which he 
owned and raced in many competitions. Fondly known as Tex, 
he enjoyed spending time with his family at the cabin at Wakaw 
Lake. Gerry Ehman was one of the greats of the NHL and made 
our province proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Don McDonald Named CTV Saskatoon 
Citizen of the Year 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today to honour Don 
McDonald, a constituent of mine who was recently honoured as 
the 2005 CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Saskatoon 
Citizen of the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don is an outstanding example of the 
Saskatchewan spirit of volunteerism and dedication to the 
community. 
 
First and foremost, Don is a piper and has played the bagpipes 
for the North Saskatchewan Regiment Pipes and Drums for 
almost 60 years, taking part in his first parade in 1947. Since 
1993 he has been responsible for organizing the march-in of 
cadets, soldiers, officers, and veterans for Canada’s largest 
indoor Remembrance Day ceremony held every year at the 
Credit Union Centre in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don’s dedication to the city of Saskatoon has 
spanned over 50 years. In the early ’50s he played for the 
Saskatoon Hilltops, and he’s remained a very active member of 
the Hilltops organization ever since. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 
Don is currently president of the Saskatoon Sports Hall of 
Fame, president of the North Saskatchewan Regiment 
Association, and president of the Saskatoon branch of the St. 
John Ambulance as well as serving on the provincial board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Don McDonald, CTV Saskatoon Citizen of the 
Year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

North Saskatoon Business Association’s Awards Night 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
honour that I get to rise today to talk on the North Saskatoon 

Business Association Builders Awards presented last night in 
the city of Saskatoon. This event which was attended by my 
colleague the member from Saskatoon Southeast, this event 
recognizes members of the association who have made 
exceptional achievements in business. 
 
This year president, Shirley Ryan presented the New Direction 
Award to Perdue Oasis Golf and RV Resort owned by Jim 
Scharf Holdings. This link-style golf course has become a jewel 
of rural Saskatchewan. With plans to expand to 27 holes, it will 
surely become a draw for golfers across Western Canada. 
 
The Small Business Award went to Arthur and Therese Denis 
of St. Denis for their vacation ranch, Champetre Country. 
Facing the prospect of economic difficulty on their family farm, 
they chose to make their home a tourist destination and 
welcome guests from across Canada. 
 
Former NSBA [North Saskatoon Business Association] 
president, Bryan Hnatiw was awarded for his contributions 
twice with his company Ecol Laser taking home the 
Management Quality Award, and Hnatiw himself the Member 
of the Year Award. 
 
Other award winners were the Energy Doctor receiving the Job 
Creation Award; the Saskatoon Inn Hotel received the Building 
Team Award; and the Exports Award for the International Road 
Dynamics Inc. 
 
I’d like to say congratulations to all award winners and 
acknowledge the excellent work of the NSBA and president, 
Shirley Ryan, does in fighting for the concerns of Saskatchewan 
business people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Benevolent Spirit 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
incredibly pleased to be speaking today about a young man 
from Meadow Lake. Mr. Speaker, Blake Betker is a 10-year-old 
boy from our community. His grandmother owns a store where 
he tends a table of donated items. Blake sells goods that his 
grandmother and other Meadow Lake residents donate in order 
to raise money for various causes. Many of his items are 
marked at 1 or $2, but many of his customers make a very 
simple donation instead of paying the 1 or $2. He has been a 
salesman since he was seven years old. 
 
A previous year has seen Blake give money to the Door of 
Hope and the Meadow Lake local food bank. Mr. Speaker, he 
has also used funds to purchase toys for hospitalized children or 
those who are in need. This past year Blake chose to donate to a 
fund for the victims of a rare lung disease called LAM 
[lymphangioleiomyomatosis], a disease that has affected a 
family friend. And many of us in Meadow Lake know this 
person and support Blake in his efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when asked why he is so committed to his work, 
Blake simply replied, I have lots of toys, and I don’t need them 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

anymore. So instead of keeping the money that I make, I give it 
to people who might need it more than I do. I just want to help 
people in need and maybe make them a little bit happier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite members to join with me in 
congratulating young Blake Betker on his charitable work and 
to wish him luck in all his business endeavours. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Premier’s Annual Address to Regina Business Community 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 
Premier delivered his annual address to the Regina business 
community. He talked about various issues — education, 
immigration, taxes. But this year he had something new to 
share: his dismal population record. The loss of people and jobs 
threatens the government’s ability to pay for programs and 
services such as the cancer drug Avastin. Two tiered health is 
alive and well under the NDP in Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder if he berated the business community on their plan to 
take over the most profitable part of the economy as he did in 
his 2003 campaign fundraising letter. The Premier talked of his 
resolve when it comes to taxes. The people have certainly seen 
that resolve. He raised the PST [provincial sales tax] to 7 per 
cent, and he has had a steely resolve to never lower it again. 
 
He again demonstrated his steely tax resolve by refusing to 
lower education property taxes on farm land for the last three 
years. He abandoned his promise until half the RMs [rural 
municipality] refused to pay the tax to the school boards — a 
steely resolve to maintain the status quo, a status quo of 
destructive NDP policies that hurt people, farmers, and 
children. 
 
When the Premier met with that arch-demon of the NDP, US 
[United States] Vice-president Dick Cheney, he talked of a lack 
of confidence. The oil and uranium industries have shown 
confidence in Saskatchewan, so it must be the Premier who has 
no confidence. The people of Saskatchewan have confidence in 
this province because they know they’ll soon be able to choose 
a new government for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Problems at Prairie Rubber Corporation in Assiniboia 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
sent a letter to the Minister of the Environment on October 20, 
2005 advising about the tire plant in Assiniboia and the issues 
associated with it and forwarded another copy of the letter 
stating what the tire company needed to stay in business. I 
would like to ask the minister what the status of that request is 

today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation is operated as a steward 
program much like the oil, reused oil operations and now the 
new paint one that we’re working with. They had their annual 
meeting yesterday and a board of directors meeting. The issue 
of Prairie Rubber in Assiniboia was one of the topics that was 
there for discussion. One of the issues relates to some 
supplemental monies that they are providing to that particular 
operation and they’ve agreed that that would continue for 
another 90 days as people try to sort out the financial issues that 
relate to that Assiniboia operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the 90-day option is 
not on as far as the tire company is concerned. Mr. Speaker, this 
government talks about a green and prosperous economy. And 
yet because if its inaction over the past number of months this 
tire plant will likely close down tomorrow. So much for green 
and prosperous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier says young people need to be told of 
the success that is to be found in Saskatchewan. Well tomorrow 
there will be 40 young workers that will likely be looking for 
jobs elsewhere. So much for his success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I wrote to the minister’s office about this 
problem five months ago — five months ago — why did he or 
his predecessor not do anything? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire 
Corporation — which is a steward program with primarily car 
dealers and tire dealers as their board of directors — have a 
contract with Prairie Rubber, a private corporation that is 
owned by some of the local people and I think some other 
investors from other places. 
 
They have been in negotiations around some of those particular 
fees. But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire 
Corporation, which has representation of two people from 
Saskatchewan Environment, has been working on this before 
the letter that the member sent opposite and all through this 
particular time. And, Mr. Speaker, what really is going on is 
that that particular operation is having some difficulties, and 
they need to work as a corporation to make sure that they live 
up to the terms of the agreement they’ve entered into with the 
overall program. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to 
work with those local people as they sort this one out. 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s typical NDP; 
try and blame it on somebody else. Blame it on the 
Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation. They won’t take any of 
the blame over there themselves. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us why Saskatchewan 
sends scrap tires to Minnesota and lets a Saskatchewan plant 
close down? Can the minister explain why it makes more sense 
to send our scrap tires to Minnesota while killing jobs in my 
constituency? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the overall tire industry is in 
charge of this particular program. And one of the big issues is, 
to do what that member wants and what some of the people 
within that corporation want would mean to increase the 
amount of charge on every tire sold in Saskatchewan, but 
especially the large tires that are available for farmers. Farmers’ 
and off-the-road tires, those are the ones that are the most 
difficult to recycle. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what their job is, is to review as a 
stewardship industry the balance between the consumers and 
who they are selling their tires to with this recycling program. 
Mr. Speaker, they are very capable people. We’re very much 
willing to work with them as they sort this one out. They’ve 
been meeting regularly since the problems arose and they will 
continue to work at it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the plant in 
Assiniboia has been stockpiling tires and there’s quite a 
mountain of them. And now because that NDP government 
failed to lift a finger to help, this plant is on the verge of 
shutting down. To the minister: what are the plans for the 1 
million tires that this plant recycled in a year? What plans does 
the minister have for that mountain of tires that are there once 
the plant shuts down? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire 
Corporation uses various contractors to deal with particular tires 
and they will continue to negotiate in a fair manner with the 
different companies that are involved. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that the member opposite may want to 
suggest what he wants to happen with that particular 
corporation in his community and practically make some 

suggestions for the local people there, because this is a major 
issue around the balance between what consumers are going to 
be paying for tires — that extra amount — versus what kind of 
management and company is contracting with the overall 
corporation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we want to work with the people who are 
the experts in this tire business and they are going to come 
forward with a solution. We will respond when they have 
suggestions. And it may be an increase for everybody, but we 
want to make sure that they are doing it from the industry and 
not us stepping in and forcing private business to do something 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s ironic the minister 
would say when suggestions are forwarded. It was five months 
ago that I sent the letter complete with suggestions to the 
minister and nothing has happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, a newspaper today, a columnist said, 
“We are experiencing a jobless boom.” A jobless boom. Most 
of the young people are voting with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. I 
would ask members to allow the member to put the question. 
Member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, a newspaper columnist 
said, “We are experiencing a jobless boom.” Young people are 
voting with their feet. 

 
And we heard yesterday, 8,800-plus young people between 15 
and 29 left Saskatchewan in the past year. And here we have a 
company, tire company that’s making a go of it in its plants in 
other jurisdictions around North America. But because of NDP 
policies and their attitude —they don’t seem to care — this 
plant will be closing tomorrow. This NDP government has 
frittered away the last six months not doing a thing to assist 
that. Now they have 24 hours. 
 
Will the minister at least try something in the next 24 hours to 
assist this plant so it doesn’t have to close its doors at the end of 
tomorrow? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what is always difficult is 
when members do not accurately portray what has happened. In 
December, in December the Saskatchewan Scrap Tire 
Corporation and this particular operation agreed to an interim 
increase of 50 cents per tire, which was an increase from $1 to 
$1.50 — that was a 50 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, that 
particular amount was then to be evaluated as to what should be 
happened. That was done in December. 
 
The member just opposite said nothing was done. Well that’s 
not accurate at all. 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Safety Issues Related to Garbage Dumps on Crown Lands 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also to the Minister of the Environment. My 
question is, what policies or safety protocols does his 
government have in place with respect to garbage dumps on 
Crown lands? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to 
Crown land, garbage disposal is usually controlled by lease 
agreements or miscellaneous use permits, and these agreements 
would normally require fencing of sites. However some of the 
northern landfill sites don’t have leases related to them. The 
people set up the dump sites on Crown land and so some of 
these are not licensed. 
 
This policy came into place in 1986. Some of the ones that were 
pre-existing to that time have not come forward and been part of 
this system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that the current 
policy dates back to 1986. And I think it’s time that this 
government had a look at their policy dealing with garbage 
dumps on Crown land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an unregulated garbage dump in northern 
Saskatchewan at Points North led to the loss of life of a young 
man from Oshawa, Ontario. Last November, Kenton Carnegie, 
an engineering student, went for a walk and never came back, 
Mr. Speaker. And his family has never been told why. I quote 
from a CBC story aired last night on The National, where Kim 
Carnegie, Kenton’s father, said, and I quote: 
 

I have an anger in me that I have never felt before. I have 
an anger burning inside of me that I have a hard time 
keeping track of my emotions. I just feel it could have 
been prevented and that’s what bothers me the most. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this garbage dump on Crown land attracted 
wolves. To the minister, Mr. Speaker: what policy is he going to 
put in place to prevent this ever happening again? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the situation is that the 
coroner — and this is the new provincial coroner that we have 
instituted in this province — is investigating this particular 
death. They’re gathering all of the information from the local 
people, from the police, and for others that are investigating this. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a very difficult spot commenting on 
the actual cause of death — which is the task of the coroner to 
determine — until his report is completed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are quite a number of factors involved 
here. And some of the information that’s come forward so far 
doesn’t have all of the pieces in that. We need to wait for the 
final report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, last night the coroner also appeared 
on the news item and she felt that there was little doubt as to the 
cause of young Kenton Carnegie’s death. And, Mr. Speaker, 
wolf attacks are not . . . This was not an isolated incident. 
 
Last fall near the Key Lake mine an employee went out for a 
jog and was attacked by a wolf and had to wrestle the wolf to 
the ground. And he only escaped with his life because his 
co-workers came along and helped him get rid of the wolf, Mr. 
Speaker. So Cameco took some action. They called in wildlife 
officials from the Department of Environment. They looked at 
the situation. The officials suggested that Cameco fence their 
garbage dump, and they have done that, Mr. Speaker. They no 
longer have a wolf problem in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, to the minister, why is the minister not protecting 
people? Why won’t he put policies in place that deal with 
garbage dumps on Crown land? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member in his 
question actually answered his question. Saskatchewan 
Environment does work with mining companies, local 
communities in the North around planning and designing some 
of these landfill sites, and then steps are taken. But, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the parts of northern 
Saskatchewan where many of these communities are located are 
in wilderness areas where there are substantial wild animal 
populations. Local people understand that there are risks 
involved with this. Visitors that are coming to these places, I 
think, should have some understanding of this. The employers 
who work in these places need to make sure that they have 
predator plans for their employees and for everything else. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll work with all of those groups as we go forward 
with this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, Cameco had a garbage dump on 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

their own leased land and they were proactive and they 
recognized the problem and they did something about. But there 
are a number of unregulated garbage dumps on Crown land in 
northern Saskatchewan where nothing has been done. The case 
in point, the one at Points North, Mr. Speaker. It’s been four 
months since that young Kenton Carnegie was killed and 
nothing has been done to this date, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I quote again from the story on CBC last night which 
stated, and I quote: 
 

Human negligence and [the] lack [of] environmental 
enforcement helped set the deadly trap. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Kim Carnegie, Kenton’s father, still has no 
answers. He said: 
 

I’m concerned with the Saskatchewan Government. I 
guess we’re angry that we lost our son. That’s a tough 
thing. And we’re angry that his brother and sister will have 
to go on without him. 

 
To the minister, Mr. Speaker: why won’t he take some action in 
this case, put some regulations in place so we don’t have 
another tragic accident as happened in the Kenton Carnegie 
case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all of us recognize that this 
is a tragedy when a young person who is in the start of his 
career is taken from us like this. And I have the same concerns 
and I know all Saskatchewan people’s hearts go out to this 
particular family. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we will continue to do is work with 
local communities. The Saskatchewan Environment is going 
and helping those communities that end up having their landfill 
sites in places that have not been appropriately planned and 
approved. We’re going with sites inspections. We’re going 
towards a system of making sure that they have permits for 
these things. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are many unregulated sites in the North, 
and we need to continue to work at those particular ones. But 
everybody who lives in the North should recognize that one of 
the advantages of being there is the wilderness; the other side of 
that is that it can be quite dangerous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has admitted that they 
need to do more work in this area. Mr. Speaker, the wolf 
population is growing throughout northern Saskatchewan, and 
in fact it’s growing and becoming a problem in the forest fringe 
areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why doesn’t this minister just take some positive action here, 

require that these unregulated garbage dumps be fenced, so that 
we don’t have tragic incidents as we’ve had last fall, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we will do is work 
with local communities around what’s the most appropriate 
facility for those particular communities. And that’s what we 
need to do. Because, Mr. Speaker, sometimes the communities 
aren’t large enough to pay for all of the costs. One of the 
questions becomes, how do we deal with particular garbage? 
Our goal is to have a minimal waste system for the whole 
province, and we know we have some work to do in this 
particular area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moosomin. 
 

Number of Inmates in Correctional Centres 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
the Saskatchewan Party’s crime committee went on tours of the 
Prince Albert Correctional Centre and the Pine Grove 
Correctional Centre. And one of the biggest concerns expressed 
to us by the staff was overcrowding. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] Correctional Centre, the centre is housing 
40 more inmates than the capacity allows. And at Pine Grove, 
they’re housing almost 20 more inmates than capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these concerns were also echoed recently by the 
Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union. 
The union says, Mr. Speaker, overcrowding leads to an 
increased threat of violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is: why is this NDP 
government putting the safety of workers in our correctional 
centres at risk? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think all members of the public should know and 
understand that our correctional facilities are secure facilities 
and are built for the purpose of housing offenders sentenced by 
the courts to those facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current number of offenders in the province 
are determined by the courts. Once an individual is sentenced to 
the courts it is the responsibility of the Department of 
Corrections and Public Safety to fulfill the order put before 
them by the courts. Mr. Speaker, the numbers currently in the 
system are at an all-time high and they are high right across the 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

country. And it is a situation in which we are watching very 
carefully and making changes to our direction in order to deal 
with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
admission that numbers in our correctional systems are at an 
all-time high is certainly revealing and that’s a concern that the 
Saskatchewan government employees’ union is saying . . . 
they’re saying that overcrowding combined with a lack of 
opportunities for inmates is a dangerous mix. Barry 
Nowoselsky of the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union] says, and I quote: 
 

Many inmates serve ‘dead-time’ — and dead time added 
to overcrowding increases the threat of violence in the 
centres, putting both staff and inmates at . . . risk. 

 
Mr. Speaker, many people in our jails suffer from addictions, 
health issues, and lack job and life skills that contribute to crime 
and act as barriers to rehabilitation. Without proper 
rehabilitations people are more likely to reoffend once they get 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question again to the minister is this: why is 
the NDP government encouraging repeat offenders by not 
addressing the issue of dead time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the number of inmates that are incarcerated in any 
facility is as a result of being placed there by the courts. Mr. 
Speaker, there are programs within the centres. But as those 
counts go up of course there is not adequate programming to 
deal with the number of offenders that are currently in the 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the correctional system is manned by very highly 
qualified staff. They deliver programs throughout the system. 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to thank the staff for 
their dedication and hard work in dealing with the high counts 
that we have currently in our correctional system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate but we again see 
today that this government, rather than accepting responsibility, 
continues to blame someone else. Let’s review the situation, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the P.A. Correctional Centre, 
inmates are sleeping in gymnasiums and on the floor. At Pine 
Grove, women are double bunking in visiting rooms and the 
boardroom outside of secure areas. 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that this NDP government has cut 
program after program over the last decade, including two 
community training residences in Regina and North Battleford 
in 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SGEU says this is unacceptable. The question 
to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is this: why is this government 
ignoring these critical problems and, Mr. Speaker, in some 
cases actually contributing to making these problems worse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to inform the member that we are dealing with 
this issue. He may well be aware that this government has 
announced a new correctional facility in Regina being built. It’s 
going to cost approximately $47 million and house an 
additional 215 offenders, Mr. Speaker. We’re at the point of 
tendering this new facility, Mr. Speaker, and that will 
significantly help deal with the problem. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Reporting of Escape from Regina Correctional Centre 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, that’s all fine and good but the new 
upgrade at the Regina Correctional Centre is just taking the 
place of an old one that’s going to be torn down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue arises regarding our correctional 
system. It is our understanding through recent media reports 
that an inmate escaped from the Regina jail on Sunday. Mr. 
Speaker, the media was not alerted of this escape until Tuesday 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s two days between the time the inmate 
escaped and when the public was notified. A question to the 
minister, Mr. Speaker: can the minister explain to this 
Assembly why the public was not notified about an escaped 
inmate for two days and is the minister satisfied with this 
reporting process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When an escape 
occurs at the provincial correctional centre, Mr. Speaker, the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] are immediately 
notified and it is the purview of the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police to notify the public, Mr. Speaker. In this particular case 
there was a communication error. That communication error has 
been acknowledged by the RCMP. And, Mr. Speaker, no, we’re 
never satisfied when there are errors in the system. But it was 
identified, it’s been noted, and been improved upon, Mr. 
Speaker. 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it appears this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that the blame thrower is working well 
again. First of all we see, Mr. Speaker, the RCMP are blamed. 
It’s the court’s blame. When is this government going to accept 
responsibility for its own actions, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, is 
it appropriate that the public safety is in jeopardy because of the 
inaction of this government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister: Mr. Minister, do you 
find this acceptable? 

 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to state his 
question through the Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
stated earlier to the member, we’re in the process of building a 
new facility at the Regina Correctional Centre and we are in the 
process of putting 24 new beds in place at the Pine Grove 
institution. We expect those beds to be able to be opened as 
early as May 3. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 

The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, today I stand to officially 
proclaim The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act, 
effective April 1, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — This Act will enhance the ability of 
parents, caregivers, and others to support a narrow segment of 
youth with extremely serious substance abuse issues. These are 
youth who are at risk to themselves or others, Mr. Speaker, and 
who are resistant to traditional interventions. 
 
The Act includes involuntary detoxification and stabilization 
services for youth age 12 to 17 through an order from two 
physicians. Once ordered, Mr. Speaker, youth would be 
required to undergo involuntary detoxification and stabilization 
within a facility that offers a safe and protective environment 
for a period of up to five days. In the interim, Mr. Speaker, 
youth will be housed in the provincial secure youth detox 
centre, a unit created for this purpose at the Paul Dojack Centre 
in Regina. 
 
There is a possibility of an extension determined by physicians 
for two additional five-day periods. The youth would be 
prohibited from leaving during that time using acceptable 
methods of intervention as defined by the physicians. 
 
This Act includes provisions for involuntary community orders 

of up to 30 days that would be issued either before or after 
involuntary detoxification in a facility or as an alternative to it. 
Mr. Speaker, these provisions require an order from two 
physicians for the safety and protection of youth requiring 
involuntary detoxification and stabilization. We understand that 
the rights of the youth in question are of the utmost importance 
and will ensure that their rights are protected. We will also keep 
parents informed of the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that invoking the powers of this 
Act will be something that parents, advocates of children’s 
rights, or the health care system will take lightly. In fact I view 
it as a last resort when all other options have failed. We are 
confident that, in most cases, other available options for 
detoxification and stabilization will be successful. All other 
avenues will be pursued before authorizing that a youth will be 
apprehended against his or her will. 
 
As we move forward to implement this legislation, we are 
breaking new ground. There are always challenges associated 
with innovation, but we will continue to work with our partners 
in law enforcement, Justice, and Community Resources to 
refine this process. We will monitor the use of this Act closely, 
using an evaluation mechanism to determine the efficacy of the 
approach. Thus we can assess what steps we need to take in the 
future. 
 
My personal goal, Mr. Speaker, and that of our Premier and of 
the province is for a province where every child has the best 
possible opportunity to grow up free from addictions. I believe 
that the youth detoxification and stabilization Act provides one 
more tool to ensure this occurs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
rise today to speak to the ministerial statement. I want to thank 
the minister once again. I got this about five minutes before we 
entered the House, and I just want to thank him for the courtesy 
of sending it over. 
 
You know once again, Mr. Speaker, we see this government 
being reactive instead of proactive. You know once again we 
see that they needed to be prodded and pushed in a direction in 
order to act on these. The Sask Party supported this Act as it 
went through the Legislative Assembly. In fact it was the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena who first pushed through a 
private member’s Bill and pressured this government to take 
action on this issue. 
 
I also need to say, Mr. Speaker, that that push and action took 
almost two years. And yet again like so many issues involving 
drug treatment and addiction, youth issues facing our youth, this 
NDP government did nothing until they were pressured, 
pressured, and pressured, not only by the Saskatchewan Party 
but the press. 
 
The Minister of Health once said that he was aware of these 
addiction issues since 1998. The minister of Education said it 
was just a passing fancy that the children were going through. 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

In fact when this issue came before the legislature, the former 
minister of DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment] indicated her hesitation to adopt any rules at 
youth that might require involuntary treatment. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to quote from that minister from Hansard, quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a balance of opinion on 
both sides of the question regarding mandatory treatment. 
But I think I would fall on the side of people and parents 
who believe that better to err on the side of protection of 
youth than to have a disaster as a result of not having done 
that. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, then her department reviewed the 
issue for months before suddenly deciding that the 
Saskatchewan Party was on the right track and, after all, 
adopting the policy. Mr. Speaker, they had to see that other 
governments such as Alberta were working on this legislation. 
 
That is getting pretty familiar pattern with this government — 
to be reactive instead of proactive. In fact there’s no doubts of 
mine and some people in this province who have to work with 
these kids with addiction problems that we wouldn’t have seen 
any action on this issue were it not for the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena and the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the people in this province know that 
it was this NDP government who shut down SADAC 
[Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission] and that 
it was this Premier, this Premier, who personally shut down 
White Spruce which was an addiction treatment centre that was 
world-class. 
 
Mr. Speaker, five days is not a long time in addiction treatment. 
It’s not a long time either in detox. It concerns me, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will have the beds to move them from this one stage to 
the next stage. In the city of Calgary alone, Mr. Speaker, they 
have 60 beds for children aged 13 to 18. Mr. Speaker, not only 
are these detox beds; they are one-year treatment centre beds. 
Mr. Speaker, in the city of Calgary alone they have far more 
beds than the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’ve got three times the population. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Somebody’s beaking that they have three 
times the population, Mr. Speaker. Well that’s just all and fine. 
Maybe that one would like to come with me on some of these 
tours and speak to the children and the parents of these children 
who have been asking this government to get proactive and to 
do something about the children that are dying in our cities and 
in our province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to say that we’re going to do 
something, that we’re going to put nickels and dimes towards 
this issue, that we’re really going to look at it. We have no 
interactive approach to these issues at all. 
 
[14:30] 
 
What about the parents, Mr. Speaker, of a 13-year-old child 
that’s sent to Prince Albert, and they live in Shaunavon or 
Estevan or Carrot River? Are there any provisions in there for 
the parents to be able to visit with the children? None. Mr. 

Speaker, what about the family assistance for travelling to get 
there with their child, to be with their child? Is there any type of 
respite care given while the children are in these facilities? 
None. Mr. Speaker, are there any counselling provisions made 
for the parents to assist them in dealing with these children 
when they come home? None. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s disappointing that we always 
have to be — from this government — reactive instead of 
proactive. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
be tabling responses to written questions no. 599 to 630 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 599 to 630 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the close of 
my remarks I will make a formal motion of condolence to note 
the passing of Frederick Neibrandt. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Premier request leave for 
condolences? Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Frederick Neibrandt 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated, I will be making the formal motion of condolence to 
note the passing of Frederick Neibrandt at the close of my 
remarks. And the motion, I understand, will be seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fred Neibrandt passed away on November 21, 
1987. And so clearly, Mr. Speaker, today’s tribute in this 
legislature is long overdue. 
 
Mr. Neibrandt was born on August 26, 1900, at Evenyer, which 
at that time was before the foundation of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It was in fact at that time in the North-West 
Territories. 
 
In his 87 years, Fred Neibrandt’s interests and occupations were 
many and varied. He was a teacher, farmer, a businessman, a 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

construction foreman, and a CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] member of this Legislative Assembly, representing 
the constituency of Yorkton. 
 
He also did his share of travelling, but always returning to the 
Yorkton area. He studied at the University of Manitoba and 
then returned to Yorkton to teach. In 1924 Fred was married to 
Lillian Bailey. 
 
In the 1930s in the midst of the Great Depression, Fred 
travelled to the United States and worked in Detroit, Michigan, 
for a time at General Motors. His experiences during the 
Depression, Mr. Speaker, clearly had a lasting influence on 
Fred Neibrandt. As a rookie MLA here in this legislature in the 
government of Tommy Douglas, Fred used the occasion of his 
maiden speech in this Assembly to reacquaint members with the 
hardships of the Depression. He spoke passionately about 
witnessing working people standing in lines, waiting for jobs 
that never materialized or standing instead in relief lines. Those 
experiences instilled in Fred a commitment to social and 
political activism. 
 
He began his political life as a CCF constituency president and 
provincial councillor. He served as MLA for Yorkton from 
1956 to 1960. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his life and career away from the political arena 
offered no fewer opportunities for service, and Fred Neibrandt 
seized them enthusiastically. Even toward the end of his life, 
the retired farmer maintained a large vegetable and flower 
garden with most of his produce given away to friends and 
residents of the Yorkton nursing home and to senior citizens’ 
teas. 
 
A man of many interests, talents, and pursuits, the community 
of Yorkton he served as MLA was perhaps his most passionate 
pursuit. And so, Mr. Speaker, by leave of this Legislative 
Assembly, I move, seconded by the member of Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Frederick Neibrandt, who passed away on November 1, 
1987, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1956 until 1960, representing the constituency of Yorkton 
for the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. Mr. 
Neibrandt was born on August 26, 1900, at Evenyer, in 
what was then the Northwest Territories. 

 
Mr. Neibrandt attended the West Ebenezer School and 
completed high school at the Yorkton Collegiate Institute. 
He studied for two years at the University of Manitoba 
before returning to train as a teacher at the Yorkton normal 
school. Mr. Neibrandt married Lillian Bailey on February 
6, 1924. They had two children. 
 
Mr. Neibrandt’s employment history included a variety of 
careers. For much of it, he was active in the family farm 
operation. He also spent time as a teacher, a salesman, a 
construction foreman, and working in a General Motors 

plant. In his spare time, he pursued several successful 
business ventures. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Neibrandt was an active participant 
in his community. His involvement extended from the 
Yorkton Chamber of Commerce and the Hudson Bay Rail 
association to the Rhein Curling Club. Mr. Neibrandt 
served as chairman of the agricultural committee of the 
Yorkton Board of Trade and as a school trustee. The 
Yorkton Co-operative Association also benefited from his 
tenure as chairman and director. 
 
Mr. Neibrandt’s involvement in politics began at the local 
level. He served as the president of the Yorkton CCF 
federal constituency and as a councillor for the provincial 
party. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member of 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for 
Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour to second the motion of 
condolence that has been put forward by the Premier this 
afternoon. Mr. Speaker, as noted by the Premier, the date of 
death of Mr. Neibrandt was a long time ago; it was in fact on 
November 1, 1987, so it’s been awhile. Normally we recognize 
people who have passed away who have been former members 
quite quickly, but notification of this Assembly has to take 
place of course by family members and others. And it has now 
taken place, and it’s excellent that we recognize the contribution 
of every individual, no matter how long ago they have passed 
away, if that has not taken place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that Mr. Neibrandt was born near the 
community of Ebenezer. Ebenezer now is a community in 
Canora-Pelly constituency. And in fact I note that, you know, as 
a young man he was very active in the Rhein Curling Club, a 
curling club that still is active today. So obviously the 
involvement of an individual like Mr. Neibrandt in so many 
things, it’s with great interest that I look at the number of 
occupations and the number of interests that Mr. Neibrandt had 
over his 87 years. 
 
He was a teacher. He was a salesman. He was a construction 
foreman, worker at a General Motors plant, a farmer, and of 
course a politician — a wide-range of responsibilities that this 
gentleman undertook. 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

As indicated by the Premier, he was involved for I believe it’s 
one term from 1956 to 1960 as the CCF representative of the 
Yorkton constituency and was replaced by the Liberal 
candidate, Bernard Gallagher, in 1960. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that the gentleman was very involved in the 
community. He was a very active member of the Yorkton 
Chamber of Commerce, the Yorkton Board of Trade, and, 
interesting also, a person very active in the Hudson Bay Rail 
association. And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that still 
continues. And many individuals in east central, and more so 
northeastern part of this province still want to continue the need 
to be able to have an access route for shipping products directly 
to the Port of Churchill through the Hudson Bay Rail 
association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, I’m grateful to the Assembly for putting 
forward this motion to recognize something that has not taken 
place in the last 19 years but we’re doing that today. And I 
extend my condolences to the family that lost one of their 
family members. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
privileged this afternoon to also join in the tribute to the 
Neibrandt family with the Premier and the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
I had the opportunity of meeting and speaking with Mr. 
Neibrandt during my early years in preparation to serve as a 
member of the legislature, as well as having an opportunity to 
meet and visit with Mr. Neibrandt and members of his family as 
we were busy preparing our campaigns in that area, but also 
when we were involved in some of the sporting events. 
 
I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly speaking a little bit 
about Mr. Neibrandt’s involvement with the curling club. But 
Mr. Neibrandt also had a passion for sport and was much 
involved with some of the organizational work that took place 
in the Rhein-Ebenezer area around the sport of fastball of which 
both . . . I know the member from Canora-Pelly and I would 
have attended some of those sports days in the Rhein area. And 
Mr. Neibrandt would have been a strong supporter I would 
expect of our team at that time because the member from 
Canora-Pelly at that time was playing with the 
Margo-Invermay-Rama Rams is what they were — MIR Rams. 
 
And at that point in time, I can remember one ball game of 
course that we were at where Mr. Neibrandt was cheering 
feverishly for our team only because he had recently been 
defeated by a Liberal candidate in that area. Of course he 
wouldn’t have known Mr. Krawetz’s politics at that point at all 
but knew that he wasn’t a bad . . . was a pretty good pitcher and 
wasn’t very happy when the member from Canora-Pelly struck 
out the member from Yorkton on a couple of occasions. So Mr. 
Neibrandt was clearly not very pleased with that exercise. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as has been mentioned, 
Fred, Mr. Neibrandt, was a very, very good farmer, a very 

progressive farmer and took great pride in the many crops that 
he grew in that area of the province, was in many ways a 
pioneer in some of the, some of the new varieties of grains that 
were grown in that area of the province or that region of the 
province. 
 
And of course, because of his strong, keen interest in 
agriculture, we found him involved in things like the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool where he served as a delegate, where 
he served on the boards of trade — the agriculture boards of 
trade — was very active in some of the 4-H programs that came 
into the community, was very actively involved in helping build 
the work of the exhibition association which is a very 
prominent event in our city today. And Mr. Neibrandt was a 
part of that. 
 
The member from Canora-Pelly talked a little bit about his 
involvement and engagement on the Hudson Bay Route 
Association which remains even today a very strong link to the 
Port of Churchill. Mr. Neibrandt knew the importance of, the 
value of grain transportation and was actively involved in the 
work in building a strong railway network and also a link to the 
Port of Churchill. 
 
But I best know Mr. Neibrandt, Fred Neibrandt, Mr. Speaker, 
for his dedicated work to the party. There was never an 
occasion where we needed to engage his efforts to put together 
a event, a party event in the community or in the area, of which 
Fred Neibrandt wouldn’t provide some of that leadership. There 
was never an occasion where we needed to renew many of our 
memberships or when we had a local event in our community 
where we needed somebody to do some of the canvassing, some 
fundraising for us, and on every occasion that there was, Fred 
would be the first to put up his hand to volunteer the work in 
making the party stronger. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And so I want to join with those, Mr. Speaker, today who have 
spoken about Fred’s life and to extend my appreciation as the 
member from the constituency of Yorkton because Fred was 
very highly respected by the members of our community. They 
spoke very highly of his work. And I’m simply proud to say 
that I have the opportunity to sit in this Assembly today — 
based on much of the work that he did in pioneering and laying 
the path for those of us who followed from our constituency — 
to come to this Assembly and to be able to provide leadership in 
a variety of different ways. 
 
So to Fred’s family who are still in Yorkton . . . The sons are 
still in Yorkton today. One works for the city of Yorkton; the 
other is involved in some work on the farm yet and also owns a 
business venture in the community. I want to extend my 
appreciation to their family for giving us Fred Neibrandt, both 
to this Assembly — who represented the constituency of 
Yorkton in a very significant way — and also to the fact that he 
did such tremendous work in ensuring that the strength of our 
own party association has been built on the work that he has 
done. 
 
So this afternoon I join with the Premier and the member from 
Canora-Pelly in expressing my condolences to the family and 
my appreciation for the tremendous contributions that he’s 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

made, and not only to this Assembly but to the province of 
Saskatchewan and to the constituency of Yorkton and area. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for 
Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, Frederick 
Neibrandt, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to his community, his constituency, 
and to the province. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move another 
condolence motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

Gordon Taylor Snyder 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the close of 
these remarks, I will make a formal motion of condolence to 
note the passing of Gordon Snyder. And I understand the 
motion again will be seconded by the member of Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon Snyder was my own MLA for many, 
many years. In fact in all my formative years as a young person 
growing up in Moose Jaw and for years beyond that, Gord 
Snyder had a significant role in teaching me who and what an 
MLA is and does. 
 
I knew that when I came to represent the riding of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow — first Moose Jaw South as Gord Snyder 
represented it for many years, and then Moose Jaw Wakamow 
in 1986 — I knew that coming into this legislature I had some 
very large shoes to fill, both literally and figuratively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon Snyder, before he was ever a member of 
this legislature, before he was ever an active politician, and for 
the whole of his life, was a devoted family man — a husband to 
his wife Anita for 55 years and an extremely loving and caring 
father, grandfather, and in latter years, great-grandfather. 
 
For all of we who knew Gordon, we knew he was an avid, avid 
fisherman — loved his cottage at Buffalo Pound. He was a 
gifted storyteller which perhaps explains why he was such an 
avid fisherman or why he convinced us all he was a very good 
fisherman. He was a man with a great sense of humour. But I 

think above all else, a man with an unfailing commitment to 
other people whether it were his colleagues in the work site or 
his constituents or to the general public of Saskatchewan, an 
unfailing commitment to people. 
 
Gord Snyder was born in Moose Jaw in 1924. He served as a 
navigator in the Royal Canadian Air Force during World War 
II. After the war, like his father before him, he worked as an 
engineer on the Canadian Pacific railroad and became an active 
member of the Brotherhood of Firemen and Enginemen union 
local. 
 
Gord was first elected as a CCF MLA in Moose Jaw in the 
government of Tommy Douglas in 1960 and always, Mr. 
Speaker, regarded himself as a proud, proud foot soldier in the 
battle for medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gord Snyder would represent the people of Moose 
Jaw for the next 22 years as a member of this Legislative 
Assembly. When the New Democratic Party returned to power 
in 1971 under the leadership of Allan Blakeney, the new 
premier had no doubt as to who he would take to place in the 
Labour portfolio. And, Mr. Speaker, from 1971 to 1982, 
Gordon Snyder served as the Minister of Labour in the 
government of Premier Allan Blakeney and was the only 
Labour minister during that government’s entire tenure. 
 
In this role Gordon Snyder continued Saskatchewan’s national 
and continental leadership in progressive social policy. In 1972, 
under the leadership and the direction of Gordon Snyder, 
Saskatchewan passed the first occupational health and safety 
Act, not only in Canada but in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In addition to creating the model for 
occupational health and safety protections that exist today, the 
Act gave workers the right for the very first time to refuse 
dangerous work. It may seem unusual to many of us today, but 
prior to 1972 that right did not exist for working people. Such, 
Mr. Speaker, is the lasting and far-reaching influence of the life 
and the work of Gordon Snyder. 
 
Another of Gordon’s notable achievements was the complete 
revamping of workers’ compensation in Saskatchewan, 
changing it from a system that saw the government pay out 
lump sums for permanent injuries to one that was based on 
income replacement with the focus on rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Gord Snyder’s tenure of Minister of Labour 
in this province began in 1971, Saskatchewan had the third 
lowest minimum wage among all of the provinces. By 1982, at 
the end of Gord Snyder’s tenure, Saskatchewan had the highest 
single-tier minimum wage in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Gordon Snyder created a 
legacy that every working man and woman in Saskatchewan, 
indeed in Canada and even across North America, has benefited 
from. He left as his work from this Assembly a legacy that will 
endure for a generation yet to come. 
 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I move the formal motion, let me say 
of Gord Snyder and of his legacy, there is one thing about Gord 
that for those of us who knew him will not ever be captured in 
print and that, Mr. Speaker, will be the sound of Gordon 
Snyder’s voice — this deep, confident, assured, resonant, but 
always compassionate voice. And, Mr. Speaker, the last 
opportunity I had to speak with Gordon before his passing, the 
voice had not changed in all those years. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
his voice we heard the character of the man — deep, strong, 
assured, but always, always compassionate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We mourn the loss of a good friend of this province, a good 
friend of working people, a good friend of this legislature, a 
good friend of his family, a good friend of many of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so by leave of the legislature, I will move the formal 
motion. I move, seconded by the member of Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Gordon Taylor Snyder who passed away on December 
10, 2005 was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1960 until 1982 representing the constituency of Moose 
Jaw South for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Snyder was born on December 17, 1924 in Moose 
Jaw. He grew up on the family farm, began his schooling 
at the Ross Public School in nearby Moose Jaw. He then 
attended the Moose Jaw Technical High School before 
graduating from Central Collegiate High School. In 1942 
he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force and served until 
1945. Mr. Snyder married Anita Copeman on August 23, 
1950. He is survived by his wife and their two sons. 
 
Mr. Snyder joined the Canadian Pacific Railway after 
completing his education. He began as a fireman and later 
became a locomotive engineer. Mr. Snyder was an active 
and long-time member of the Moose Jaw Lodge 521 of the 
Brotherhood of Firemen and Enginemen. He served as 
recording secretary for several years. Mr. Snyder also 
owned land which he farmed between the railroad runs 
until 1956. 
 
Mr. Snyder began his affiliation with the CCF in 1947 
when he joined the youth wing of the party. The following 
year he began a two-year term on the provincial executive 
of the Co-operative Commonwealth Youth Movement. 
 
Mr. Snyder was first elected to this Assembly in 1960 and 
was re-elected in the following four elections. Mr. Snyder 
joined the cabinet of Premier Blakeney in 1971 and served 
as minister of Labour for 11 years. His tenure was 
noteworthy for the introduction of the first occupational 
health and safety Act in Canada. Mr. Snyder was also 
responsible for other portfolios during the course of his 
career, including Welfare, Social Services, and 
Government Services. 
 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, and seconded by the Deputy 
Leader of the Opposition, the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, Gordon 
Taylor Snyder, and expresses its grateful appreciation for 
the contribution he made to his community, his 
constituency, and to the province. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition I would like to join 
the Premier in expressing condolences on the passing of Gordon 
Snyder, a former cabinet minister and member of this 
legislature. I also want to express our most sincere condolences 
to the family of Gordon Snyder. 
 
Members of the legislature who have passed through the doors 
of this Chamber and participated in the democratic process in 
our province have made a special and unique contribution to 
Saskatchewan. As members of this Chamber, we are drawn here 
from all walks of life by a desire to serve the public in the best 
way we know how. That was certainly the case with the 
member we honour today. 
 
Born in Moose Jaw in 1924, Gordon Snyder was educated at 
the Moose Jaw Technical School before joining the RCAF 
[Royal Canadian Air Force] to serve his country in World War 
II. Following his discharge from the service, he began work for 
the CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] as a fireman and was 
promoted to engineer in 1956. As indicated by the Premier, he 
also operated the family farm between railroad runs. In 1960 he 
was first elected to the Saskatchewan legislature and was 
re-elected four times before the NDP government’s defeat in 
1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for us currently in the Legislative Assembly as we 
look at our careers in politics, it’s indeed a marvel that someone 
would spend 22 years, active years in politics, busy years, 
working for the betterment of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And to be re-elected that many times must be something that 
the family must be really proud of today. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Throughout the tenure of the Blakeney government, Gordon 
Snyder served as minister of Labour, and in his time in office as 
the minister we saw the passage of the country’s first 
occupational health and safety Act and the first legislation to 
ensure equal pay for similar work. He also worked on issues 
such as minimum wage and the establishment of a 40-hour 
work week which have contributed to the well-being of 
Saskatchewan workers. Indeed it was under his watch that the 
Saskatchewan Minimum Wage Board developed the constant 
review of the minimum wage and tied it to a percentage of the 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

average industrial wage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, Mr. Snyder spent 22 years. He has 
left behind a legacy which included four re-elections, an 
accomplishment that I’m sure he was very proud of during his 
lifetime, and now it can be a source of pride for his family 
members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition joins the members opposite 
in expressing our condolences on the passing of Gordon 
Snyder. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
with great honour and appreciation that I enter into this debate 
to acknowledge the tremendous contribution that my friend 
Gordon Snyder has made to my community, to our province, 
and to his many, many brothers and sisters who hold him in 
immense regard in our province. It, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is 
the fact of the matter that Gordon Snyder is the longest serving 
member of the legislature to serve in the city of Moose Jaw, and 
he made a difference. 
 
It is not my intention in my brief remarks today, Mr. Speaker, to 
cover his fantastic accomplishments for working people. I know 
others will want to highlight that, and I will leave that for others 
to do. But I want to acknowledge the influence that Gord 
Snyder had on this proud politician, or politician proud to be 
one. 
 
The first time that I sought public office, Mr. Speaker, it was 
less than resoundingly successful, and it was in the campaign of 
1982. And at that time it was my great honour to have as my 
running mate this outstanding, highly respected member of the 
CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party] government who was not only a mentor for 
me but who was always willing to put his labours where his 
heart was. 
 
I will oftentimes look back at that campaign, Mr. Speaker, and 
reflect on the fact that in my constituency I had the ignoble 
results of having set a new record. Nobody had ever been 
beaten by that much before in Moose Jaw North. And so it was 
less than resounding in its outcome. 
 
However one of the things that I deeply appreciated is that Gord 
Snyder took time out of his own campaign in Moose Jaw South 
to come and help this rookie colleague of his to campaign in my 
own riding. And I know I’ve often thought about and looked 
back and thought, with Gordon having lost by such a small 
majority in that election, perhaps it was Gordon’s tremendous 
commitment to the team and to the cause and his belief in social 
democracy that contributed to make the difference. We’ll never 
know. But I do know this, that Gordon didn’t hesitate for a 
second to become involved and pitching in for a brand new 
colleague. 
 
It’s been referred to, his great sense of humour. And one of the 
things that I loved about Gordon was that when Gord Snyder 
laughed he didn’t just chuckle, his whole body shook. And he 
was a man who loved life. And he was a man determined to 

leave the world that he found a better place for his having been 
here. And he did exactly that. 
 
He was a big man and in my mind always an intellectual giant. 
He was seen as a man who was hard-nosed when he needed to 
be. He was decisive but also a man with a huge heart. His 
compassion was reflected in his service as minister for Welfare 
in his time, but in the special place that he held in his heart for 
the important role of government to come to the aid of the little 
guy — the man or woman who didn’t have all the advantages 
but deserved to be respected for who they were and for their 
labours and to be protected from unfair risks. 
 
And so to Anita and the family, I just want to express officially, 
on the record, my own personal sadness at having lost a good 
friend — a good friend personally but also a good friend to this 
legislature, to the people of Saskatchewan, and to say how 
deeply I and my constituents in Moose Jaw North have 
appreciated Gordon’s commitment to us in our community and 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s truly a privilege to be able to stand in the House 
today and join in this motion of remembrance and condolence 
for Gordon Snyder and condolence to his family, Anita and 
sons. Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have talked about 
Gordon’s accomplishments and his very life that brought him to 
the legislature in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d really like to 
make some comments today on my memories of Gordon and 
the things that I believe I have learned and benefited from 
Gordon and Gordon’s experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was plain and simple. If you were from Moose 
Jaw, you knew who Gordon Snyder was. He seemed to be 
evident in community events, in labour events, in the politics of 
the area, was always highly thought of. And I remember him 
coming to my parents’ house to renew NDP memberships and 
also coming to speak to my mom and dad during election times 
and campaigns. We just knew who Gordon Snyder was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a contribution that he has made to the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I was reading just the past 
couple of days out of The Innovation Journal a chapter that 
Gordon wrote. And it’s chapter 7, and it’s “Social Justice 
Through Legislation: Saskatchewan Labour.” It’s a wonderful 
history of . . . a quick, quick snapshot of the 11 years that 
Gordon Snyder spent as minister of Labour in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the wonderful thing about it is that it is in very clear 
English that Gordon would have used, and you can almost hear 
that wonderful voice saying all of these comments to you. I 
would recommend it to anyone. And it gives you a very 
straightforward understanding, rationale, reasoning for the 
many changes that Gordon helped put in place and 
accomplished for working people right across Saskatchewan 
and in fact, Mr. Speaker, right across North America. 
 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

My colleagues have spoken of The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act that was passed in 1972 — the first piece of 
comprehensive occupational health and safety legislation ever 
passed in North America. And it has been used across the world 
as a model and adopted in many other countries and areas 
beyond Saskatchewan’s borders. 
 
But it was interesting in this chapter that Gordon wrote in this 
journal. He talks about his crusade for occupational health and 
safety had its roots in his work experiences of the 1940s and 
’50s. His experiences as a railroader carried anger and vivid 
memories of hazardous, unhealthy, and unsanitary conditions 
which employees were expected to tolerate as a normal working 
environment. Mr. Speaker, that’s just some of the passion that 
Gordon Snyder brought to the role that he played in the history 
of our province and in the history of this legislature. 
 
Again I would recommend anyone read this chapter. It’s 
actually wonderful reading. It talks about the 40-hour 
workweek, the changes to the minimum wage, the changes and 
the importance of the changes to The Trade Union Act, and also 
he talks about The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a couple of things that really stick in my 
memory of Gordon Snyder and I would like to just make some 
quick comments on them. Long before my political life, Mr. 
Speaker, I was a delegate to the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour convention. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, that convention 
held a celebration of the 25th anniversary of The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act. It was in the late ’90s. On stage for the 
afternoon celebration was Gordon Snyder, Bob Sass who still is 
active in occupational health and safety and resides in 
Saskatoon, and also Bob Mitchell who was the deputy minister 
of Labour at that point in time. These three gentlemen were on 
the stage and we talked about occupational health and safety. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s very few pieces of legislation that 
we ever celebrate 25 years after the fact of them being but in 
place but that just shows you how remarkable this piece was 
and the importance and the significance of this piece of 
legislation, and what it has meant to working people in the 
province of Saskatchewan and right around the world. 
 
That’s one thing I remember, these three gentlemen being on 
the stage and Gordon making comments. And they were very 
humble about it, spoke about the work they did. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in the four years that I was minister of Labour, I can 
only imagine the fortitude and the work that it took to put in 
place that comprehensive piece of legislation. It’s a debt of 
gratitude that many working people around the world have to 
Gordon Snyder and to others that did the work at the time. I will 
always remember that 25th anniversary. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, there’s another piece. The very first day 
I was appointed as minister of Labour, I was standing in my 
office here in the legislature, not quite sure of what I was 
supposed to be doing in a brand new office, moving boxes 
around, getting things moved in. I got a phone call. The very 
first phone call I ever got as the minister of Labour was from 
Gordon Snyder. And as soon as I said hello . . . you know by 
the voice who it is. And he said Debbie, he said this is Gordon 
Snyder. And he says, from an old guy who’s been around for a 
long time, I just have one piece of advice. He said, do 

something about that minimum wage. 
 
So even though he may have retired, Mr. Speaker, he kept track 
of us. He kept track of the progress of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and he showed a keen interest that he carried 
with him right till the end. He was a wonderful man and one 
that we will all miss dearly. And I know in Moose Jaw he will 
be missed dearly. 
 
The last time I’d seen Gordon Snyder was in the fall of this year 
at the New Democratic convention. And we had a reunion, the 
one evening, of MLAs and former MLAs, and it was a 
wonderful evening. We had lots of constituents that come into 
Regina for the reunion from all over the province, and we had 
about four tablefuls of people from Moose Jaw that came to join 
in the celebration. 
 
And Gordon was there with his family, sitting at a different 
table. But typical Gordon Snyder, he got up and he brought his 
granddaughter over; he spoke a few words to everyone at the 
tables, said hello to old friends, bragged about his 
granddaughter a wee bit and his family. 
 
He never forgot where he came from, and he never forgot his 
roots. And I think that is something that will stay with me 
forever, and it’s something that I will always think of when I’m 
in this Assembly and in the role of an MLA, that we always 
have to remain as Gordon did — grounded — and realize that 
the important things in life are the places that we come from 
and the people that we represent. And I think Gordon did that in 
wonderful style and really was a role model for many of us. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the opportunities — I guess it’s a rule of 
the House — is that while I’m here I’m not an individual; I’m 
here representing the people of Moose Jaw Wakamow. And 
while I would like to pass along personal condolences to 
Gordon’s wife Anita and his sons and his daughter-in-laws and 
the grandchildren that he was so proud of, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to be here representing the constituents of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow because I know there’s many of them in Moose Jaw 
that speak so highly of Gordon — to the dedication that he 
brought to his job, to the commitment that he brought to the 
people that he represented, and to the dedication that he went 
far above and beyond in the 22 years that he represented our 
constituency in this Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of the constituents in Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, I would like to add condolences to Anita and to 
the family and to say that Gordon left a huge gap in many of 
our hearts, and we will have wonderful memories of him that 
will see us through many difficult times. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a sincere honour 
for me to speak on this condolence motion for Gordon Snyder. 
Although I did not know him personally, I have immense 
respect for the legacy he left both through his years served as an 
MLA and as the minister of Labour. My family and I would like 
to extend our deepest sympathies to Gordon’s wife of 55 years, 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

Anita, as well as the entire family. I would like to make special 
mention of Gordon’s son Randy, and his wife Claire, and 
children Angela and Ryley as they are friends of ours, and 
extend our special thoughts and prayers. 
 
Randy’s marriage to Claire is one of the interesting stories in 
Gordon’s life, for Claire is the daughter of Eiling Kramer, his 
long-time friend and legislative colleague. Mr. Speaker, I was 
not a member of the Assembly at the time of Mr. Kramer’s 
death in 1999 and would like to pay my respects at this time to 
his family, especially my dear friends Jennifer 
Kramer-Sampson and Tim Kramer, and also extend sympathy 
with respect to the death of Eiling Kramer’s wife Dorothy on 
January 14 of this year. 
 
Gordon and Eiling shared a ritual for the opening of the fishing 
season each May. They were truly great friends. And what I 
know of Gordon is either what I’ve heard over the years or have 
researched in preparing for my condolence today. My 
understanding is that his formative years were divided between 
the family farm and Moose Jaw, and the discussions surrounded 
Christian responsibility to your fellow man and the works of 
prominent European social thinkers. Gordon was appalled at the 
injustice of an economic system which, left to its own devices, 
threw so many into despair and poverty. This view that society 
should serve all citizens, not just the wealthy and powerful, led 
Gordon and his parents to become some of the earliest members 
of the CCF Party which later became the NDP. 
 
Gordon was first elected in 1960 and then subsequent election 
wins in 1964, ’71, ’75, and ’78. We already heard it made 
Gordon one of the longest serving MLAs in Saskatchewan 
legislature with a total of 22 years. 
 
His 1971 to 1982 appointment by Premier Allan Blakeney to 
the provincial cabinet as minister of Labour provided Gordon 
with the opportunity to develop legislation which reflected 
Saskatchewan values of fairness, dignity, and equality. If I may 
quote former Premier Blakeney, he said, quote: 
 

He was a good able guy and a strong trade unionist. He 
was so well accepted by the trade union movement and 
employers as well, he just had all the qualities that we 
needed at the time. 

 
Snyder was the only Labour minister for the entire duration of 
the Blakeney government from 1971 to 1982. As a cabinet 
minister, his favourite legislative accomplishment — which 
we’ve already heard about — was the development of a North 
American first, The Occupational Health and Safety Act which, 
since its implementation, has served to protect the lives and 
health of a great many people from workplace-related accidents. 
And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is truly a legacy that I 
will be forever grateful and thankful for in the number of 
anecdotal experiences that I have encountered over the years. 
 
Gordon Snyder was a union man all of his working life. He’d 
worked for the CPR railway as a locomotive engineer. And he 
believed with every fibre of his being that working people are 
best off if they have the protection of a collective agreement 
and the protection of a trade union acting on their behalf. With 
every fibre of his being, he believed that. 
 

So here we are. He becomes a Labour minister in 1971, and The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act is passed in 1972 and 
introduced in the legislature by Gordon. It was a radical change 
to the law of this province, Mr. Speaker. What was radical were 
some of the provisions in the Act, and probably the most 
important was that it conferred on the working people the right 
to participate in the occupational health and safety concerns in 
their workplace. And it did that by requiring every plant with 
more than 10 employees to establish a joint occupational health 
and safety committee. It was a radical change in the law of this 
province and indeed in the law of any jurisdiction in Canada. 
The managers and workers working together were given the 
responsibility and the power to identify problems, to analyze 
those problems, and to seek advice with respect to those 
problems and to solve them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify that I’m reviewing some of 
the contents of the Act because I believe that we are now taking 
it for granted in terms of . . . it’s always been there. I know from 
my own work experience there are very few people that 
understand the history of this Act and how it came about and 
what tragedies took place prior to the Act. So I feel it’s very 
important to read into the record once more some of the 
provisions of Gordon’s work. 
 
The people that work in that workplace meet at least once a 
month and talk about making their workplace safer. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it has worked. It has worked in a great way all across 
this province. So the right to participate — a very important 
right and the workers do it through the occupational health and 
safety committees — is an important right. 
 
In subsequent years, there were two other rights that were 
introduced into the Act that were as important in terms of the 
contents of the Act as we know it today. The first one to appear 
was the right to refuse to do dangerous work. It was introduced 
into legislation in this province just a few years after the 
original Act was passed, still under the Blakeney government 
and the administration of Gordon Snyder. 
 
The right to refuse to do dangerous work, one would have 
thought that that right would have existed all along, but it 
didn’t. And because it now exists, it now prevents people from 
suffering a great danger to themselves in terms of taking their 
life or injuring them at their place of work. And the number of 
times in which refusals have taken place in workplaces have 
been many, and many indeed, and that has saved the lives of 
countless numbers of working people. And I think we should all 
be very proud of that because that right was born on the very 
floor of this legislature and has been a part of Saskatchewan law 
ever since. 
 
Other provinces, seeing what Saskatchewan had done, 
mimicked the Act . . . the federal government, other Canadian 
provinces, as well as other jurisdictions all across United States 
and Europe. And, Mr. Speaker, imitation is the sincerest form 
of flattery, and in that respect the drafters have much to be 
flattered about. 
 
The third right is a little more subtle but nonetheless extremely 
important, and it’s the right to know if a workplace is using a 
type of chemical that may be harmful, in terms of inhalants or 
in terms of skin exposure, etc. The workers now have the right 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

to know what that chemical contains in advance of using that 
chemical and then have the right to decide whether or not that 
chemical is safe for them to use or have the right to refuse 
again. 
 
Those three rights really form the muscle of the Act because 
they are so fundamental to the health and safety of working 
people. And we now have Gordon Snyder and the government 
of the day to thank for those rights. 
 
This program, Mr. Speaker, is the flagship of this government 
as far as workers’ rights are concerned and working people in 
this province are concerned. And all of us, all of us can take a 
great deal of pride in it. 
 
Another Canadian first, Mr. Speaker, was the introduction of 
the 40-hour work week that was also made during his tenure as 
the head of the Department of Labour. One can hardly believe 
that one is dealing . . . that this happened in such . . . just a few 
years ago that we finally developed a 40-hour work week and 
prior to that there was no legislation around that. And he also, 
as we heard, had a major impact on Saskatchewan’s minimum 
wage. 
 
So I just want to quote from his obituary because I think this is 
something that is incredibly descriptive of the man that I wish I 
would have known personally and yet feel I do know from all 
of the stories that I heard about him. Gordon: 
 

. . . was also very conscious that his success was a 
reflection of the quality of the wisdom, talent, skill and 
commitment of the people who shared his values and 
fought beside him to make them a reality. 

 
Gordon led a meaningful and productive life, which in 
many ways, reflected the essence of the province [that] he 
[so] loved. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to have the privilege of joining other members in 
paying tribute to the life and work of the Hon. Gordon Snyder. 
 
And I want to begin by expressing my sympathies to the Snyder 
family for what is a great loss — a great loss to the family, Mr. 
Speaker, and a great loss to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As other members have noted, Gordon Snyder’s legacy is 
immense. And I felt very privileged to have the opportunity as a 
new member of the legislature in 1978 to serve with Gordon 
Snyder during the last four years of his time in this Chamber, 
and I have some fond and vivid memories of that period of 
service. But those were the last four years, Mr. Speaker, in a 
22-year career in this Assembly. 
 
I want to make reference, Mr. Speaker, to a few things that have 
not been heavily emphasized during the tribute. One, Mr. 

Speaker, was that not only was Gordon Snyder a very strong 
trade unionist, but he also had an understanding of rural 
Saskatchewan, and he brought those two together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the strengths, I think, of the CCF was that it was 
deeply connected in both rural and urban Saskatchewan. And 
Gordon Snyder understood the importance of linking the needs 
of farmers and the needs of working people together in a party 
that embodied the CCF, Mr. Speaker. And he had both deep 
rural roots and deep roots in the trade union movement, Mr. 
Speaker, and brought both to bear in his work in this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I remember the most about 
Gordon was what a powerful force he was in this Chamber and 
in caucus, Mr. Speaker — a very powerful force and at the same 
time a powerful force that had an extremely kind heart. And that 
kind heart, Mr. Speaker, was embodied in the legislation that 
Gordon Snyder, as minister of Labour, brought forward in this 
Assembly. 
 
I think one of the hallmarks of the Blakeney years and of the 
work that Gordon Snyder did, Mr. Speaker, was the 
commitment to increase the minimum wage in this province and 
protect the poorest of working people in Saskatchewan. And so 
during the Blakeney years and during the years of Gordon 
Snyder’s tenure as Labour minister, the minimum wage in this 
province doubled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Minimum wage increases were an annual event in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And when Gordon Snyder left office in 
1982, the minimum wage in this province was $4.25 — the 
highest of any minimum wage in all of Canada — which was a 
remarkable accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another important point, Mr. Speaker, that I want to mention is 
Gordon Snyder’s contribution to the women’s bureau, which he 
strengthened significantly, and was an advocate for equal pay 
for similar work and brought in legislation, Mr. Speaker, to 
bring this into effect. 
 
[15:30] 
 
During my time in the Assembly, Gordon Snyder also 
introduced on behalf of our government very significant 
legislation in 1979, amended again in 1980, to strengthen The 
Workmen’s Compensation Act in this province. And Gordon 
Snyder in introducing that legislation, Mr. Speaker, he had a 
clarity that I think was very important and well appreciated by 
people in the labour movement in this province — a clarity 
about his determination to improve conditions for working 
people in Saskatchewan. And important mention has been made 
of the pioneering work of the Blakeney government and of the 
Hon. Gordon Snyder with respect to occupational health and 
safety legislation. He had that same kind of clarity, Mr. 
Speaker, when it came to improvements to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, he was clear, first of all, about the 
circumstances prior to 1929 and he spoke about that actually 
quite eloquently in the Assembly on April 27, 1981. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to quote briefly from what he said. He was 
talking about conditions of workers prior to the election of the 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] in this province 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

and he noted that a worker, as it was known, was forced to 
bring action against the employer in the courts if the worker 
could afford it. He would only win if it could be proved that the 
injury was due to defective machinery or negligence of some 
responsible person. It is little wonder then that under these 
circumstances fewer than 30 per cent of the employees injured 
on the job actually received 1 cent of compensation. Mr. Snyder 
noted: 
 

The majority of injured workers were unable to work and 
their families quickly became destitute and they were 
forced to rely on the mercy of the state for sustenance. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Snyder understood what the conditions of 
working people had been like and he was determined to 
improve on those conditions. And the legislation that was 
introduced, Mr. Speaker, in 1979 and amended in 1980 assured, 
Mr. Speaker, that workers would have compensation from the 
time of injury to the time of their retirement, Mr. Speaker and 
assured again, Mr. Speaker, that that compensation would be 
based on a percentage of the income that they had earned prior 
to their injury — 75 per cent — and, Mr. Speaker, guaranteed 
that those benefits would be indexed. And this is just one 
example of dozens that could be provided of the kind of 
determination that he built into labour legislation that would 
benefit working people. 
 
I remember in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, when I had served 
about two and a half years, that Gordon Snyder brought in an 
amendment to The Labour Standards Act — which 
unfortunately is not in effect today but which was repealed by 
the Devine government later on in the 1980s — but which 
guaranteed the right of retail workers to be seated when 
working at a cash register so that basically they could avoid 
injury as a result of having to stand all day on their job. 
 
He identified, Mr. Speaker, in a very practical way the needs of 
working people and he was a powerful, powerful advocate in 
caucus that those needs be addressed in a systematic and 
positive way. So it’s a great legacy, Mr. Speaker, that he has 
left us and I was very honoured to serve with him. And the 
Assembly has lost a great champion for working people in this 
province. I remember Gordon Snyder as a deeply, deeply 
committed social democrat, a deeply committed member of the 
CCF-NDP, a great champion for the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, and a great humanitarian. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to add those comments to 
the words of others in the Assembly and again express my 
condolences to the Snyder family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Environment, the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to also join 
in to this discussion of Gordon Snyder. 
 
Gordon and his wife lived in Regina Lakeview for many years 
and when I was considering entering into politics he was one of 
the people that I talked to about this particular opportunity. And 
as always he had very direct, very sage advice and he continued 

to provide that to me right up until his death. He had been 
involved with so many different aspects of politics that you 
were always certain to get good advice if you went to see him. 
 
And I just wanted to add these words from all of the people in 
Regina Lakeview who very much appreciated his work with us 
over many, many years, but specifically the last 10-plus years 
that I have represented this constituency. And so I send my 
condolences to the family as well. 
 
The Speaker: — It has moved by the Premier, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, Gordon 
Taylor Snyder, and expresses its grateful appreciation of 
the contribution he made to his community, his 
constituency, and to the province. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move one 
further motion of condolence today. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

Stephen Worobetz 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again at the 
close of my remarks, seconded by the member of Canora-Pelly, 
I will make the formal motion of condolence to note the passing 
of the Hon. Dr. Stephen Worobetz, former Lieutenant Governor 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as is well known across this province, Dr. Stephen 
Worobetz offered his province and his country a lifetime of 
service in various roles — as an army medical officer, a doctor, 
a surgeon, health care administrator, volunteer, and 
philanthropist and Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, born in Krydor, Saskatchewan to Ukrainian 
Catholic pioneers, Stephen Worobetz worked as a doctor for a 
year before joining the army. In 1944 while serving as a 
medical officer in Italy, he was awarded the Military Cross for 
courage under fire. After the war, Dr. Worobetz practised 
general medicine and studied in Winnipeg and Philadelphia to 
become a surgeon. 
 
In 1970, he became the 13th Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan and the first Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan of Ukrainian origin. 
 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

Dr. Worobetz was for a time a president of the medical staff of 
St. Paul’s Hospital and a Saskatoon separate school board 
trustee. For many years he taught at the University of 
Saskatchewan, College of Medicine. He was president of St. 
Joseph’s nursing home, the Ukrainian Catholic Council of 
Saskatchewan, the revived Canadian Club of Saskatoon, and a 
member of the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic among other 
professional and service groups. 
 
In 1989 he and his wife formed the Stephen and Michelene 
Worobetz Foundation to help charitable organizations including 
the University of Saskatchewan, Amnesty International, and the 
St. Paul’s Hospital. In 1999 Dr. and Mrs. Worobetz created an 
endowment fund at St. Thomas More College supporting the 
Prairie Centre for the Study of Ukrainian Heritage. 
 
In addition to numerous other well-deserved honours, Dr. 
Stephen Worobetz was a member of the Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit and was invested as an Officer of the Order of Canada in 
1993. Mr. Speaker, the Order of Canada citation for the Hon. 
Dr. Stephen Worobetz reads, and I quote: 
 

. . . he has provided exceptional service to others . . . he 
has exemplified a spirit of social commitment, 
voluntarism, love of country and dedication to the 
community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this citation more than any other speaks 
of the core Saskatchewan values, the core values that Dr. 
Worobetz embodied throughout his life, including in his term as 
serving as our Lieutenant Governor. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, 
seconded by the member of Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 
of the Hon. Stephen Worobetz, 13th Lieutenant Governor 
of the province of Saskatchewan, who died on February 2, 
2006. 

 
Stephen Worobetz was born on December 26, 1914 in 
Krydor and spent his childhood on the family farm. He 
received his early schooling in Krydor and at the Bedford 
Road Collegiate in Saskatoon. Dr. Worobetz continued his 
studies at the University of Saskatchewan where he 
obtained a bachelor’s degree in science. This was followed 
by a Doctor of Medicine degree from the University of 
Manitoba in 1940. From 1952 to 1954, Dr. Worobetz 
completed post-graduate studies in Winnipeg and at the 
University of Philadelphia to qualify as a general surgeon. 
 
Mr. Worobetz married Michelene Kindrachuk on May 1, 
1949. Dr. Worobetz began his medical career as a general 
practitioner in Lucky Lake, Saskatchewan. From 1942 
until 1946 he served as a medical officer with the Princess 
Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry in England and Italy. 
He was awarded the Military Cross for courage under fire 
during the Italian campaign. Following the war, he 
returned to his surgical practice in Saskatoon. 
 
Dr. Worobetz’s involvement in the medical field extended 
beyond his practice. He held positions on the executives of 
the local, provincial, and national medical organizations. 

He was sought to pass on his knowledge and experience as 
a clinical lecturer and senior associate in the College of 
Medicine. 
 
In his private life, Dr. Worobetz was an active participant 
in the affairs of his community. He provided personal and 
financial support to several cultural, religious, and 
charitable organizations. With his wife, he created the 
Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation to support 
community, organizational, and personal community 
enhancement opportunities. 
 
The breadth of Dr. Worobetz’s public service was 
recognized by numerous awards. He was a fellow of the 
Royal Society of Physicians and Surgeons, an Honorary 
Doctor of Laws, an Officer of the Order of Canada, a life 
member of the Knights of Columbus and the Canadian and 
Saskatchewan Medical Associations. He was recipient of 
the Shevchenko Medal in recognition of his leadership in 
the Ukrainian community. 
 
Dr. Worobetz was the first person of Ukrainian origin to 
be appointed Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
During his tenure from 1970 until 1976, he sought to draw 
attention to those initiatives and activities that enhanced 
the Saskatchewan society. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by Deputy Leader 
of the Opposition, the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 
of the Hon. Stephen Worobetz, 13th Lieutenant Governor 
of the province of Saskatchewan, who died on February 2, 
2006. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
we recognize the accomplishments of a great Canadian, a great 
individual from the province of Saskatchewan, and more 
specifically from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I want to join with the Premier and members opposite and speak 
to this condolence motion for former Lieutenant Governor, Dr. 
Stephen Worobetz. 
 
Dr. Stephen Worobetz had an unparalleled record of service and 
dedication to Saskatchewan and Canada. But before he was our 
province’s Lieutenant Governor, Stephen Worobetz was a 
doctor, a community activist, and a leader. As indicated, born in 
the small town in Saskatchewan of Krydor, Stephen Worobetz 
attended high school in Saskatoon at Bedford Road Collegiate 
and then moved on to attend the University of Saskatchewan 
where he completed his studies in 1935 and received a Bachelor 
of Science. He then attended medical school and graduated 
from the University of Manitoba with a Doctor of Medicine 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

degree in 1940. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Dr. Worobetz was also a decorated war veteran. Out of school 
in 1940 he joined the Royal Canadian Medical Corps of the 
Armed Forces and served our country in England and Italy from 
1942 to 1946. While he was serving with Princess Patricia’s 
Canadian Light Infantry as a medical officer, he received the 
Military Cross for his distinguished service and courage under 
fire. After returning home from the war, Dr. Worobetz 
continued his studies in Pennsylvania where he qualified as a 
general surgeon. Dr. Worobetz returned to Saskatoon and 
worked as a general surgeon during which time he held 
numerous positions — locally, provincially, and nationally. 
 
Dr. Worobetz had an extensive career as a health professional in 
Saskatchewan. He was a clinical lecturer in the College of 
Medicine from 1956 to 1983 and also served as the senior 
associate in the division of oncology. Dr. Worobetz was an 
active member of the Saskatoon and District Medical Society, 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Canadian Medical 
Association, the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan, and was advanced as a fellow of the Royal 
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada in 1973. 
 
Dr. Stephen Worobetz was also dedicated to his family, church, 
and community, serving on many boards including being 
chairman and founding member of the St. Joseph’s nursing 
home in Saskatoon. Dr. Worobetz was described as a man of 
quiet distinction who commanded respect by being an example 
to others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall the appointment of Dr. Worobetz in 1970. 
Dr. Worobetz was appointed as the 13th Lieutenant Governor in 
1970 at a time when I in fact was a resident of Saskatoon 
attending the University of Saskatchewan. And I do recall the 
appointment of Dr. Worobetz from the perspective of a 
Ukrainian-Canadian. And I recall the pride that so many people 
in Saskatoon felt for the appointment of the first Lieutenant 
Governor of Ukrainian origin, and the fact as I think indicated 
by the premier at that time, Premier Ross Thatcher, who said it 
was long overdue because there was such a large base of 
Ukrainian-Canadians within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Dr. Stephen Worobetz I recall coming to the Mohyla 
Institute where I was a resident during my university years and 
was so well received, and spoke to university students on a very 
one-to-one basis in a calm, quiet manner. And yet you knew 
that this gentleman had so much to offer to you in the way of 
advice. So that was something that I think many people in 
Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan were very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Worobetz was a volunteer and philanthropist. 
He provided exceptional service to others. Throughout the years 
he exemplified a spirit of social commitment, volunteerism, 
love of country, and dedication to his community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition I want to 
express our condolences to the family of Dr. Stephen Worobetz 
and extend our sympathies to the bereaved family. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to join this 
Assembly in the condolence motion for Dr. Stephen Worobetz. 
Dr. Worobetz was a distinguished member of the Ukrainian 
community of Saskatoon and became, as has been mentioned, 
the first person of Ukrainian descent to be appointed as the 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Worobetz was born in Krydor, which is a community very 
close to our family farm. And Mr. Worobetz is always 
mentioned with high praise whenever major Ukrainian events 
are held. 
 
I will not mention all of Mr. Worobetz’s contributions, which 
have already been well stated by the Premier and others, but 
only to say that he was the recipient of the Shevchenko Medal 
in recognition of his leadership in the Ukrainian community. 
And I want to, with this, join in expressing my sympathies to 
the family of Dr. Stephen Worobetz. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to speak to the condolence motion for the Hon. Dr. Stephen 
Worobetz. Many accolades have been given to the former 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, very worthy accolades. 
And I’m not going to repeat all of the honours and 
involvements of Mr. Worobetz in the life of Saskatchewan, but 
I think it’s appropriate to point out just a few. 
 
He is one of the rare residents of this province that was a 
recipient both of the Order of Canada and the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit, Mr. Speaker — a tremendous honour for a very 
deserving person. These two honours certainly demonstrate his 
commitment to his province and his country. 
 
He was also recognized for his outstanding community and 
professional contributions. He received an honorary Doctor of 
Laws from the University of Saskatchewan. He was a life 
member of the Knights of Columbus. And as was mentioned by 
my colleague across the way, he received the Shevchenko 
Medal for his leadership in the Ukrainian community here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Worobetz served briefly in my constituency 
when he served as a medical doctor in the community of Lucky 
Lake. And as so many great Saskatchewan residents have done 
in their service to their province, they provided that service both 
in rural and urban parts of our province. And I think it’s 
tremendous that Mr. Worobetz was able to serve all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And his legacy has reached beyond the borders of this province 
and touched our nation and touched our world. Mr. Worobetz 
had the concern for the worth of his fellow man, and he valued 
service above self. And that’s a wonderful Saskatchewan 
tradition and trait that Mr. Worobetz presented in a very large 
degree. 
 
His service to our province and a representative of our province 
as our 13th Lieutenant Governor will be remembered fondly 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2006 

and with great gratitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition I want to 
particularly extend condolences to his family and friends — 
people who are certainly . . . have every right to be very proud 
of his accomplishments. When a man has the number of 
accomplishments to the degree that Mr. Worobetz did, you 
know that there was family and friends who supported and 
often probably sacrificed so that he could become the great 
person that he was. And I trust that they share in our pride and 
appreciation — as I know they do — for his service to the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before putting the 
question, I would ask leave to give my personal condolences 
with respect to Dr. Worobetz. 
 
Dr. Worobetz was someone that I knew and admired a great 
deal. I must say that he had considerable influence on my life 
even though I didn’t know him very well personally. It was 
simply the fact that he was a role model. Dr. Worobetz was 
born in 1914. My father was born in 1914, so Dr. Worobetz was 
somewhat of a father figure to me as well. 
 
It’s been mentioned that Dr. Worobetz is known as the first 
person of Ukrainian extraction who became Lieutenant 
Governor. I do believe that like John Diefenbaker who made a 
breakthrough as an ethnic who became a Prime Minister, Dr. 
Worobetz, I believe, was also the first non-French and 
non-Anglo-Saxon to be appointed to this very important post, 
prestigious post as Lieutenant Governor. 
 
He made a tremendous contribution to his country as has been 
mentioned already. He was an accomplished person in every 
which way. And by his example I consider him one of the 
breakthrough people, people who were under-represented and at 
that time were seeking a way of becoming recognized. 
 
I want to mention that at that time things were quite a bit 
different. At the time of my father’s early years particularly and 
through what is known as the dirty thirties and right up to the 
end of the Second World War, being a person of non-French, 
non-Anglo extraction in Saskatchewan was not exactly an easy 
thing. People in those days often . . . First of all they lived in 
isolated areas of the province, so there wasn’t that movement 
and contact with other people. But they were often 
discriminated against and had to fight the difficult way and 
really work hard to get the jobs and to gain self-respect. 
 
And I think with Dr. Worobetz becoming Lieutenant Governor, 
it was a bit of a breakthrough in the fact that the thing that 
people were working for, to have control of their own lives 
through economic and professional equality, was an objective. 
And Dr. Worobetz was a model that showed that this objective 
could be reached. 
 
I want to mention also that I’m not the only person that he 
influenced. I had a telephone conversation with former Premier 
Roy Romanow and I asked him about his thoughts about the 
passing of Dr. Worobetz. Roy told me that he had attended his 
funeral. He said that their paths had crossed frequently and that 

Dr. Worobetz’s work, and I quote Mr. Romanow, “strengthened 
the fabric and diversity of Canada.” And Mr. Romanow went 
on to say that he was a person of tranquillity in demeanour. In 
his public life he offered learned observations and advice. 
 
Mr. Worobetz, as has been mentioned earlier, made a 
contribution not only by his example, but he also left a legacy, 
the biggest of which I believe was his $500,000 endowment to 
St. Thomas More College to establish the Prairie Centre for the 
Study of Ukrainian Heritage. These funds are used to ensure the 
preservation, study, and promotion of Ukrainian-Canadian 
heritage, creating greater public awareness of the contribution 
of Ukrainian-Canadians to the national life of Canada. 
 
Mr. Romanow also mentioned to me that on the funeral card of 
Dr. Worobetz was this quotation which was taken from the 
inauguration of that particular foundation, of that fund, the 
Prairie centre for Ukrainian heritage, when he spoke there. Dr. 
Worobetz said this: 
 

A dream we dream alone is only a dream. A dream we 
dream together makes us all winners. So let us dream and 
work together to add something of value to this great 
country of ours, Canada. 
 

This is again his quotation: 
 
I believe this centre will be looked upon as a 
well-deserved thank you to those who have gone before 
and sacrificed so much to make our lives better. 

 
Dr. Worobetz brought the philosophy of this quotation to his 
work. He was an unassuming man. He was not a politician, but 
he did become head of state. He left a permanent example and a 
permanent legacy by his example and through his endowment 
on behalf of himself and his wife, Michelene. I wish to express 
my condolences to his family and friends and I wish them to 
know that Dr. Worobetz is revered. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The motion before the Assembly is the motion moved by the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier; the Deputy 
Leader of the Opposition, the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 
of the Hon. Stephen Worobetz, 13th Lieutenant Governor 
of the province of Saskatchewan, who died on February 2, 
2006. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, leave of the House to 
introduce a motion of transmittal, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 30, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
I so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the member for Melfort: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned till tomorrow at 10:30 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:03.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................882 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................882 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................882 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................882 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................882 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................882 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................882 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................883 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................883 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Party Nominates Candidate for Weyburn-Big Muddy 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................884 
 North Saskatoon Business Association’s Awards Night 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................884 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Condolences to Ehman Family 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................884 
 Don McDonald Named CTV Saskatoon Citizen of the Year 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Benevolent Spirit 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Premier’s Annual Address to Regina Business Community 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................886 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Problems at Prairie Rubber Corporation in Assiniboia 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................886 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................886 
 Safety Issues Related to Garbage Dumps on Crown Lands 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................888 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................888 
 Number of Inmates in Correctional Centres 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................889 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................889 
 Reporting of Escape from Regina Correctional Centre 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................890 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................890 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................891 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................891 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................892 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................892 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
CONDOLENCES 
 Frederick Neibrandt 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................892 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................893 



 

  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................894 
 Gordon Taylor Snyder 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................896 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................897 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................897 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................898 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................900 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................901 
 Stephen Worobetz 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................901 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................902 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Hagel (transmittal motion).......................................................................................................................................................905 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


