






















































Hansard: October 26, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 65A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1797 
 October 26, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer a certificate of the election and return of 
Dustin Duncan, as a member for the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. I hereby table the return of the writ. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I have the honour to present to you, Mr. Dustin 
Duncan, member for the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
who has taken the oath and signed the roll and now claims his 
right to take a seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Hello, Mr. Duncan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Duncan, as you take your rightful place in 
this Legislative Assembly, I’m sure that your time here will be 
one that serves as a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. Let the 
hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
The Speaker: — It is my duty at this time to inform the 
Assembly of the following vacancy in representation in the 
constituency of Martensville, due to the death of the hon. 
member, Mr. Ben Heppner. 
 

MOMENT OF SILENCE IN HONOUR 
OF BEN HEPPNER 

 
The Speaker: — In memory of a sitting member of this 
Assembly, Mr. Ben Heppner, who died on September 24, 2006, 
I invite all members to rise and observe a moment of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. Members are also informed 
that the formal condolence motion will be moved on Friday. I 
am advised that His Honour is here for prorogation. 
 

PROROGATION 
 

[At 10:05 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. His Honour was 
then pleased to deliver the following speech.] 
 
His Honour: — Please be seated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the 
Second Session of the Twenty-Fifth Legislature. 
 
In relieving you, I would like to thank you, and to commend 
you for the progress made and the commitments fulfilled. 
 
This Session began during this great province’s centennial 
celebrations – celebrations that allowed Saskatchewan to look 
back on a century of achievement and progress, and to look 
ahead to a future filled with opportunity. 
 
Saskatchewan people from one end of the province to the other 
participated in more than 4,000 events commemorating the 
centennial. 
 
It was with great pride that Saskatchewan celebrated its 
extraordinary history, culture and accomplishments. 
 
In March of this year, you celebrated the 100th Anniversary of 
this Legislative Assembly and the partnership with First 
Nations and Métis who created Saskatchewan. On that 
anniversary, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
presented a traditionally-crafted beaded moose-hide runner and 
beaver pelt cushion to the Assembly. 
 
On that historic day, you recognized the significance of 
Treaty-making as part of this province’s heritage, which is a 
part of this Assembly’s parliamentary tradition. 
 
Your accomplishments during the Session built on this legacy 
of diversity, hope and optimism to fulfil commitments to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
In this Session, you provided both new programs and new 
protections for young people. 
 
You froze university tuition. You created 2,700 new training 
and employment spaces and you provided $100 million in 
student assistance. Capital investments were made in 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 schools and additional funds were 
allocated to expand pre-kindergarten programs. 
 
You further improved services to Saskatchewan families with 
the introduction of the Child and Youth Mental Health Strategy, 
the expansion of the Premier’s Project Hope, and the restriction 
of the sale of ingredients which can be used to make crystal 
meth. 
 
You passed The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization 
Act to ensure an accessible, flexible, and effective treatment 
approach for youth with substance abuse issues, and already 60 
Saskatchewan young people have benefited. 
 
To further protect youth and to guide parents and guardians, 
you enacted The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 
2006, to prohibit the sale, rental or exhibition of violent and 
explicit video games to children. 
 
This Session, you also focused on continued efforts to build a 
green and prosperous economy. 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2006 

An initial agreement to explore the feasibility of a clean coal 
project was signed. Wind power was expanded to supply the 
largest percentage of energy from wind of any jurisdiction in 
Canada with the opening of the Centennial Wind Power 
Facility. 
 
You strengthened the Saskatchewan economy with reductions 
to business taxes, including phasing out the Corporate Capital 
Tax, eliminating the Corporate Capital Tax immediately on new 
investments, reducing the Corporate Income Tax, and reducing 
the small business threshold. 
 
These measures not only allowed you to build a positive climate 
for investment and job growth, they also allowed you to build 
on the social programs that have been established and supported 
by Saskatchewan people for generations. 
 
You have strengthened public health care in this Session by 
providing the largest-ever budget investment in health. Aging 
equipment was replaced, improving the ability to detect and to 
diagnose disease. New cancer treatment equipment was 
purchased. Wait times for surgery and diagnostic tests were 
decreased. 
 
You also continued your efforts to create safer communities and 
neighbourhoods, and focused on enhancing the protections 
afforded to Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
To make roads safer, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005, 
established an immediate 24-hour license suspension for drivers 
who fail a standard field sobriety test. This amendment protects 
both drivers and others from potential harm. 
 
The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 
2005, proposed amendments to hinder potential crime, violence, 
intimidation and recruitment that may arise from gang 
activities. These changes strengthen legislation that creates a 
hostile environment for crime and has delivered impressive 
results in shutting down properties where illegal activity is 
occurring. 
 
The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006, set out guiding 
principles so that victims of crime have their voices heard in the 
criminal justice system. It also ensures the continued fairness of 
the victims’ compensation program and increased the time 
available to apply for compensation. 
 
The passage of The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 
2005, strengthened confidence in the marketplace by setting out 
new rules for purchases and agreements entered into by 
consumers. 
 
The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005, was 
enacted to ensure consumers receive accurate information to 
allow for better-informed credit decisions. 
 
Finally, legislation was updated to protect both tenants and 
landlords who enter into rental agreements with the passage of 
The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 
 
Thus, in the Session now closing, you have assisted young 
people and families, built a stronger green and prosperous 
economy, invested in social programs, and created safer 

communities. 
 
It is with these accomplishments that you have built on the 
momentum of Saskatchewan’s great Centennial year and 
launched boldly into Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
I thank you all for your unyielding dedication,  and your efforts 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan throughout this 
Session. 
 
In taking leave of you, I wish you the full blessings of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly: it is the will and pleasure of His Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 26th day of October 2006 at 2 
p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:14.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1797 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1797 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1797 
MOMENT OF SILENCE IN HONOUR OF BEN HEPPNER 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1797 
PROROGATION ...........................................................................................................................................................................1797 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


