


















































Hansard: December 19, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 7A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 19, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 163 
 December 19, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, seated in the east gallery are two friends of mine from 
Regina. I’m pleased to see that they’re able to join us today, and 
I would ask you and the members to join me in welcoming 
Mark Pitzel and Peggy Grace Pitzel. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you my daughter, Brigitt Buckingham, sitting in 
the Speaker’s gallery. Brigitt. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Can I say a few more words, please? Thank 
you. Brigitt worked as a nurse. Brigitt worked in hemodialysis 
in Alberta for two years, but fortunately when I won she came 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Now she’s in her third year of social service. 
She’s working on her social work degree in the program at the 
University of Regina, and she’s also currently working for the 
Saskatoon Health Region in home care. So I am sure she’ll be 
an asset. So I’d like to say thank you for joining us today and 
welcome . . . 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and, through you, to the 
Assembly I would like to introduce some guests in your gallery. 
We have Marlene Brown from the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses; Larry Hubich, president of Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour; Cara Banks, communication officer of Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour; and Larry Kowalchuk, counsel with the 
Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union. I would ask all 
members to welcome these people to our Assembly and, Mr. 
Speaker, just entering now in the east gallery, Tom Graham, 
president, Canadian Union of Public Employees; and Ann St. 
Denis, staff representative for the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 
all members I’d like to introduce Mr. Larry Hubich with the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, in our gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d 
like to introduce a good friend, Jack Mitchell, an adult basic 
educator, and he’s done lots of work in the fields of adult basic 
education with SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology]. And he’s sitting in the north gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce Ms. Marilyn Braun-Pollon and other officials of the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that all members of this 
Assembly will grant them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
Bill Missal who’s sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. Bill has been 
a long-time friend — a very long-time friend come to think of it 
— but also has been instrumental in all three of my campaigns. 
Bill resides in Lang and is doing some part-time work, I guess, 
here in Regina. But I would like all members to welcome Bill to 
his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all 
members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming, from my 
constituency, Mr. Chris Hudyma who is a good friend and who 
has long-time lived in the Melfort constituency in the Gronlid 
area. And he’s here today for a visit, and I would like everyone 
to please give him a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Furber: — I wish to present a petition to the Legislative 
Assembly on behalf of the citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
commit to reopening negotiations with Domtar, based on 
the already negotiated MOU, so as to see a viable pulp and 
paper mill continue in Prince Albert. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions have been signed by citizens from 
Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order a certain petition regarding failed government investments 
presented on December 18, 2007, has been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 16(4) has been found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 

New Rink in Caswell Hill 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the heart of most 
Saskatchewan communities is a hockey rink. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure today to tell you about an exciting new project in 
my neighbourhood of Caswell Hill. A few weeks ago, people 
came together for the construction of a new, modern hockey 
rink behind Caswell School. Mr. Speaker, this project came 
about through the co-operation of Caswell Elementary School, 
the Caswell Hill Community Association, KaBOOM! — a 
non-profit organization operating in North America — and 
Home Depot. 
 
Through co-operation and team work in true Saskatchewan 
fashion, hundreds of volunteers faced the winter elements and 
constructed the rink in record time. Mr. Speaker, for many 
decades the Caswell rink has been a place where neighbours 
have played shinny and children have learned to skate. The 
successful completion of this project will ensure residents have 
access to a top-notch rink for many years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
offering congratulations to the many individuals that pitched in 
to make this new rink a reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 
 

Good News 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise in the Assembly to share more good news with 
the people of Saskatchewan. By now I’m sure that word is 
filtering out all across Saskatchewan that our province has once 
again, after six long NDP [New Democratic Party] years, 
crossed back over the 1-million mark in population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, our population now stands at 
1,003,299 people and counting. But, Mr. Speaker, the good 
news doesn’t end there. No, Mr. Speaker, according to Stats 
Canada, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I call the members to order. We’d like 
to hear the statement by the hon. member from Weyburn. I 
recognize the hon. member from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, according to Stats Canada, 
Saskatchewan had the highest third-quarter population growth 
in all of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
discarding with the NDP notion that it’s statistically impossible 
to grow at the rate of the national average. Mr. Speaker, we 
nearly doubled the rate of the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s other good news. Sales are up. Crown oil 
and gas rates are up. Property values are up. And jobs are up, 
Mr. Speaker: 1,400 more people since October and 8,000 more 
people employed in November than a year ago. Mr. Speaker, 
jobs are aplenty — 7,500 available on saskjobs.ca today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, confidence is up. The CFIB [Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business] is reporting that across 
Canada there’s a sharp decline in business confidence, but in 
Saskatchewan it’s growing. Mr. Speaker, at a time when all of 
our economic indicators are on the rise, one of the only 
numbers which is down is the number of NDP members in this 
Assembly. A coincidence, Mr. Speaker? I think not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Award-winning Prince Albert Musician 
 
Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Prince 
Albert’s own Donny Parenteau won two awards at the Canadian 
Music Awards held in Toronto November 29, ’07. He won best 
single and best producer-engineer for his song “Father Time.” 
In September, Mr. Speaker, he won the Rising Star Award at 
the Canadian Country Music Awards. 
 
Donny was born and raised in Prince Albert and grew up in the 
west flat in my constituency. He spent 12 years playing with 
Neal McCoy and was based out of Nashville. His appearances 
with McCoy include, to name just a couple, The Tonight Show 
with Jay Leno and the Grand Ole Opry. 
 
Donny returned to Prince Albert in ’03 to start a solo career. If 
these awards are any indication, Mr. Speaker, he’s about to 
embark on a very successful career. Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen him 
many times and will say that he is indeed both a great recording 
artist and a great performer. 
 
I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in offering 
congratulations to Donny Parenteau and his success at the 
Canadian Aboriginal Music Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

Sutherland. 
 

Traditional First Nations Feast 
 
Ms. Schriemer: — I apologize for rising early. I guess that’s 
what happens when you don’t pay attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we made history in the Saskatchewan 
legislature. For the first time ever, a traditional First Nations 
feast was held in this building. The guests were invited by the 
Premier and Chief Lawrence Joseph of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. The feast included a pipe 
ceremony, and the occasion was steeped in First Nations 
traditions, spiritual ceremonies, and culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
has worked for some time on bettering relations. Her caring 
personality has served her well. This occasion exemplifies the 
minister’s success. Madam Minister has been made an honorary 
elder at the Yellow Quill First Nation and last night was 
ceremoniously wrapped in a blanket by First Nations 
grandmothers. 
 
It was an interesting occasion listening to the Premier and Chief 
Joseph. They both have a great sense of humour, but more than 
that, they both want what is best for their people. Chief Joseph 
presented the Premier with a painting by Michael Lonechild 
entitled “The Battle that Lingers” in recognition of the sacrifice 
made by First Nations war veterans. Chief Joseph suggested 
that the battle should linger no more. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, hope is winning over fear. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, and I ask all to thank Chief Lawrence Joseph and 
his people from all across the province who joined us for this 
hopeful and historical occasion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon’s Columbian Manor 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Back in the 1980s, the 
Knights of Columbus Saskatoon chapter foundation was 
established to assist in the development of a seniors’ housing 
project. The idea, Mr. Speaker, was to fill a void that existed in 
lease accommodation for seniors, those who wish to live 
independently but who could not afford to purchase a home. It 
took years, Mr. Speaker. But thanks to the time and effort of 
many volunteers, financing was secured, land was purchased, 
building plans drawn up, and Columbian Manor — a complex 
that offers seniors the opportunity to live in safe, affordable 
housing — finally became a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the planners of Columbian Manor recognize that 
the need for affordable housing for low- to moderate-income 
seniors would be ongoing, and the initial design allowed for 
future expansion. In 2000, 16 new units were added. And in 
2006 through the then NDP government’s HomeFirst program, 
the housing complex was expanded by a further 51 units of 

assisted living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Knights of Columbus 
Saskatoon chapter and K.C. Charities Inc. for their initial and 
ongoing support of this worthwhile housing project, and I 
particularly want to mention Bob Jeanneau. Because of him, the 
new expansion is named in recognition of his significant 
commitment and contribution to the project. Columbian Manor 
is an excellent example of organizations, community, and 
governments working together to meet the needs of those who 
might otherwise fall through the cracks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 

Department of Health Pre-election Advertising 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we now know that the former Health minister and 
Executive Council ordered the Department of Health to spend 
$1.1 million on feel-good advertising to make the NDP 
government look good in the months leading up to the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the frightening thing is that the $1.1 million was 
unbudgeted, and the department was ordered to absorb the cost. 
One of the headlines in today’s Star-Phoenix says, and I quote, 
“NDP admits . . . ads prior to the election were political.” The 
member from Saskatoon Nutana said that the ads were justified 
as they were needed to counter political ads. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the former NDP government had wanted 
to run political ads and counter-political attacks, the 
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party should have paid for the 
ads, not the taxpayers of the province. Mr. Speaker, that money 
could have been much better spent addressing some of the real 
issues facing our health care system. I understand that our 
Minister of Health is sending a letter to the Leader of the 
Opposition asking his party to reimburse the people of this 
province for ads that were purely political. We look forward to 
his reply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan Party government is 
already taking action to ensure that this NDP practice of 
running feel-good ads at taxpayers’ expense on the eve of an 
election is outlawed for good. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Regina Police Service Awards Ceremony 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday I had the pleasure of being in attendance to witness 
the 2007 Regina Police Service Award ceremony. Twenty-three 
civilians and 31 officers received awards in a number of 
categories. These honours were all well deserved and involved 
individuals putting their lives on the line, saving lives, and 
sometimes both, Mr. Speaker. In short there were a lot of heroes 
being recognized for tremendous service in the cause of making 
. . . 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

The Speaker: — Order. I would suggest members to have 
some respect for the member on his feet, and I would invite the 
member from Regina Elphinstone to present his statement. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Why thank you, Mr. Speaker. In short there 
were a lot of heroes being recognized for tremendous service in 
the cause of making our communities better and safer. While 
each of the individual award recipients warrant recognition in 
this Assembly on their own, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take 
the opportunity to publicly thank and praise the work of one of 
the winners of the teamwork award and that is the Housing 
Standards Enforcement Team. 
 
The team is made up of representatives from the city of Regina 
bylaw enforcement division, North Central Community 
Association, Core Community Association, Regina Fire 
Department, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, the 
Department of Community Resources, Welfare Rights Centre, 
the Regina Housing Authority, the Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Investigation Unit, and the Regina Police 
Service — quite a team, Mr. Speaker. In the citation for their 
award, these entities were recognized for their sharing 
knowledge, skills, and authorities  to improve housing in 
Regina’s inner city neighbourhoods. 
 
The team has been in operation since September of 2004 and 
was developed out of the work of the inner city community 
partnership. Since that time, the team has inspected 1,000 
houses, put work orders on the vast majority of these units, 
moved 73 families into better dwellings, closed 53 dwellings 
with 15 of those being demolished. It has empowered people in 
the inner city and neighbourhoods, like core and my home 
neighbourhood of north central, by letting them know that 
something can be done about slum housing and indeed — as 
you can tell by the stats — has been and is being done about 
improving inner city housing. 
 
I’d like to again thank the Housing Standards Enforcement 
Team and congratulate them on their award. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition. 
 

Equalization Negotiations with Federal Government 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Premier, and I have a number of questions 
about equalization. Mr. Speaker, as everyone in Saskatchewan 
is well aware, the current Conservative government in Ottawa 
promised that 100 per cent of our non-renewable and natural 
resource revenue would be excluded in the calculation of 
equalization. 
 
So my question today is to the Premier. Does he believe today 
that 100 per cent of Saskatchewan’s revenues from 
non-renewable natural resources should ought to be excluded 
from the calculation of equalization? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the Opposition Leader for the question and say that the new 
Saskatchewan Party government believes that there is an 
imperative here for the federal government to provide some 
significant investment in key areas of our province — in key 
areas of not just the economy but in social areas — so that we 
can ensure the current boom that has us now over 1 million 
people in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — That that current boom could have a lasting 
prosperity. There is an imperative here, I believe, in investment, 
in new investment for infrastructure in our province, around 
issues impacting on First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. And I 
look forward to the Opposition Leader’s support in the case that 
Saskatchewan intends to make for value-added opportunities in 
uranium. All of that will be very much part of our plan to press 
for aggressive federal involvement and investment in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we may not have been 
entirely successful in getting a fair equalization deal from 
Ottawa, but we were successful in pushing the population of 
Saskatchewan to 1 million people well before the provincial 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Now the Premier’s answer this afternoon gives 
me, and I believe the Saskatchewan people, cause for concern. 
Since the election I have heard the Premier reflecting on 
equalization. I heard him say, or saw him quoted as saying, that 
he would, quote, “press the feds in another way to get a better 
deal for Saskatchewan.” And I heard his minister in charge of 
energy say, quote, that “all options will be explored.” 
 
Now that concerns myself, this caucus, and the people of 
Saskatchewan because it sounds as if the Premier is about ready 
to sign a deal or has already crafted a deal with Ottawa around 
Saskatchewan’s natural resources. So again I put a very clear 
question to him which he did not answer when he was on his 
feet a moment ago. Does the Premier still hold the view that 
100 per cent, 100 per cent of Saskatchewan’s natural resource 
revenues should ought to be excluded from the calculation of 
equalization, the position he took before the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the preamble of the Leader of the Opposition, I want 
to say that a lot of things, a lot of people were anticipating a 
change in government just prior to the last election. They were 
moving to the province. The Riders managed to win the western 
final because they too were anticipating a change in government 
and a chance to win the Grey Cup. And they did. 
 
The opposition leader quotes me as saying that our government 
intends to press the feds in another way with respect to this 
issue. That’s exactly what we intend to do. And the other way 
that we intend to use is one that will actually work, that will get 
federal dollars to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the now 
Premier when he was leader of the opposition. Right from the 
bench I now occupy in this House, he said, quote: 
 

First, I want to state in the strongest terms the 
Saskatchewan Party, Saskatchewan’s Official Opposition, 
stands in full support and agreement with the Premier and 
the Government of Saskatchewan on the solution: 
 
The federal government should immediately agree to a 
Saskatchewan Energy Accord that allows Saskatchewan to 
retain [retain, note the words] 100% of our non-renewable 
resource revenues beginning in the 2005-06 fiscal year and 
continuing through 2012. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that has been valued by the national government 
as meaning a benefit to the Saskatchewan population of $800 
million every year. Now why, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier 
say one thing before an election and today in this House is 
saying something quite different? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have been very consistent 
on this issue, and during the election campaign this party 
committed to a new accord, a new agreement with the federal 
government — one that would actually produce results — 
because when that member sat over here he got precisely 
nothing from Ottawa. 
 
And it’s hard to fathom why his tactics wouldn’t work. After 
all, he took out a lot of ads in Saskatchewan in the daily paper 
so that he could convince the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan that the federal government should provide more 
money. They did the raise the flag for awareness campaign. 
They did a lot of website activity. I believe when he was here, 
when he was the premier of the province, he tried temper 
tantrums with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that party failed to get a better deal, to get a fair 
deal for this province, to get any deal, to get any money. We 

intend to work very hard to succeed, to get that new agreement 
for strategic investments that will ensure that this province’s 
current boom, now of over 1 million people, translates into 
long-term prosperity. And I invite his support as we move 
towards that goal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly say one thing before 
an election to get yourself elected, and then say and do 
something quite different after the election. I have here, Mr. 
Speaker, a letter that was sent to me by the now Premier, in 
which — a letter he sent to me on February 4, 2005 — he said, 
“What we have at this current time is a patchwork of uneven 
and poorly designed compromises that do not serve the welfare 
of the people of Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is very direct to the Premier. Is he 
now setting us up for a patchwork quilt of poorly designed 
compromises that will not serve the welfare of the people of 
Saskatchewan? You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pattern. They say 
one thing about essential services legislation before an election; 
they do something quite different after. As my colleague just 
said, actions speak louder than words. I ask the Premier: is he 
cooking up some kind of a poorly designed compromise to 
satisfy his political masters in Ottawa? That’s my question, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well this is pretty amazing. I don’t know if 
I’ve ever seen a opposition member actually flip-flop in the 
same set of questions, Mr. Speaker. But I think what I just heard 
there is that that member opposite will not support the 
Government of Saskatchewan in getting a fair deal, in getting a 
better deal from Ottawa that recognizes some of the very unique 
opportunities and challenges we have as a province. That is in 
fact what we talked about before and during the campaign. It’s 
what we intend to deliver on. 
 
And while he’s talking about federal parties, while he’s on his 
feet next — I assume there’s another question — maybe he 
ought to explain what he has done with respect to his federal 
leader who has been attacking, Mr. Speaker, attacking the 
potential development of oil sands in Canada. Which would of 
course, if it ever happened . . . Likely it won’t — he’ll never 
form the federal government — but if it did happen it would 
happen to the great detriment of the province of Saskatchewan 
and of First Nations people in that area who believe in the 
opportunities that can come from oil sands development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party platform clearly stated that 
they were going to negotiate a new revenue-sharing deal with 
municipalities and provide immediate assistance to the 
municipalities while they were in negotiations. 
 
Now the Minister of Municipal Affairs seems to be wandering 
on this a wee bit, because he said, “Seven per cent is not enough 
to solve the problem but we look at it as a useful first step, and 
we’re hoping that we might be able to do better in the future.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go. The Premier’s own minister, the 
Premier’s own minister doesn’t support the Sask Party plan. He 
has doubts about it, and he’s got good experience in municipal 
government. So once again there’s a huge disconnect between 
the Saskatchewan Party during the election campaign and what 
they’re saying now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal Affairs: with billions 
of dollars sitting in government coffers, where’s the immediate 
assistance and what exactly kind of vision for municipalities is 
“. . . we’re hoping that we might be able to do better . . .”? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
municipal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand the 
long faces on the other side of this House. Rather than being 
pessimistic, we on this side of the House are being optimistic. 
We fully recognize that an increase to the revenue-sharing pool 
of 7 per cent this year is not enough to actually fill the 
infrastructure gap. The mayors of the city of Regina and across 
the country have been very clear about all of that. 
 
We have to ask why we got to this sad situation. We need only 
turn back the clock to the 1990s to remember that the former 
government reduced the revenue-sharing grants to the city of 
Regina alone by $100 million. The city of Saskatoon’s revenue 
sharing was cut back by $100 million as well, and the smaller 
communities endured cutbacks of another $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re doing the best we can with the dollars that 
are available within the structure of balanced budget legislation. 
We hope to do better, and we fully intend to do better as 
circumstances permit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, too bad the minister didn’t 
read his current briefing books. He’s still living back in the 
early 1990s. But in this budget year, in this budget year, Mr. 
Speaker, the increase in revenue sharing was $30 million. And 

this Saskatchewan Party, with billions in the bank, is offering 7 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, which works out to about eight and a half 
million dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said in an article that he did not like 
the idea of variable revenue-sharing formula, saying that you 
just can’t plan with that kind of formula. He says the benefit of 
the new Sask Party plan is that it’s finally predictable. But the 
Sask Party plan is tied, revenue sharing is tied to a percentage 
of own-source revenues, and that leads us to a new problem, 
Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Finance tells us the whole reason 
that they need a Fiscal Stabilization Fund is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member will place her question. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, to tie municipal revenue sharing 
to the wildly gyrating provincial finances, how does that 
guarantee for municipalities consistent and predictable funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
municipal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I heard mention 
of wildly gyrating and I’m not sure if this is a dance floor or a 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — But perhaps I can clarify what I 
think I understand the member’s question to be. Her concern is 
the variability of funding through the revenue sharing from the 
province to Saskatchewan’s municipalities. The big problem 
that I as a former city councillor — and everybody that was on 
city council throughout Saskatchewan — faced in previous 
years was we had no idea what kind of revenue sharing was 
going to be provided by the province. When you’re planning for 
road improvements, when you’re planning for sewage and 
water treatment plant expansions and upgrading, how are you 
supposed to plan properly if you have no idea what kind of 
revenue sharing is coming? 
 
One of the fundamental principles that we need to obey here is 
to make sure that it’s predictable, and that’s our intention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has said they’re 
going to negotiate a new deal but the mayors have said, why do 
we need to reinvent the wheel? Start where our negotiations are 
now. 
 
They’re going to increase the funding by 7 per cent, which is a 
decrease from last year, Mr. Speaker, plus they’re going to tie 
revenue sharing to a percentage of own-source revenues, which 
are wildly gyrating, is how the Minister of Finance put it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not predictable. The minister hasn’t been 
consistent. Could he please explain what his plan is? 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
municipal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
would stop wildly gyrating for a moment, perhaps I could say 
the following few words. 
 
We fully intend to pick up where the discussions left off. The 
municipalities of Saskatchewan invested a tremendous amount 
of time and effort and their expertise in developing the 
arguments and furthering the discussions to the point where we 
find them today. We have absolutely no intention of dropping 
the ball. We’re going to pick it up and in this particular case we 
have the pleasure and the opportunity of carrying it across the 
goal line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 

Attracting People to Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, people are becoming more and 
more concerned that this government’s actions don’t match 
their words. My constituency office was contacted a few days 
ago by Karen Morrow, a young woman from Alberta who 
recently moved to Saskatchewan. Ms. Morrow graduated from 
Brandon University’s Applied Disaster and Emergency Studies 
program, the only program of its kind in Canada. She graduated 
with an honours degree, with great distinction and a president’s 
medal for academic excellence, in May 2007. She is one of 
perhaps a dozen Canadian students with a university degree 
specifically in emergency management. 
 
She was offered jobs in four different provinces but she chose 
instead to come to Saskatchewan, a choice which according to 
Ms. Morrow was partly due to the NDP’s graduate tax 
exemption. And now the Sask Party wants to replace the grad 
tax exemption with a tuition rebate scheme that would do 
absolutely nothing to attract people like Ms. Morrow to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the member from Saskatoon Greystone: why on 
earth is he shutting the door on young people moving to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Advanced Education and Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a rather odd phrase 
when we have a day where our population’s up over 1 million 
to start talking about closing doors. In fact this is an era of open 
doors in Saskatchewan because people see new opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, growth, prosperity and security, and keeping our 
promises . . . We campaigned on a graduate tax rebate. That’s 
what we’re going to move on, and that’s about keeping our 
word. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the member can dodge the 
question, but Ms. Morrow demands an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a sad message to be sending to the young 
people of this country who are taking a close look at 
Saskatchewan. Our economy needs skilled workers from across 
the country. Pulling the welcome mat off Saskatchewan’s 
doorstep just doesn’t make sense. 
 
Why is the Sask Party planning to kill the NDP grad tax 
exemption and leave nothing behind to help attract young 
people from out of province? 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Greystone: was this omission 
intentional, or was it just an oversight? And if it was an 
oversight, will the minister at least commit to extending his plan 
to the people who graduate out of province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Advanced Education and Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, people from across Canada 
and around the world are moving to Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan has the fastest rate of growth in Canada right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re keeping our word. We’re keeping our 
promise as far as the graduate tax rebate. What we said we 
would do is we would see through that former government’s 
commitment for this year, and we would begin to phase in our 
commitment starting in the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is completely consistent with the platform. 
It’s completely consistent with what the people of 
Saskatchewan voted for. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s consistent with 
the outcome of the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the proposed plan does not help 
people in this situation. My office was also contacted by Ms. 
Crystal Day, a Regina native who moved out of the province to 
pursue training in occupational therapy, training that isn’t 
available here in Saskatchewan. Why should she be treated 
differently than the nurse or physiotherapist that can be trained 
here in Saskatchewan? Allow me to quote from Ms. Day’s 
letter: 
 

What is fair for some Saskatchewan residents should be 
fair for ALL Saskatchewan residents. To me, not allotting 
the grad tax benefit is an insult . . . 

 
Can the member from Saskatoon Greystone please answer 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Crystal Day a simple question: why? Why is the government 
removing this benefit from people outside of Saskatchewan? 
And why is this minister punishing Saskatchewan people who 
have to get their training outside of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we are keeping our word. 
We’re going to move forward with our graduate tax plan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it was obvious, as we move forward we’re looking 
at programs that aren’t offered in Saskatchewan so that we can 
ensure that those who have moved back, in order to have 
educational opportunities and employment opportunities, will 
have new opportunities under the Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Recruitment and Retention of Health Professionals 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party made 
some pretty clear promises during the election. Their 2007 
platform promised to, and I quote, “Hire 800 Registered Nurses, 
by filling . . . 600 Registered Nurse vacancies and hiring an 
additional 200 Registered Nurses within the first term of 
government.” 
 
Yet their Throne Speech stated, “The goal will be to hire 800 
Registered Nurses within the first term of government.” 
 
So we went from will hire to will try to hire — in less than a 
month, Mr. Speaker. That must be some sort of backtracking 
record. That beeping you hear is the Sask Party truck backing 
up. 
 
To the Minister of Health: can he lay on the table today his plan 
to hire 800 nurses, or will he admit that he actually has no plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, our plan is very clear. Over the four years of our 
mandate, we will hire 800 more nurses — 600 to fill the 
vacancies and 200 more to add to the complement on the floor, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you have to realize where we are starting 
from. After 16 years of NDP government and absolutely 
ignoring the nursing profession in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
we have a deep hole to climb out of. We will be doing it by 
retaining, by training, and by recruiting, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
lofty goal, but a goal that we’re not afraid to set, unlike the 
opposition was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health 
was asked many times to answer how his party would find more 
health care professionals when he was Health critic. He told the 
public to wait and see. Wait and see just isn’t good enough any 
more. Assuming he has a plan — and that may be a big 
assumption, Mr. Speaker — now is the time to show his plan, 
and let the public along with health care professionals judge the 
plan on its merits. 
 
We know the Calgary Health Region alone is short some 500 
nurses. We know the recruitment and retention of health care 
professionals is the foremost challenge for governments right 
across North America and the world. My question is for the 
Minister of Health: how will his government hire 800 more 
nurses in four years? What is his plan to move beyond words 
and into action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I said, our plan over the next four years is certainly 
to hire 800 more nurses. It’s an absolute must. Failing that, our 
health care system is fragile right now and not meeting our goal 
will cause big problems into the future. 
 
But how we will do it is certainly by recruiting, retaining, and 
training, and listening to the stakeholders — unlike that 
opposition. I’ll quote from Rosalee Longmoore. “A decade of 
denial, neglect and mismanagement by the government and 
health-care . . . [employees] has produced the worst retention 
rate in Canada and the highest vacancy rate in Canada.” That is 
coming from the president of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses — someone that she should very well respect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. She has another 
question. The Saskatchewan Party’s platform committed to, 
quote, “Creating 40 New Physician Training Seats and 60 New 
Physician Residency Positions in Saskatchewan Hospitals.” 
These are some pretty specific numbers from the campaign, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what did they say a few weeks later in the Throne Speech? 
And I quote, “My government is also committed to creating 
more training seats and more residency positions for our 
doctors.” Notice there’s no numbers attached any more. No 
more numbers. This appears to be the first step in the Sask 
Party’s plan to backtrack from their election promises. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. Will he state on the 
record that his government will live up to the specific promise it 
made during the election, or would he like to start lowering 
expectations today? 
 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what we 
won’t do is what that previous government did. They lowered 
the number of training seats down to 115 graduating nurses in 
one year. If you wonder why we have a shortage right now, 
they can look in the mirror, Mr. Speaker, because they closed 
52 hospitals, laid off hundreds of workers, and lowered the 
number of training seats. Mr. Speaker, we need to increase the 
number of training seats, which we’ll certainly do. And I work 
with my colleague from Saskatoon. We need to retain, much 
better than we ever did under that NDP record. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s very curious that she would start talking 
about recruitment and retention today, after we learned that that 
opposition spent $1.1 million to try and prop up a terrible 
record in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Seniors’ Drug Benefits 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. She has another 
question. The members on this side of the House are proud of 
the seniors’ drug plan we introduced in March. It truly has 
made life better for Saskatchewan seniors. When we introduced 
it, the members on that side weren’t so keen. They called it 
unsustainable. But we knew it was both sustainable and good 
public policy. 
 
Well not surprisingly, the Sask Party flip-flopped and soon the 
plan was part of their platform with a few changes. Their plan 
picks winners and losers by stripping some seniors of the 
benefits and extending coverage to some, but not all, children 
and youth. 
 
What seniors don’t know is when this will happen. We’ve been 
hearing from seniors concerned about when and if they’ll lose 
their benefits. Pharmacists also do not know when they’ll have 
to start treating seniors differently. My question for the Minister 
of Health is: can he tell us today when some seniors can expect 
to lose their current benefits? 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — During the election campaign we too 
introduced our plan and it was very similar, although we did 
have a cap on income regarding the senior drug plan. What we 
didn’t campaign on though was a universal drug plan that fell 
flat on its face, Mr. Speaker, a universal drug plan that that 

government thought was the saviour in the next election. And it 
didn’t work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to go back to the $1.1 million. Most of it, an awful 
lot of it, was spent to prop up their lagging support, their 
sagging support regarding the drug plan. Mr. Speaker, my 
question — and it certainly will be to the premier; I sent the 
premier a letter — when will they pay back Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money that was used to prop up a sagging 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members to refrain 
from debate across the floor in order that we can hear the 
presentation of the introduction of Bills. I call on the Clerk. 
 
Clerk: — Item no. 1, Hon. Mr. Norris. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 5, The 
Public Service Essential Services Act now be introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 
Education, Employment and Labour has moved first reading of 
Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 6, The 
Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 6, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now read the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — During the next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I lay on 
the Table the annual report of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — And also before orders of the day, I have a 
response to the point of order raised by the Opposition House 
Leader. Yesterday the Opposition House Leader raised a point 
of order regarding the appropriateness of a member’s statement 
given by the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to review Hansard and to consider the 
comments made by the House leaders of both government and 
the official opposition. The Assembly will be aware that the 
rules provide for two distinct periods during routine 
proceedings for statements by members. 
 
The first period affords private members an opportunity to 
make statement on a subject of interest or concern to them. 
Often these statements highlight an event or an accomplishment 
by a group or individual in their constituency. 
 
A second period of time affords ministers the opportunity to 
advise the Assembly of matters relating to government policy, 
ministerial action, or to announce a new direction of program. 
Ministers are not permitted to use this period to comment on 
matters that have previously been announced or to make 
congratulatory messages. Ministers are also precluded by rule 
18(5) from using the time during statements by members to 
make a statement on matters relating to their area of ministerial 
responsibility. 
 
In reviewing the statement made by the minister, I find that it is 
in the nature of a congratulatory message on the 
accomplishment of the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
in being named the 2007 business of the year by the 
Saskatchewan Business magazine. The statement does not 
announce a new policy, direction, or program by either the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, the portfolio for 
which the minister responsible, nor by the Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority, an entity falling under the jurisdiction of the 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. 
Accordingly the statement could not appropriately be made as a 
ministerial statement. The correct time to make this statement 
was during statements by members. 
 
In arriving at this decision, I recognize the view that the 
minister’s statement could leave the impression that he was 
addressing a matter that falls within his ministerial jurisdiction. 

In reviewing the record, the minister was not technically out of 
order. However in order to avoid confusion, ministers may want 
to make a clear distinction that their statement is not related to 
their ministerial responsibilities. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to table responses 
from 100 to 190. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to, 
on the behalf of the government, to table responses to questions 
100 and 190, and I also included in that package our duplicate 
answers to questions supplied by the critic of Corrections and 
Public Safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Answers are herewith tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 
Ottenbreit, and the amendment moved by Mr. Calvert.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to congratulate you for the esteemed position in 
which you find yourself. It’s a position that requires sound 
judgment, impartiality, and grace. And having watched the 
proceedings closely for the last few years, I have no doubt 
you’ll do a great job. 
 
Additionally I’d like to congratulate those members who were 
successful during the last campaign and find a seat in the 
legislature here with us today. I’d like to single out my 
colleagues here today who are here for the first time, as am I. 
Mr. Speaker, what a wonderful accomplishment and what an 
exciting time — I wish them all the best as they strive to 
represent their respective constituents. 
 
I love this province, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spent time in each of its 
four corners. I was born in Kindersley and spent a lot of my 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

childhood with my grandparents on a farm just south of there. It 
was a mixed farm, and I participated in all aspects of life on that 
farm. I spent endless hours on a tractor listening to my 
grandpa’s stories and gaining an appreciation for life on the 
farm and for its inherent self-reliance. It’s there that I learned 
the value of a good, strong work ethic, and a hard day’s work. 
 
I remember vividly shelling peas with grandma and picking 
chokecherries in the Great Sand Hills. In the summer I travelled 
with Schafers to their home in Abbey and with the Archers to 
their farm near Sceptre. I love the freedom afforded the kids 
growing up on a farm, but I learned, Mr. Speaker, that that 
freedom was generally accompanied by an expectation of 
co-operative contribution. Believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, I am 
just old enough to have attended a barn raising. I remember 
lamenting the fact that something like that rarely happened in 
the city. 
 
I then moved with my family to Prince Albert, a great place to 
grow up, Mr. Speaker. I had friends with whom I’d spend 
countless hours exploring the city. I was active in many sports 
where I learned the value of collaboration and of standing up 
for your teammates. In junior high I played volleyball and 
basketball where Coach Regel demanded accountability both on 
and off the court. I went to a great high school where the staff 
of the school system instilled in you a sense of community and 
of a larger purpose, not an easy thing to do for 15- to 
18-year-olds, but they did it with dignity and kindness. And I 
thank them for that. 
 
Being from Prince Albert means that you have ready access to 
the greatest playground in the world. I spent many weekends 
camping, canoeing, and fishing, and gaining an appreciation for 
the natural beauty of northern Saskatchewan. Some of my 
favourite times still is spent fishing in the Nistowiak Falls with 
Annie and Janet Roberts. I have lived between Regina and 
Prince Albert ever since I was a kid. 
 
I’d like to begin by thanking a host of people. Each of us here 
knows full well that none of us get here without the great help 
from a number of people. I’d like to quote Jane Howard, if I 
could: 
 

Call it a clan, call it a network, call it a tribe, call it a 
family. Whatever you call it, whoever you are, you need 
one. 
 

In light of that, I’d like to thank my family for their undying 
support. I’m sure I feel the same way as most of the folks in this 
Chamber when I say I have the most supportive family that one 
could have. They’re generous, honest, and forgiving, and thank 
God for that, Mr. Speaker, because there are times with me 
when they’ve needed to be. Mom, Dad, Derrick, Kim, Dion and 
Christine, Brandon, Brooklynn, Alyssa, Camryn and Elyse and 
Jaelyn — thank you and I love you. 
 
In addition to my family, I have a network of supportive friends 
that stretches from Stanley Mission to Maple Creek. I would not 
be here if it were not for the tremendous support of these folks. 
You see, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a bit of a challenge to face in 
the last year, and it humbles me when I’m reminded of how 
many people reached out to me when I needed them the most. 
I’d like to thank them and let them know that it’s because of 

them I’m here today. 
 
Speaking of being here today, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
thank the many folks that worked hard to see me in my seat 
here in the legislature. It inspires me to know that there are 
people in this world that are so willing to give of themselves for 
something they believe in. They worked exceptionally hard on 
phones, computers, baking, knocking on doors. Whatever there 
was to be done, no matter how big or small, my very dedicated 
team found a way to get it done. I look forward to their 
continued friendship and counsel over the next four years and 
beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, 
Rose. An ideal constituency assistant should be friendly, 
dedicated, bright, and a good problem solver. Well Rose is all 
of these things and more. I’m thankful she’s decided to continue 
her work with me. Keep up the good work, Rose. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take an opportunity now to thank the 
former member from Prince Albert Northcote. He was a 
wonderful orator, a brilliant strategist, and a great defender of 
all things Prince Albert. He taught me a great deal about life, 
dedication to family, and I wish him well in whatever he 
chooses to do in the future. 
 
I would like to, if I could, spend some time detailing the folks 
. . . some of the highlights of Prince Albert Northcote. P.A. 
[Prince Albert] Northcote lies entirely within the city limits of 
Prince Albert. It includes a hospital, the North Saskatchewan 
River, fire station, a large percentage of P.A.’s commercial 
property, an airport, city hall, SIAST, First Nation reserve land, 
and much more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is home to a wonderful mosaic of people — people from a 
wide variety of socio-economic background, race, religion, and 
culture. It was a great place to grow up and is a great place to 
live and work. I’m very thankful to the people of P.A. 
Northcote for bestowing upon me the honour of representing 
them in this great Assembly. I’d like to thank everyone who 
came out to vote, both for me and for the other folks that put 
their name forward, because to me participation in democracy is 
extremely important. I pledge to honour their trust by working 
at it as hard as I can with them and for them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf I’d like to talk about the 
Speech from the Throne. I found it of note not as much for what 
it said, but for what it didn’t say. There are people in my riding 
who have a great need for social and affordable housing. Over 
the past few years, the former NDP government designated 
nearly $260 million to social and affordable housing, but during 
the run-up to the election the Saskatchewan Party presented 
themselves as right-leaning with a social conscience. 
 
So what is their policy as it pertains to social housing? What is 
their policy as it pertains to this most basic building block of 
society? I’ll quote from the new minister now responsible for 
social housing: 
 

Policy is very broad and we did not have a specific 
program to address housing within our policy. Was it a 
void? Perhaps. 

 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

“Was it a void? Perhaps.” When it was politically expedient, 
they railed against the former government for not having 
adequately funded housing. Over a quarter of a billion 
dollars then was not adequately funding housing, but they 
perhaps had a bit of a void in their policy. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, one line from the Throne Speech struck me very 
abruptly: “. . . actions speak louder than words.” Actions speak 
louder than words, Mr. Speaker. I find this, in the time since the 
Throne Speech, to have become a very interesting catch phrase 
— more to that in a moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first I’d like to quote from Mark B. Cohen. Mr. 
Cohen stated, “Nothing can so alienate a voter from the political 
system as backing a winning candidate.” Never was that truer 
than in the city of Prince Albert in the last election. The 
member from Prince Albert Carlton took out an ad that said, 
and I quote, “A vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and 
people working.” The first large item of business for this new 
government, Mr. Speaker, was to rip up the MOU 
[memorandum of understanding] signed by the former 
government, in spite of the fact that it had been worked on for 
nearly two years by government; local members of the task 
force made up of local business people, union, First Nation 
representatives; and a multinational, publicly traded company. 
 
Now it was their right as the new government to tear it up; I’ll 
accede to that, Mr. Speaker. But what I cannot fathom, what I’ll 
never understand, is that while they were saying these things 
during the election, they had no plan whatsoever to get that mill 
up and running — no plan at all for the working men and 
women of my city and for the citizens of the North, this in spite 
of the fact that the member from Batoche has been the lead 
member on a committee that was supposed to have been 
studying this issue for the last six months. Where is his study? 
What has he found? 
 
Well I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, a very interesting piece of 
information. I think it speaks volumes for the concern and 
commitment that they provided on this Forestry file. The local 
task force offered the former Forestry critic, the member from 
Batoche, a chance to be briefed weekly on progress as it relates 
to the pulp mill and the plan to reopen it. Do you know how 
many of these briefings the member showed up for, Mr. 
Speaker? None. Not one, Mr. Speaker. That’s their level of 
concern and commitment. Actions do indeed speak louder than 
words. Only when it became an issue during the campaign did it 
become important to the members opposite. It’s an affront to 
the community and the people that work and live there. 
 
But worse than that, Mr. Speaker, it was done not for some 
rigid, guiding policy where you might say well at least they’re 
consistent. 
 
I think we’ll find in the days to come that this is solely about 
picking winners and losers, Mr. Speaker. And you can bet I’ll 
be watching and standing up for the people of Prince Albert. I’ll 
be watching very closely their policy as it pertains to 
agriculture, ethanol, and I’ll be watching this policy as it 
pertains to transportation. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Furber: — I do note with great interest the big 
transportation announcement at the Regina Airport on 
December 7. It didn’t make it on to the government web page 
list of government news releases. A message from the Premier 
is there telling me to phone my mother. That made the list but 
not this big announcement. The mayor of Regina was there, but 
some of their federal cousins from Ottawa were there as well. 
But it didn’t make the list, Mr. Speaker — very curious indeed. 
 
What are they hiding? And whom are they hiding it from? I 
would guess, Mr. Speaker, that over time this rigid policy will 
have the flexibility equal to that of Stretch Armstrong and a 
game of Twister. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party campaigned on a yearly balanced 
budget and railed for years against the NDP use of a fiscal 
stabilization fund. Then they decided to create and implement 
one of their own. And when the Finance minister was asked 
whether or not this was hypocritical, he responded by saying 
he’d been called worse. Actions speak louder than words. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party campaigned on not allowing rural 
school closures and that they already had a plan that would 
provide $350,000 to each school affected, that they had the only 
plan to solve the problem. Now they’re saying at some point 
they might begin to study the issue. Actions again speak louder 
than words. 
 
The member from Swift Current stated to the North Saskatoon 
Business Association that he’d have Enterprise Saskatchewan 
up and running within a week of taking office. Now the issue is 
not whether this was a prudent thing to say. Obviously it was 
not. It’s that he said it and hasn’t lived up to it. It’s been six 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, and still the people have no idea what this 
enterprise will look like. Actions speak louder than words. 
 
The words in their platform detailed nothing of essential service 
legislation. And in interviews just prior to the election they 
denied that it would be of interest to them. “I don’t think we 
need to get to legislation” is the quote from the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
What have they done in the time since, Mr. Speaker? Well this 
week they pledged to introduce legislation that will force 
sweeping changes on the working men and women of this 
province. Actions speak louder than words. They made 
promises regarding specific numbers of health care 
professionals. The Throne Speech, they chose to begin backing 
away from those commitments. Actions will speak louder than 
words on those items as well, Mr. Speaker. They made a 
pre-election commitment to create 100 residencies for doctors. 
In the Throne Speech, they’ve already began watering down 
that commitment. Actions again will speak louder than words. 
 
I believe the folks that sit across the way are learning that the 
burden of government is too heavy. They’re learning quickly 
that people actually believe that you’ll do the things you say 
you’ll do. And I think that they’ll find out that they’ll be 
accountable on these things. I’ll be here, and we’ll be here in 
full force to ensure that. 
 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the new government will get a 
holiday when it comes to the implementation of their policy, 
and fair enough. The people have voted for change, and you’d 
be a fool to disregard that, Mr. Speaker. And so they will have a 
bit of a holiday period for these things. 
 
But you know what you don’t get a holiday from, Mr. Speaker? 
You don’t get a holiday from integrity. You don’t get a holiday 
from standing behind your word. You don’t get a holiday from 
refusing to stand up for the people that you’re elected to 
represent. This is where the members opposite have already 
made critical errors, from which some will not recover. It is for 
these reasons and many others that I’ll be supporting the 
amendment and not the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
municipal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an honour to rise and address you and, through 
you, members of the Legislative Assembly, our honoured 
guests here today, and the people of Saskatchewan. In addition 
it’s a great pleasure to congratulate yourself and the Deputy 
Speaker on being elected to your new positions. We know you 
will both serve with great distinction. 
 
Now while the primary purpose of my remarks today must be to 
discuss the Speech from the Throne, I would like to begin with 
some very important thank yous. 
 
Like all members I recognize that we are not elected through 
our own efforts, but with the generous assistance of a large and 
dedicated team of volunteers who donate their time and energy 
in a common cause. These are people who knock on doors with 
us; people who do telephone work; people who are involved 
with communications, volunteer recruiting, and election day 
activities. Without their incredible efforts, nothing is possible. 
And I’m very grateful for their hard work and offer them my 
heartfelt thanks. 
 
One person above all deserves special recognition, my wife 
Jocelyn — in the gallery today, in the west gallery — whose 
constant support, insight, and creativity gave me the strength to 
persevere. She made enormous sacrifices over many months in 
order to ensure that I had the opportunity to pursue my dream. 
Now there’s no way to thank her adequately, but my getting 
back to walking the dogs on a regular basis is probably a pretty 
good start. 
 
I also warmly welcome the opportunity to acknowledge the 
other candidates for parties who put their names forward in the 
recent election in Regina South constituency. They campaigned 
very honourably, capably, and served their voters well. Most 
especially I sincerely thank the residents of Regina South who 
chose me on November 7 to be their provincial representative. 
It’s truly an honour and a humbling responsibility to have been 
elected to serve the people of Hillsdale, Whitmore Park, and 
Albert Park in our great city of Regina. Rest assured I will 
approach my duties on their behalf with energy and enthusiasm. 
 
Now the days since the election have been extremely busy and 

productive, with many hours spent in meetings with personnel 
from the Ministry of Municipal Affairs. These extremely 
professional civil servants have worked very hard to provide me 
with a broader understanding of a wide range of issues and are 
as dedicated and focused a group as I have had the pleasure of 
meeting. 
 
Recently some questions have arisen about the change of name 
in my area of responsibility. The answer, Mr. Speaker, is rather 
simple. In a sense this ministry is at long last just going home. 
You see, Mr. Speaker, before its previous incarnation as 
Government Relations, it was called Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs which was preceded by Municipal Affairs 
and Housing; and before that Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing; then even further back Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Recreation; and originally many years ago, Municipal 
Government. We have come full circle. That much is clear. 
What remains somewhat murky are the supposed advantages of 
the ongoing name changes prior to today and indeed their cost. 
But these are questions that other members can consider at their 
convenience. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, voted in favour of a 
government committed to restoring a relationship of trust with 
our municipalities. Therefore my work as minister is to forge 
stronger partnerships with our cities, towns, and villages; to 
work together with northern municipalities and First Nations 
communities; and to extend the hand of friendship to our rural 
municipalities who for so long have felt they were on the 
outside looking in. My message to them is very simple, Mr. 
Speaker: rural Saskatchewan, welcome back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Rural and urban, north and south, 
communities large and small — all of us have to find new ways 
to work together as full partners in a true 
government-to-government relationship because in this way 
we’re going to accomplish a great deal more than we can 
accomplish on our own. In fact I would like a powerful new 
partnership between municipal and provincial governments in 
Saskatchewan to be one of the signature achievements of this 
administration. 
 
In order to achieve this goal, I’ve begun the process of meeting 
municipal leaders from all over the province. It will be my 
objective to get out of the Legislative Building on a regular 
basis because it’s essential to meet people in their communities 
to discuss their issues. 
 
Much consideration has already been taking place between 
Saskatchewan’s communities, key representative organizations 
like SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association], and the New North, along with personnel from 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
As I mentioned earlier in question period, our government 
intends to build on this solid foundation and to make further 
progress. This is important because we have a lot of work to do 
to ensure prosperous, safe, and sustainable communities. 
 
During the 1990s, as I mentioned, provincial grants to 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Saskatchewan municipalities were cut back drastically. The city 
of Regina and Saskatoon and all of the smaller communities 
together lost $300 million in revenue-sharing grants during that 
period of time. As a result, the ability of our cities, towns, 
villages, resort communities, rural and northern municipalities 
to renew aging infrastructure was seriously impaired. This is 
because property taxes alone will never fill the infrastructure 
gap. 
 
Now that times have improved, some progress has been made, 
but the results have always been erratic, and that makes it 
impossible for municipalities to plan optimally. The Speech 
from the Throne offers a different strategy for the next four 
years and outlines its plans within a framework of growth and 
opportunity, security and compassion, and keeping our word. 
 
Saskatchewan people will see our government deliver on its 
commitment to respectfully negotiating a new revenue-sharing 
agreement with municipalities that will include, as promised, a 
percentage of the province’s own-source revenues. It will 
ensure sustainable, predictable funding that will allow 
municipalities to plan programs and expenditures more 
effectively than at any time in the past. 
 
In addition our government will provide $300 million in 
five-year, interest-free loans through the Saskatchewan 
infrastructure growth initiative. This will assist all 
municipalities, including smaller communities, in developing 
the infrastructure needed to meet the soaring demand for new 
housing, commercial and industrial construction. This 
innovative, new idea is a central part of our growth agenda to 
create more opportunities for young people here in 
Saskatchewan and to attract new business and new residents to 
our province. 
 
Our government will also dedicate a significant portion of the 
proceeds from the NewGrade Upgrader sale to assist 
municipalities in the construction of road and transportation 
projects. 
 
Finally, while all these new agreements are being respectfully 
negotiated through consultation with our municipal partners, we 
will be increasing revenue sharing to provide immediate 
assistance to municipalities. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan voted for more opportunities for 
our young people. They told us how every long weekend they 
watch the steady stream of cars with Alberta licence plates 
rolling in on Friday and rolling out again on Sunday. Parents 
want their children and grandchildren back. 
 
As mentioned earlier, the Throne Speech contains a vision of 
planned development in our communities leading to increased 
opportunities for our young people right here at home. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Another key component of our growth agenda is Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. This new vision for economic growth will be an 
inclusive partnership between government, business, labour, 
First Nations, municipalities, post-secondary education 
institutions, and other key economic stakeholders. It will return 
direction of the economy to the hands of people who actually 

create the jobs, invest the dollars, and build the labour force. 
Enterprise Saskatchewan will set economic targets, chart 
progress toward meeting goals, and ensure that we remain a 
competitive and attractive home for investment and job creation 
into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do you build a community? Well you start by 
providing reasons for youth to stay. For too long our young 
people have left after graduating because there were other 
places that were more attractive to them. In response, we are 
offering the nation’s most aggressive tuition rebate plan, up to 
$20,000 over seven years for students who stay in the province 
after graduation to start their careers. We also recognize the 
enormous potential of young entrepreneurs. And so we will be 
helping young people starting businesses in Saskatchewan by 
allowing them, under 30, to earn $10,000 per year tax free for 
five years. 
 
Building communities means making it affordable for people to 
live in their own homes and operate their own businesses. To 
realize these goals, I support our government meeting its 
promise of reducing the education portion of property taxes by 
doubling rebates over the next four years. This promise, applied 
to both farm land and urban dwellings, is a step toward making 
good on our commitment to achieve a better balance in paying 
for our education system and for restoring equity in rural and 
urban communities. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, all of these new ideas for growth must be 
built on the foundation of sound fiscal management. That’s why 
we have introduced the Saskatchewan growth and financial 
security Act. It requires a balanced budget on a yearly basis — 
the same as for municipalities — and allocates budgetary 
surpluses in equal proportions to paying down the debt and 
investing in our future through economic growth initiatives 
such as additional funding for municipal infrastructure. 
 
Balancing our agenda for growth and opportunity are 
commitments for security and compassion. Quality health care 
is an essential part of vital and sustainable communities, and the 
people of Saskatchewan have voted for better health care. As 
reported in the Throne Speech, there is overwhelming support 
for a publicly funded, publicly administered health care system, 
but our people need solutions to overflowing emergency rooms, 
shortages of doctors and nurses, service cutbacks at many 
hospitals, and long surgical wait-lists. That’s why I support our 
government’s ambitious strategy for nurse training, recruitment, 
and retention, along with the plan to create more training seats 
and residency positions for our physicians. 
 
In addition I welcome our commitment to conducting a 
comprehensive patient-first review of our health care system. 
With input and support from Saskatchewan’s own health care 
professionals, this initiative will identify the most effective 
ways to address existing problems and create top quality work 
and care environments. 
 
Further, we will honour our promise to introduce a prescription 
drug program covering a large majority of seniors along with 
children, in a cost-effective and sustainable manner. 
 
Building communities not only means providing infrastructure, 
unshackling natural innovation and enterprise, and improving 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

health care, it is also about giving our young people the skills 
and knowledge to succeed. And that’s why the people of 
Saskatchewan voted for top quality education. 
 
To build a knowledge economy in our communities, an 
economy whose only limits will be those of the imagination, I 
am pleased to support our government’s additional investment 
in post-secondary institutions of $125 million over four years. 
And in order to ensure that our young people are properly 
prepared for advanced education, we are increasing K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] operating funding to school boards 
by 20 per cent over four years — an estimated $118 million 
investment. 
 
Building communities means welcoming everyone, and since 
our government is one of inclusion and recognizes the 
importance of First Nations and Métis peoples to our economic 
growth, I support our government’s proposal to add the history 
and content of the treaties made with First Nations to the K to 
12 curriculum. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — The people of Saskatchewan voted 
in favour of helping families in need, Mr. Speaker, by reducing 
child poverty and supporting good work in our communities. In 
response, our government will provide more funding for school 
lunch and anti-hunger programs. 
 
We will also make an additional $20 million available in the 
next four years to assist community-based organizations across 
Saskatchewan who are on the front lines offering services to 
those most in need. 
 
Another important initiative designed to support families is the 
doubling of the caregivers’ amount tax credit, which will 
significantly assist those who are caring for aging parents and 
dependent family members at home. 
 
Communities are built when young and old come together to 
learn about teamwork and character through sports and other 
group activities. However, there are many who are unable to 
take part due to high costs. So I am also pleased to support our 
active families benefit to help families with the cost of cultural, 
artistic, and sports activities. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have voted for a cleaner 
environment. They know our province currently has Canada’s 
fastest rate of growth in greenhouse gas emissions, and as the 
Speech from the Throne states, “For the sake of our children, 
this must change.” We are committed to achieving our 
province’s greenhouse gas emission reduction target of 20 per 
cent by the year 2020. We’ll provide residents with financial 
assistance when they choose geothermal and solar heating 
systems for their homes. We will also lead by example through 
ensuring new vehicles purchased by government are either 
hybrid or higher-efficiency types, and we will discount the cost 
of insurance to drivers buying these kinds of vehicles. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have also voted for safer 
communities. The Speech from the Throne promises our 
hard-working municipal police services 120 new officers over 
four years. Now as a former member of the Board of Police 

Commissioners for Regina’s police department, I am very 
proud to support this initiative. 
 
New officers will allow for more successful approaches to 
addressing today’s security challenges such as youth gang 
activities and the exploitation of our children over the Internet. 
The root causes of crime must also be addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s why in addition to the increased investments in 
education, child hunger programs, and community-based 
organizations already mentioned, our government will begin the 
essential work of funding long-term beds for people who are 
suffering from addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne contains a new vision 
for our province that the people of Saskatchewan have asked for 
— a vision that emphasizes growth and opportunity and 
balances them with security and compassion. 
 
It offers strategies for well-planned economic development and 
more career opportunities for our young people. It provides 
much needed assistance for students and young entrepreneurs 
that will encourage them to stay and build their lives and grow 
their families right here at home. 
 
It ensures sound financial management, balanced budgets, and 
an orderly paying down of our provincial debt. It focuses on 
improving health care, education, and the supports that enable 
families to succeed. It addresses our responsibility to work 
towards a cleaner environment, and takes a direct approach to 
our need for safe families, safe homes, and safe communities. 
 
And to all who share my passion for community building, it 
imagines a new partnership with our province’s municipalities 
that is stronger and more successful than ever before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the above comments in mind, it is a privilege 
to declare that I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start out by 
adding my congratulations to you on your election as Speaker 
of this Assembly. I’m sure that the next four years will be 
memorable under your direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I start my reply to the Throne Speech, I’d 
like to thank the people of Saskatoon Eastview who have 
elected me to be their MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for the fourth time. Mr. Speaker, the constituency of 
Eastview has many wonderful and unique qualities, not the least 
of which is the vibrant and significant seniors population. 
Eastview has a very high seniors population. It’s mixed with 
many young families and, as we found out on the doorstep in 
the November election, many new residents from outside the 
province. 
 
There are currently two high schools in the Eastview area, 
Walter Murray and Holy Cross, and soon there will be three 
with the opening of the L’École canadienne-française. Many 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

students from these high schools have participated and excelled 
in national competitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our several elementary schools are full of bright 
young people, busy learning to be our next leaders. I’m 
particularly fond of Georges Vanier School, as I am an alumni 
of that school. It is a designated fine arts school and has 
wonderful programs of music, dance, and art. The community 
associations of Eastview and the parent councils are active and 
involved in their schools and neighbourhoods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many seniors’ complexes in Eastview, 
like Scott-Forget, St. Volodymyr, Ilarion, Columbian Manor, 
St. Ann’s, Legion Manor, Brantford Estates, and Sturby Place. I 
enjoy having talking teas at these residences on a regular basis. 
Mostly they talk to me, and I listen and learn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to represent the constituency that had 
the highest voter turnout in the province in the last election — 
91 per cent. Congratulations to all who came out and showed a 
strong democracy in action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to have been the Eastview MLA 
since 1998, and look forward to the next term of office 
representing this great constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a moment to thank the people 
who worked so hard during the campaign to re-elect me to this 
Assembly. First, of course, thank you to my family, who are 
tireless supporters and campaigners — my husband, Don; my 
son, Sean; my daughter, Heather; my mother, who is a fierce 
campaigner at 82; my sister, brother-in-law, and my nieces, 
who all spent a month campaigning with me. Even my baby 
granddaughter was out on the campaign trail with me as I was 
on grandmother babysitting duty one day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next I want to thank the strong, committed, and 
tireless campaign workers of Eastview — Tamara as campaign 
manager; April as voter contact; Kay and Craig as E-Day 
organizers; signs by Milt; and fundraisers, Jim and Jan. 
 
Heartfelt thank yous to the hundreds of other volunteers who 
dropped pamphlets, made food, did data entry, were scrutineers, 
phone, or foot canvassers, had or put up signs, and of course 
donated money. Together we did a superb job and I would not 
be here without all of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be a change being on the opposition side of 
the House, but the people have elected a strong opposition and 
we will be diligent in our duty to protect the interests of 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great enthusiasm that I take on the role 
of Health critic and critic for seniors’ issues. As most of you 
know, I’m a registered nurse and maintain current licensure 
with the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association]. I’ve been the associate minister of Health, along 
with my colleague from Nutana; minister responsible for 
Seniors; the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; 
and vice-president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
All of these past experiences have positioned me well for the 
next four years, particularly as the Health and Seniors critic. 

Mr. Speaker, the new Minister of Health can rest assured that I 
will be happy to score the arguments about recruitment and 
retention and catalogue our party’s achievements when we were 
in government. This is not the time for that long, long speech, 
but it will be coming in detail over the next while as we watch 
the new minister grapple with the problems in the health system 
— problems, by the way, that are not limited to Saskatchewan, 
but indeed are the same across Canada. 
 
We will be very attentive to the delivery of the many aggressive 
and complex promises made by the Saskatchewan Party — and 
in the minister’s own words, the lofty promises — to the people 
of Saskatchewan for their health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November 7 the people of Saskatchewan chose 
two things. Yes, the Saskatchewan Party will be government, 
but there will be a strong opposition to keep the government 
accountable. And that is what we’ll do — watch out for the 
public interest. And as the watchdog of that interest we will ask 
questions, debate issues, and expose, if necessary, direction, 
policy, or legislation that is not in our opinion or in the public’s 
opinion in the best interest of the people or of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the first things the Sask Party Throne 
Speech stressed as part of their stated value was keeping your 
word. Well, Mr. Speaker, that value has already been tested and 
found wanting. 
 
The member from Prince Albert Carlton campaigned on the 
promise of the P.A. mill opening. That promise was quickly 
forgotten as the memorandum of understanding with Domtar 
was torn up. A promise for balanced budget legislation, not so 
much — nothing different from when we were in government 
and they constantly criticized it. Essential services legislation 
not mentioned during the campaign and indeed discounted just 
before the election by the now Minister of Health, and today it’s 
on the order paper. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan did not vote for the Sask Party 
only to see them do covertly what they cannot do openly — 
things such as stripping the Crown assets, TILMA-type [Trade, 
Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] talk about 
competitiveness, and democratic labour laws, meaning essential 
services and union busting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many of my colleagues have said, Enterprise 
Saskatchewan gives the power over much of our province’s 
finances to an unelected body of Sask Party appointees. This is 
very disturbing. How is accountability maintained to the 
people? We will continue to be vigilant over Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been much made by the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone about recruitment and retention, 
particularly in the health sector. I have a copy of a letter, 
mentioned by my colleague from Massey Place, sent to the 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour and 
copied to me as the Health critic, from a very concerned young 
woman about the policies, about what the policies of the Sask 
Party mean to her and others like her as recent graduates of 
health programs not offered in Saskatchewan. And I quote: 
 
[15:00] 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

As I have heard that the current new program will be 
replaced with a new tuition program in 2008-09 for 
students who have studied in Saskatchewan, yet not to 
those educated outside of the province. 
 
As a new graduate, you can understand my concern, and 
that of many of my colleagues in the health care 
professions that were educated outside of Saskatchewan 
purely due to the fact that Saskatchewan does not offer 
education for the following professions: Occupational 
Therapists, Speech Language Pathologists, Audiologist, 
Respiratory Therapist, Optometrists, Prosthetic and 
Orthotics, Clinical per fusionists, Medical Sonographers, 
Diagnostic medical ultrasound technicians, 
Electrophysiology technologists, Cardiology technologists 
and Chiropractors. 

 
If the true goal of the Saskatchewan Party is to attract and 
retain new graduated professionals to Saskatchewan . . . 
 

And I’m continuing to quote: 
 

. . . and their aim is to hire 600 Health Care professionals, 
then why the limitations? . . . How does the new political 
party plan to attract and retain new graduated 
professionals to Saskatchewan when they limit 
Saskatchewan residents in their career choices? 
 
What is fair for some Saskatchewan resident should be fair 
for ALL Saskatchewan residents. To me . . . 

 
And I’m still quoting, 
 

. . . not allotting the Grad tax benefit is an insult to my and 
the above listed professions. It depicts that your health 
care profession being educated outside of the province, by 
no choice of our own . . . is less important in the health 
care field than others. 

 
She asks a very good question and has a valid concern with the 
Sask Party graduate tax plan which certainly does pick winners 
and losers. It is also another indication of the lack of thought 
put into some of the promises made by the Sask Party during 
the election. 
 
The health and seniors file will be my focus. As a registered 
nurse, past president of the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses], past vice-president of the SFL [Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour], associate minister of Health, as well as 
minister of Learning — which included post-secondary as well 
as K to 12 — and minister responsible for Seniors, I will be 
watching the progress of the recruitment and retention and new 
training seats for nurses and doctors. I’ll be watching the 
patient-first audit, the new drug plan, and the capital projects 
promised like fast-tracking the health sciences building in 
Saskatoon. 
 
I’m interested in how some seniors and families with children 
over 14 like their new drug plan. I’m interested in how you 
explain to Saskatoon families how closing the ski hill at 
Blackstrap helps build healthy and active families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as opposition will be relentless in our pursuit 

of accountability in all that the Sask Party does as it delivers — 
or not — to the people of Saskatchewan the promises they made 
during the November election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot finish my speech without mentioning 
how disappointed I am with the lack of any mention in the 
Throne Speech of housing. Having spent last summer in 
housing consultations across the province, it became apparent 
how complex the housing issue is and how vastly it affects 
different people. Saskatoon is affected the most significantly 
and, with all the glee around getting Sask Party seats in 
Saskatoon, it’s strange that no mention was made of this very 
real problem there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so much for the security focus of the Throne 
Speech. Nothing is more important to security than a home. 
Apparently the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t care that for a huge 
segment of our population they do not have that. And how do 
you address child poverty without talking about a housing 
strategy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I’d like to say to the Minister of Health 
that his job started after November 7, and he is accountable for 
all that happens from that day forward. He can no longer be the 
Health critic and blame everything on us and answer to nothing. 
We’ll see how he can square his continued attempt to 
undermine the public confidence in our health system and a 
publicly funded and administered health system. And the clock 
is ticking on the delivery of these promises. Eight hundred is a 
lot of nurses in a tight international market. I’m looking forward 
to his magic touch to solve all the problems in the health 
system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to all the members opposite: I hope the 
promise of keeping your word is better fulfilled than it has been 
in your first month in government. Mr. Speaker, for what it says 
and for what it doesn’t say, I will not be supporting the Throne 
Speech. I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start my 
Throne Speech presentation by congratulating you, Mr. 
Speaker, on your election as Speaker and also to the Deputy 
Speaker on his election. 
 
At this time I’d like to also just send my best wishes out to 
former Speaker Mr. Kowalsky. I understand he’s had an 
operation, and I hope he’s doing very well. Also I’d like to 
thank all the new members that have been elected and the 
re-elected members on both sides of the House. It’s an honour 
to be elected to this House, and I wish everyone well and 
congratulate them on their election. 
 
I’d like to thank the Premier for appointing me as Government 
Whip. I appreciate the appointment. I’m enjoying my job very 
much. 
 
In the last election I garnered 60 per cent of the vote, and I 
would just like to thank . . . 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d just like to thank the constituents of Biggar 
for returning me as their member of the Legislative Assembly. 
I’m humbled. This is my third term. I’m humbled by the first 
two elections and also this third election. Of course this is very 
important. This is the election where the Saskatchewan Party 
formed government. 
 
And I’m looking forward to the next four years in government, 
to be part of the Saskatchewan Party team to help turn this 
province around and make this province a better place for our 
children and grandchildren and people returning and 
newcomers coming to the province to live and raise their 
families and work and pay taxes to Saskatchewan treasury. 
Because that’s, at the end of the day, what pays for our health 
care and our social services and builds the highways is 
economic activity and the taxes that comes into the government 
from those activities. And it’s very important that we set the 
province on the right course so that we continue the economic 
boom that is just taking off in the resource centre. And as we 
see today that the population numbers have gone over 1 million 
people and I can only see that going higher and higher over the 
term of the Saskatchewan Party government in the next four 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank some members of my campaign 
team. I’d like to thank Ed and Terry Young, who were my 
campaign manager and my business manger. They worked very 
hard in our campaign, and a lot is owed to them. Other people 
I’d like to thank: Shannon Lanigan and Lyle Zeebeshko. 
Shannon was someone . . . Like she said, she lived in the 
campaign office. She was there for easily 10 to 12 hours a day, 
and she was a great asset to the election campaign in Biggar 
constituency. Her daughter, Kendra helped out as well. A young 
lady is expecting a baby in January, and so she was there quite a 
lot helping out and always supplied the campaign office with 
Timbits and donuts, so she was greatly appreciated as well. 
Other people that helped out: Robert and Derik helped with 
signs, and Shirley and Glen helped door knock and helped do 
phoning to fill out the roster for scrutineers and those types of 
things. 
 
There’s been other people that helped out on the campaign that 
are too numerous to thank at this time. I’d like to thank my 
wife, Cindy, and our children. As we all know, with the spouses 
back home, that in this political life that it’s a very trying time 
— this trying life, actually lifestyle that we as members have — 
and we rely on our spouses a lot to look after the home fires. 
And you know, I’ve been a member for eight years; my 
children really have grown up and become adults while I was a 
member. And certainly many times Cindy was the, as she says, 
the single parent of the family. While I was either in Regina or 
out doing my MLA duties, Cindy was at home looking after the 
kids. And I appreciate their support and continued support, and 
it’s greatly appreciated. 
 
I’d like to also recognize the NDP candidate in the last election 
in the Biggar constituency. He worked very hard, I have to say, 
door knocked and worked very hard. He had a key number of 
workers in his campaign office. 
 
But there’s just one story I want to tell about the NDP candidate 

in the last election. We had two debates — one in Vanscoy and 
one in Biggar. And the first debate in Vanscoy was possibly 
you might say a more structured event. There was prearranged 
questions so we knew what the questions were and the answers. 
They did open it up to the audience somewhat, but it was quite 
a nice affair. 
 
The debate in Biggar was somewhat different. First of all there 
was only the NDP candidate and myself that even showed up 
for the debate in Biggar. In Vanscoy, the Liberal candidate from 
Saskatoon Northwest came to represent the Liberals. We never 
did see the Liberal candidate in Biggar constituency 
whatsoever. Also in Vanscoy, the Green Party candidate 
showed up for the debate, but he did not show up in Biggar. 
 
Now the NDP candidate in Biggar constituency — during the 
debate in Biggar — began his 5-minute opening comments by 
telling a story about his idea of how Saskatchewan is. How 
society in Saskatchewan works. And he went on to say that 
government is like the parent, and the voters and the citizens of 
the constituencies of the province are like the children. And the 
parent is there to guide the children through regulation, labour 
laws, and so on and so forth. And it was shocking to hear 
someone describe the voters of Biggar constituency and the 
voters of Saskatchewan as children. 
 
I can’t imagine where he got that type of information unless, 
unless this is something the NDP party, you know, tells their 
candidates for the election: that’s how you go out and get votes, 
by telling all the voters that they’re children. So vote for the 
NDP. But who knows, I guess we’ll have to find out if that’s the 
kind of courses that the NDP gave to their candidates. But 
needless to say, the NDP candidate didn’t do very well. 
Anyway it was certainly an interesting debate when my 
opponents came out with that type of an opening remark. 
 
My constituency, or the Biggar constituency, is made up of 
many communities: of course the town of Biggar; includes 
Vanscoy and Delisle and Asquith, Perdue; also the communities 
of Landis and Wilkie and smaller places like Springwater; and 
it goes up to Denholm and includes Radisson and Langham and 
of course Borden, Saskatchewan. 
 
And as we all know that there’s been a tragedy in Borden where 
there’s two young basketball players were killed in an accident. 
And there’s still four young men in the hospital, and the mother 
of one of the deceased basketball players is also injured in the 
accident. So certainly on behalf of myself and my family and 
my staff, and I’m sure that all the residents of . . . all the 
members of the House extend their deepest sympathy and 
would like you to know that you are — along with the families 
of Greg, Sandon, Carter, Tarrell, Dustin, and Jordan — are in 
our thoughts and in our prayers. It’s certainly a . . . It’s never a 
good time to have an accident like that, but certainly just before 
Christmas is . . . It makes it even worse. 
 
I’d like to talk a bit, even though this whole sheaf, wheat sheaf 
issue wasn’t part of the Throne Speech, it wasn’t part of the 
election, but I just feel that it’s . . . Being a member from rural 
Saskatchewan, I certainly have no problems with the idea of 
changing the logo. 
 
I’d just like to quote Michael Jackson, Dr. Michael Jackson 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

who is a research fellow at the Canadian Plains Research 
Centre, University of Regina, and was the chief of protocol for 
Saskatchewan from 1980 to 1905, and I won’t read the whole 
article in the Leader-Post as of December 19 but I just wanted 
just to quote a few items from here and how he describes this 
really silly . . . I guess I can only say it’s a silly situation around 
changing those types of letterheads and those types of things. 
And he says it was: 
 

Conceived in the era of typewriters, it was never . . . 
[adopted] by successive governments to the requirements 
of new technology. 

 
He goes on to say it was: 
 

. . . trendy in the . . . [mid-1990s], produces poorly in 
photocopies or faxes and has a washed-out look on 
computer screens or Web sites. In print, the wheat sheaf 
logo appears in unattractive black or faded tan or bilious 
yellow. Saskatchewan’s government letterhead, business 
cards and signs are among the least appealing in the 
country. 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

In addition to its technical deficiencies, the visual identity 
program has been symbolically problematic. True, it 
evokes the province’s agricultural roots. But agriculture 
now accounts for only about eight per cent of the 
Saskatchewan’s GDP. The rural economy — fortunately 
— has diversified into livestock, oilseeds, pulse crops and 
legumes. Wheat is no longer king — even in the 
agriculture community there is concern about projecting a 
monoculture image. Furthermore, the 1977 logo does not 
make sense to the rest of the world, a drawback to a 
province so dependant on trade. In his Leader-Post 
column of December 15, Ron Petrie compared the logo to 
broccoli. Perplexed international visitors have asked me if 
it represented an umbrella or a mushroom cloud. 

 
And I can only agree with all of these comments. It goes on to 
say, referring to other provinces who have made change to their 
logos: 
 

With a bit of care, Saskatchewan could be in their league. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Referring to British Columbia and Ontario and Manitoba and 
Quebec. To go on: 
 

We have the built-in advantage of an attractive provincial 
flower, the western red lily, and what heraldry experts call 
one of the best shields of arms in the country — the lion 
and (real) wheat sheaves. These could form the basis of a 
successful logo. After 30 years, a confident, prosperous 
province can surely afford to spend some money on an 
image which reflects its character. 
 
The wheat sheaf logo has had its day — in fact, far too 
many of them. It’s time to move on. 

 
Well as a member from rural Saskatchewan, I can only agree 

that it’s time to move on. The constituents of Biggar, who’s 
basically generally an agricultural community, is proud of our 
historical past. We’re proud of agriculture and proud of our 
fathers and grandfathers who developed the province and broke 
the land. And yes, back in the ’20s and ’30s and ’40s, yes they 
stooped sheaves. That’s right. I’ve heard the stories and if you 
want to come out Borden thresherman’s day every fall, you can 
come out there and watch the seniors hook up the horses and 
drive around with their binders and making sheaves and running 
threshing machines and forking the sheaves into the threshing 
machine. That’s great. But it’s historical. 
 
Compare that to today’s modern, high-tech agriculture 
economy. My goodness, we’re using GPS [Global Positioning 
System] and those types of things with a very modern, everyday 
equipment and so it doesn’t make a lot of sense to cling to 
something from the past. I made the comment when I heard 
about this logo situation that even in 1977 the wheat sheaf was 
out of date. I mean, no one had been producing wheat sheaves 
for probably 20 years. So it’s certainly out of date and it’s time 
to move on. 
 
It’s time also to portray our province as it is, as it is becoming, 
as it will be in the future — very progressive. As I said, only 8 
per cent of the economy is agriculture-based any more. And it’s 
very important and our government will certainly support 
agriculture in the future. But we have so many other natural 
resources that we are . . . that is very important to our economy 
and manufacturing and tourism. And it goes on and on. And I 
think logos need to reflect what Saskatchewan is today and will 
be in the future and present that to the country and to the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments on 
the Throne Speech and the content in it. It’s interesting, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the NDP have been throwing at us all 
sorts of comments about the budgetary process. And our 
government has introduced The Growth and Financial Security 
Act, and well it’s very straightforward. It imposes the 
requirement to balance the General Revenue Fund each fiscal 
year, provide for certain . . . it winds up the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. It requires annual surpluses in the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund] to be applied as follows: 50 per cent to the GFSF 
[Growth and Financial Security Fund] and 50 per cent to the 
Debt Retirement Fund. And it also allows for significant 
unexpected revenues to be transferred to the GFSF rather than 
split between the GFSF and the DRF [Debt Retirement Fund]. 
 
So it’s interesting. Before the election the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, when she was the provincial Finance 
minister, would not give a four-year financial report. She only 
gave one year. Now we wondered why at the time. In question 
period we asked many times and in the media we asked why 
she wouldn’t give a four-year financial report. And of course, 
after the election we find out why. We find out why. 
 
Because under the NDP economic plan and budgetary process 
they could only substantiate one year of a balanced budget. 
Year two, year three, year four were going to be deficit budgets. 
The NDP government, if elected, were going to run up an 
additional over $4 billion in debt on their plan. So naturally 
they did not give out four-year financial reports because they 
didn’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know exactly the 
financial situation of the province. 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

And it only reminds me of immediately after the 2003 election 
when the NDP government raised taxes. And the response — 
asked well why didn’t you talk about this during the election 
campaign? — well the then minister said, well you don’t want 
to talk about raising taxes during an election campaign. Well 
gee, that would be too upfront, too honest now wouldn’t it? 
 
So certainly the Saskatchewan Party government certainly is on 
a firm footing of keeping commitments and telling people — 
everybody, everybody — about the financial situation. We’ve 
come very clear about the financial situation and our cabinet 
and our government will be taking steps in the future to address 
the potential debt that the NDP left behind. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number 
of other things that the Saskatchewan Party has promised. It’s 
interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the election 
campaign our platform was called “Securing the Future.” And 
when we brought down our Speech from the Throne, the only 
thing the opposition could talk about was that oh, you have 
nothing new to present. Oh we’ve heard it all before. Well 
excuse me, we fought an election. Our first Throne Speech was 
about our election platform promises, and we are going to keep 
our promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — It should come as no surprise that our first 
Throne Speech would be talking about the campaign that we 
just won. And it’s interesting to note, we’ve talked on this side 
. . . Some people have brought up, asked us the question, well 
now that you’re government, what are you going to do? And it 
always astounded me when we got that question. And I guess 
people are so cynical by the NDP’s 16 years in power that they 
. . . whenever the NDP said something, well you just never 
believed it. And so they thought that’s what we were going to 
do. But no, what we are going to do as government is exactly 
what we said in the election campaign and we expect to be held 
to that standard. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said before “Securing the 
Future” is the basis for our Throne Speech. And you’ll see 
legislation which we have already introduced is based on our 
campaign promises. And our budget coming down next spring 
will be based on our campaign promises, and the Throne 
Speech was laid out. 
 
One area that I would like to touch on is the opposition would 
like to make Enterprise Saskatchewan something, you know, 
sinister. Well again, it’s a campaign promise and it’s a Bill 
that’s been introduced and it’s going to give the opposition all 
winter to talk to the stakeholders and talk about Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. It’s all laid out in Bill No. 2. And they say we’ve 
broken promises and we have a hidden agenda. Well, I don’t 
know. All that they have to do is read “Securing the Future” 
which they seem to have forgot was published in the election 
campaign. 
 
But I just want to point out the stakeholders, or as in the Bill, 
the membership of Enterprise Saskatchewan are members 
selected from persons nominated by a prescribed organization 
or organizations representing business in Saskatchewan, 
representing labour in Saskatchewan, representing Aboriginal 

persons in Saskatchewan, representing rural municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, representing urban municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, representing post-secondary educational 
institutions in Saskatchewan, representing co-operatives in 
Saskatchewan, representing the resource industry in 
Saskatchewan, representing agriculture producers in 
Saskatchewan. I have no idea where the opposition come from 
with their concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think that they have forgotten something. They forgot that just 
a few weeks ago they lost the election and they haven’t gotten 
used to it yet. That’s their problem. They just haven’t got used 
to the fact they’ve lost power and as we know, as they know 
their campaign of fear didn’t work. And they haven’t changed 
the way they operate. They still want to throw out the fear 
factor and try to scare people about what the Saskatchewan 
Party government’s going to do. Well hope beat fear and it will 
every time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — And, Mr. Speaker, again and again we will be 
introducing Bills and a budget based on our campaign promises 
and the future of Saskatchewan looks good. As we know that 
right now the population of Saskatchewan is over 1 million and 
people would say, oh that was going to happen anyway. It was 
just happening. Well it wasn’t just going to happen under the 
NDP because we talked to businesses and individuals that were 
not going to make any plans to come to Saskatchewan if the 
NDP party won the last election. It’s as simple as that. With the 
Saskatchewan Party in government, people made the decision to 
come to Saskatchewan and we see this in the numbers that’s out 
today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly I will not be supporting the 
ridiculous amendment put forward by the opposition, and I will 
be supporting the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Yes and now for something completely 
different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all I’d like to say 
congratulations to yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s good to 
see you up there. I know you’re not wearing the tricorne hat but 
maybe you’ll get the chance later on. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the Speaker of the House and point 
out that obviously he’s one of the deans of the legislature, been 
here since 1986. I think he was a good choice for Speaker. I’m 
sure you’ll have a good time helping him out there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I think he’ll be fair. I think he’s got respect for 
both the give and take, the cut and thrust of debate, but also the 
respect to run a fair House. So I think he was a wise choice on 
behalf of the Chamber as a whole, but particularly for your side. 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Speaker and I share an 
interest in the affairs of Westhill Baptist church, particularly the 
youth group there and what goes. And so I look forward to 
seeing how the Speaker runs this place, which is sometimes a 
bit more unruly than a youth group, I’m sure. 
 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

And yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve seen you in the House. 
I’ve played hockey with you, against you a little bit. I know 
you’re a tough player, lots of hustle. But you know I expect 
you’ll bring those same qualities to the Chamber and I 
congratulate you on it. So it’s always . . . I hope this won’t cut 
into your speech making from the floor of the Chamber or take 
the edges off your elbows at all, but I congratulate you on the 
election to Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the MLAs that have been elected to this 
place. I’d first of all like to say that obviously there are some 
folks that were not returned and there were folks that I had the 
honour of serving with. And to be frank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’ll miss some of those people. And I guess what we’ll do is 
we’ll keep in touch and keep that connection and that friendship 
going, though not in this Chamber. But sincerely, 
congratulations to the members who have been elected. 
 
Given that John G. Diefenbaker quotes will likely now be all 
the rage in this Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I know 
yourself, a big fan of John Diefenbaker — I’m reminded of 
what John Diefenbaker once had to say to a group of newly 
elected parliamentarians. He said the following, and I quote; to 
the young MPs who have just come I would say that: 
 

. . . for the first six months after you . . . [are here], you 
will wonder how you got here. [Then] After that you will 
wonder how the rest of the members . . . got here. 

 
Seriously though, congratulations and good luck to discharging 
your duties to all the new MLAs as members of the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
I want to say thank you to my family, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Not 
just for the campaign, but for all the way down the line. To my 
wife and my love Kelly, to my mom and dad, my brother Ian 
and his family, sister Carla and her family — even the Tory 
members in that family. Carolyn, Madeline, Sean, cousin Lloyd 
— these are all people who play a vital role in my ability to 
work as the MLA for the people of Regina Elphinstone, in 
helping me to stay grounded and focused on what’s important 
in life. So I thank them very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to thank my campaign team from the Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre NDP. First and foremost, my long-time 
friend and co-worker Colleen. I work with her in the 
constituency office. She does tremendous work on behalf of the 
people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, and it’s always 
interesting, and I’m sure many members in this House have had 
the occasion to run into people out on the doorstep that you’ve 
been working with for case work. And it was almost without 
fail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if I ran into somebody that had 
had dealings with my office and Colleen, being very much a 
part of those dealings, they were very grateful for the work that 
had been done and very impressed with the professionality and 
the care and concern that Colleen brought to the job. So I’m 
very fortunate to be able to work with this individual, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I’m very happy to be able to continue in 
this work for the people of Regina Elphinstone. I was very 
lucky to work with her in the campaign as well. 
 
[15:30] 
 

I want to thank my campaign Chair, Tamara, my campaign 
manager, Leanne, and our business agent, Elaine Torrie, and the 
rest of the campaign team, and the Elphinstone NDP and friends 
that helped out in the campaign. They gave so much help and 
support and wise counsel throughout the campaign and beyond. 
I’d note, with interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that their efforts 
this time garnered even more votes for the NDP this time, in 
this election, than in the last election; that we had more signs 
up, more cash raised as well. Above all, I’m grateful for the 
support of 62.5 per cent of the voters in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre is a wonderful place, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — a lot of great diverse neighbourhoods. We’ve got 
the Regent Park, three polls up in there; the old warehouse 
district and a very exciting place which my colleague from 
Rosemont knows a lot about, and the vital business district that 
they have there, the vital nightlife. Perhaps yourself, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I know you get out from time to time. Maybe 
yourself, you’ve been out to see the nightlife there on Dewdney, 
the great downtown that we have in terms of the thriving things 
going on there, and increasingly more people living downtown. 
It’s a great place. 
 
I think of things like the Derrick building that had sat derelict. It 
had become known as the derelict building. That has been 
renovated and has become the Renaissance Retirement village. 
And the people that are there . . . And our government worked 
in the capacity then to help make that possible. 
 
I think of the new businesses that are coming downtown. I think 
of the fact that we’ve got soon-to-be-opened, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the largest Tim Hortons in Canada — in all the world 
for that matter. So I mean, if you want to get your extra large 
double-double you’ll know where to get it down on Broad 
Street there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think about the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
depot that’s going up on the corner of Sask Drive and Broad 
and the great service hub that that will be for people coming 
from around the province to come to Regina and the great 
adornment that that will bring to that great part of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre in the core neighbourhood. The core 
neighbourhood itself, the old Germantown in the inner city 
Regina, a very diverse place, a lot of folks from Slavic 
backgrounds, Ukrainian backgrounds in particular, a lot of folks 
from German backgrounds, but also a lot of Vietnamese and 
Burmese and Chinese and the great . . . You know, the mosaic 
writ small into one neighbourhood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a 
fascinating place to visit. 
 
I think also of the transition area and Cathedral and just the, you 
know . . . Cathedral, if ever there was a vibrant community, Mr. 
Speaker, a community that embodied the very word vibrant in 
terms of one of the largest community arts festivals in Canada 
that is held successfully every year, the great number of artists 
and creative people that live in that neighbourhood and that 
give it a real verve and a real vibrant pulse, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I feel very much privileged to represent part of that 
neighbourhood. 
 
And then I come to my home neighbourhood which is north 
central Regina. North central’s the largest neighbourhood in 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. It’s where I was born and raised. 
It’s where my grandma and my dad came in off the farm in the 
’50s. So McCalls have been around north central one way or the 
other for many years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ve seen the 
neighbourhood go through a lot of different changes. 
 
But one thing that never changes in north central, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the spirit of the people. It’s a diverse place — a lot 
of people from First Nations and Métis backgrounds, from 
Vietnamese, Chinese, again a lot of different Slavic folks, and 
people from right around the world. But I think . . . 
 
There’s a great quote from a woman in Thelma Wallace who 
was very active in the community association back in the ’70s. 
The community association celebrated their 30th anniversary 
just recently, and Thelma Wallace said the following, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. “Some people like to knit,” she says. “Other 
people like to bowl. Me, I’ve always loved a good fight.” 
 
And Thelma Wallace was part of a community association that 
back in the ’70s it was active on a number of fronts in terms of 
housing, in terms of education, in terms of improving the 
opportunities for young people. And you see the fruit of that 
generation and those kind of activists to this day in the 30th 
anniversaries of groups like the Regina Early Learning Centre 
that got its start in Elphinstone, in north central on the corner of 
Elphinstone and 7th Avenue. You see it in groups like the 
Rainbow Youth Centre that is thriving to this day. And I’m 
heading there later on with the member from Rosemont, 
perhaps other members from this Chamber to help out with 
their Christmas dinner. 
 
You see it in groups like the Ehrlo Community Services and the 
kind of action that they’ve brought to the neighbourhood. And 
this past Sunday, we celebrated the 15th anniversary of the 
Outdoor Hockey League, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We didn’t have 
a chance to get you out there suited up, but maybe sometime for 
the outdoor hockey league we’ll get you . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll just remind all members that 
they’re not to bring the Chair into the debate. 
 
Mr. McCall: — My apologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thanks 
for not asking me to resign or withdraw or anything like that. 
But anyway I’ll behave. Honest. Anyway I can’t hear you over 
the wildly, gyrating members of the Chamber, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I’ll take your meaning. 
 
Anyway, north central is a vibrant place. It’s gone through, it’s 
gone through a number of challenges in terms of the . . . In the 
1980s, the housing stock . . . There were a lot of people that 
moved in after World War II that started to leave their houses. 
A lot of places were bought up by landlords that were less than 
scrupulous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the ’80s when a place like the Cathedral was getting a 
large infusion of social housing, had gotten a large infusion of 
social housing earlier in the ’80s, there was nothing being done 
in north central through the ’80s. And then in the ’90s, of 
course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we didn’t have any money. 
 
And one of the things that I’m very proud of that’s happened 
over the past few years in north central is that, in terms of the 

hundreds of millions of dollars that we brought to bear in terms 
of social housing in this province — the first kind of investment 
being made in that regard in decades, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
there’s been a great number of new houses built in north central 
where people get good, decent, affordable housing. And that’s 
. . . When you think about what makes for a good 
neighbourhood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, good housing is essential 
to that. So that’s been very helpful. 
 
I think of things like the Housing Standards Enforcement Team 
that I talked about earlier today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 
of going through and — chapter and verse, root and branch — 
taking out the substandard quality housing and working to 
provide work orders on places to make sure that the standard is 
brought up or to demolish some places and make sure that the 
people are moved into better standard housing. 
 
You know, there’s one woman I think of that talked about 
moving from a place like that into one of these new units of 
social housing. And she said, you know, I feel like I live in my 
own little castle now. And the kind of change in quality of life 
that that brought to that woman and to her young family, I think 
those are the things that we come to this Chamber to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think about the other community-based organizations 
throughout, throughout north central and throughout the inner 
city. I think about groups like the Regina Work Prep. Centre, 
about the Stepping Stones daycare, about the Early Learning 
Centre as I’ve mentioned, Circle Project, Aboriginal Family 
Services. And I think about the North Central Family Centre, 
and I know the members in this House, some of them are very 
familiar with the work that goes on there. 
 
And I think there’s a lot of great things that happen in this 
neighbourhood, a lot of people working hours that you could 
never be properly recompensed for, but they do it because they 
believe in making a difference in the neighbourhood. And a lot 
of these people are from north central itself and people from the 
inner city itself, and they’re trying to take some control of their 
own destiny and make a better life for themselves and their 
families. And I think that’s having an impact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I think about the great faith-based organizations throughout 
north central — groups like the Indian Métis Christian 
Fellowship centre which is an outreach of the Reformed Church 
of Canada; the Healing Hearts Ministry and Pastor Walter Selke 
and the folks there; the Salvation Army and the great work that 
they do throughout the inner city, especially at Waterston 
house, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think about Regina Rescue 
Mission and Souls Harbour and the fact that they’ve merged 
and come together. And you’ve got the Porters working with 
the Carrolls and some very dedicated people that have done a 
lot of great work coming together to do even better work, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I think about the affordable housing units 
that they’re bringing online over on Angus Street just before the 
tracks. 
 
You know, there are a lot of great things happening there, and I 
have the privilege of working with a lot of these dedicated 
people, and it’s a privilege that I take very seriously, and I’m 
very thankful for, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

Of course Regina Elphinstone-Centre, it’s home to Taylor 
Field, Mosaic Stadium. Of course we’re very happy to see the 
Grey Cup come to the field and very proud that that’s the home 
of the Riders. Also the lion’s share — or should I say the 
Roughriders’ share — of the green mile is located in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. You’ve also got the Regina Exhibition 
Park located in north central Regina. And you know, they’re not 
just the largest employer in the neighbourhood; they’re also a 
good corporate citizen and work closely with community 
schools in the neighbourhood as a good partner and as a good 
source of support and volunteers. 
 
So I represent a riding that I feel very fortunate to represent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m very thankful for the trust that the people 
have placed in me, and I hope to continue to represent them in 
opposition to the best of my abilities just as I have over the 
previous six years. 
 
It’s going to be interesting in the days to come, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because this progress that has been built up in the 
inner city for renewal and for revitalization, of course I and my 
neighbours and the people that sent me to this Chamber, they 
want to see that continued. They want to see the good work of 
the safer communities and neighbourhood units in helping 
people take back their neighbourhood from gangs and drug 
houses. They want to see that work continued. 
 
They want to see the revitalization that is embodied in a place 
like Scott Collegiate where we’ve got over the past four or five 
years, you know, functioning athletic teams and arts and 
recreation programs and graduating classes the size of which 
we’ve not seen since the early ’80s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that’s hugely hopeful because of course 
Elphinstone-Centre in north central in particular is the youngest 
neighbourhood in Regina and possibly the youngest 
neighbourhood in all of Saskatchewan. And when you think 
about the average age being 17 in north central and 35 in the 
rest of Regina, it’s a very young place. And you see that on the 
street, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And you see the need for people having good schooling and the 
good work there, but you also see the need and you realize the 
need for things like better early childhood development. And I 
think of the tremendous work that’s been done over the past 
years in a program like KidsFirst, and giving families that are at 
risk and youth that are risk a better shot at a better life. And if 
you can have a good pregnancy and a good birth, the chances of 
having a better outcome as you come into your early teens and 
as an adult — they’re so much more improved, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — So I’m very proud of the work that’s been 
done under the heading of KidsFirst, and I very much want to 
see that work continue. And I also want to see the partnerships 
that have been struck with the Circle Projects and the Rainbow 
Youth and the Aboriginal family services, I want to see those 
partnerships continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to see Scott Collegiate which has again a vital role 
to play in the revitalization and renewal in inner-city Regina. In 

the summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it came out as number two on 
the provincial capital list out of the Department of Learning, 
now the Department of Education — number two. 
 
And so when you think about what’s going to happen in this 
budget, I’m going to be watching to see that the progress we’re 
making at Scott Collegiate and the renewal that’s embodied in 
all the planning work that’s done for a new high school and 
how that figures into a shared facility overall in terms of 
working with partners in the city and the health region and 
others, I want to see that work continued, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to see the work continued at the Exhibition Park where 
this government had put up, when we were in government, we 
put up a tremendous amount of money to work for the renewal 
out there, not just with the multiplex which is a great success, 
but with the overall renewal of the park as a whole. And I want 
to see that support continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to see the work of the skills trade centre which takes the 
great Bricks and Mortar program out of Martin Collegiate and 
continue to build on that. I want to see the people that have left 
primary education or secondary education that are coming back 
to those critical education opportunities, I want to see them 
succeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And the great start that we’ve got with the skills trade centre, I 
want to see them patch up to Mount Royal and the great work 
that’s being done in Saskatoon at Mount Royal Collegiate and 
the skills trade centre they’ve got up and running there. I want 
to see that work expand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
From a local perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a 
number of things that I’ll be watching in the days ahead to see 
where they wind up on the priority list for the government of 
the day and how the priorities of the government of the day 
mesh with the priorities of the people that sent me to the 
legislature. 
 
In past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of serving as 
the minister for Corrections and Public Safety and the minister 
for Advanced Education and Employment. I had the great 
privilege of conducting a review of accessibility and 
affordability issues for post-secondary education. And again, I 
had opportunity in the campaign to participate in a debate with 
the now member for Saskatoon Greystone that had a lot of 
complimentary things to say about the report and the findings 
therein. 
 
And I’ll be watching to see how this government picks up on 
the things that were in that report, such as a centre for northern 
learning to expand the learning opportunities that are available 
out of the North, both in a centred way, perhaps building on 
Northlands College and NORPAC [Northern Professional 
Access College] and NORTEP [northern teacher education 
program] out of La Ronge, but also the satellite learning 
opportunities that are available there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll be watching to see what kind of plan comes out of this 
government in terms of Aboriginal secondary education 
completion, which is a critical component in terms of, if 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

Aboriginal people are going to go on to post-secondary 
education it makes sense that one of the greatest predictors of 
that is completion of secondary education. We don’t do a good 
enough job on that front, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’m going to be watching very closely to see if they pick 
up on the things like expanding NORTEP and SUNTEP 
[Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program] and 
making sure or maybe moving to a new program like Sask TEP 
[teacher education program] which increases the supply of 
Aboriginal First Nations and Métis secondary teachers. Because 
again, in terms of having an education system that is welcoming 
and brings people along, it’s very important to have those 
critical role models at the front of the classrooms. So I’ll be 
looking to see what’s done in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll be looking to see what they do with regards to credit 
transfer in terms of making sure that if I’m going to be doing 
university classes out in Yorkton or in Swift Current at Cypress 
Hills College or at many locations throughout the province in 
our excellent regional college system, I’ll be looking to see that 
credit transfer so when these students look to come out of 
Parklands College in Yorkton and move into the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan], that they don’t have half of their 
classes that they were counting on being stripped away from 
them. And we need these better articulation agreements 
between the different parts of the post-secondary sector, and I’ll 
be watching very closely to see how that progresses. 
 
I’ll be watching very closely to see how tuition is impacted in 
the coming budget because of course we caught a lot of grief 
from the members opposite and, most importantly, from 
students, about the way that tuition had increased over the past 
years. Despite the fact of Saskatchewan leading post-secondary 
education funding on a number of indicators, tuition had gone 
up. And the only time that we got some containment on tuition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was when we froze tuition and we bought 
that reprieve in terms of the unrelenting march of tuition 
upwards. 
 
So the new government’s put all their eggs in the basket of a 
rebate, pointing in part to the example of Manitoba. Manitoba 
of course has a rebate system but they also have some of the 
lowest tuition on the front end in all of Canada. And I guess I’ll 
be very interested to see how monitoring tuition actually 
translates into real accessibility for students. I’ll be interested to 
see how the bursaries come out of this new scholarship fund 
that they’re planning, which I think builds on the great example 
of the Centennial Merit Scholarship and the success that’s been 
had there. 
 
I’ll be interested to see what happens in terms of training space 
expansion. In the campaign we put forward a number of 10,000 
training spaces which we think would have eliminated the need 
or the backlog in terms of people waiting to get advanced basic 
education. You know, people that didn’t, that the secondary 
system didn’t work for, that are coming back because they 
realize they need the skills and the training to take advantage of 
the great opportunities available in this hot economy and in this 
great labour force situation that confronts us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And will we have those training spaces in the next budget when 

we need them? We’ll see. Will they build on the record 
expansion of training space opportunities that has occurred in 
this province over the past two years? We’ll see. Will they build 
on the partnership that we struck with the Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technology and help them become a centre of 
Aboriginal training excellence in this coming budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? We’ll see. 
 
You know, the time is now to take advantage of this great, this 
great advantage that we have in Saskatchewan, which is that 
young Aboriginal population, that young First Nations and 
Métis population, that wants the training opportunities, that 
wants to get the skills training to get into that economy, to get 
the good jobs, and to make a better living for themselves and 
positively impact their families and the community. And we’ll 
see what happens with the partnerships that we had built in trust 
and respect with organizations like the SIIT [Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies]. 
 
I’ll also be looking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of what’s 
done around child care, because of course in this Throne Speech 
it’s essentially a hold-the-line position, where we promised an 
expansion of child care spaces. 
 
And if you think about people that are going to get back into the 
workforce, oftentimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re coming 
with children. They’re coming as single parents, and they have 
every right to expect that they should be able to have their kids 
well taken care of, and that that early childhood development 
. . . it’s not a choice between either, you know, good care for 
your child or you can’t go to work. And we’ll see what happens 
in terms of child care spaces in this budget to come, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Because again the expansions have been made over 
the past number of years. There was a lot done, but there’s more 
that critically needs to be done. 
 
I guess the last thing I’ll say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last sort of 
theme I’ll address is that I’m very happy to have the, to be 
assigned the duty of responsibility for First Nations and Métis 
Relations issues in the caucus. And certainly I’ve had a great 
number of teachers on these kind of issues over the years. When 
I first arrived in the House, I sat behind Keith Goulet, the then 
member for Cumberland House, you know, himself a great 
educator, you know, one-time principal of Gabriel Dumont 
Institute. And he was . . . I learned an awful lot from him, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ve also learned an awful lot from the current member for 
Athabasca and from the current member from Cumberland, 
herself who was the first First Nations minister in a government 
in Saskatchewan in the history of the province. 
 
You know, I’ve had the privilege to sit alongside history 
makers, and people that have really blazed that path forward for 
First Nations and Métis people, and that have that respect that 
these two individuals have in spades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
I’ve learned a lot from them and I hope to continue to learn a lot 
from them. 
 
I learned a lot from our leader, the member from Riversdale, 
who when he was premier set out for himself the goal of going 
to every First Nation in the province. And he didn’t quite 
achieve it, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll bet you this, that he’s been on 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

more First Nations than any three or four premiers in this 
province’s history put together. 
 
I think of going out to Star Blanket First Nation with him in 
Treaty 4 territory, as we’re in Treaty 4 territory here today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, where the Chief Starblanket — it was during 
the centennial year — and he said, you know, oh this is our 
centennial celebration, because this is the first time we’ve had 
the premier show up to our First Nation. And Star Blanket’s not 
that far out of Regina. It’s in those File Hills First Nations right 
by Balcarres. And you think about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s, you know, centennial of the province, and they were just 
happy to have the premier. And I guess that’s something I’ll be 
looking for in the days to come in terms of that work that’s to 
be done, in terms of trying to bring people together in this 
province and bring First Nations and Métis people fully into 
their rightful place in the economy and society. 
 
I think we got a good start to it. We’ve got the mace runner 
sitting right here for all to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
representing the critical nature of the treaties and the 
importance of the treaties to this province, and the fact that the 
mace rests on the beaver pillow and rests on the mace runner, 
and that it represents the sun shining and the grass growing and 
the river flowing, and that’s for how long those treaties were 
signed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I congratulate the members opposite in terms of the feast 
that was held in this building last night. I think that’s a positive 
move. I think the more times that we can get together as people 
in this province where there have been differences in the past, I 
think that’s positive. So I congratulate them on the gesture. But 
I guess we’ll see down the road, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how the 
gesture is followed up in terms of action. 
 
And I think in terms of the action that we have taken in terms of 
adult basic education and taking training on to First Nations; 
you know, stepping over that old federal jurisdiction. I think of 
the work that had been done in terms of taking roads to reserves 
where that pavement used to run up to the edge and then it was 
federal responsibility. Well we got sick and tired of waiting for 
the feds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was a need and we wanted 
to move on these fronts. 
 
And there’s more work to be done. And we’ll see how this 
government lives up to the need that is out there, to the 
tremendous opportunity that is out there in terms of First 
Nations and Métis people in this province. I guess I’ll be 
interested to see how duty to consult works out in terms of their 
practice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll be very interested to see that. 
 
And I’ll be interested to see how things like the First Nations 
University of Canada and how that’s . . . Are we going to be 
backing up First Nations in terms of dealings with the federal 
government or are they going to be apologists for the federal 
government to First Nations? Because of course we know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the federal government of the day tore up the 
Kelowna accord, tore up the Kelowna accord. So we’ll see what 
comes of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Anyway I think I’ve exhausted my time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Your interest seems to be flagging in my remarks. But I thank 
you for the opportunity to be able to participate in this Throne 

Speech debate, to come and say a few words on behalf of 
myself and to say thank you to the people of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre who have sent me here to represent them in 
this Assembly. 
 
I’ll be voting for the amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
against the Throne Speech — just to clear that up in your mind 
— and will be watching very closely and acting very vigorously 
in the days to come as an opposition to hold the government of 
this day to account. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s with great pleasure that I stand . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. It’s with great pleasure 
that I stand and engage in the Throne Speech of the first session 
of the twenty-sixth legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And what a pleasure it is to be on the government side of the 
House in order to be actually part of the team of men and 
women who proposed this Throne Speech and who put together 
such concrete examples of why the people in this province have 
placed their trust in a new government. 
 
But before I talk about the Throne Speech in specific, I would 
like to offer some congratulations. First of all to Mr. Speaker on 
his assumption of the Chair, on behalf of the legislators of the 
province of Saskatchewan. The Speaker is certainly a person 
who over the years has earned the respect of all of the members 
of this Assembly in the way he’s conducted himself, both in this 
Assembly and outside as a member of the legislature. He has 
always conducted himself with a great deal of professionalism 
and integrity and I know it’s going to be a great deal of pleasure 
for all of us as members of the Assembly to work with Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On the next level I would like to congratulate yourself, Mr. 
Speaker. At the risk of engaging you in the debate, I want to 
extend my congratulations. It’s been a tremendous pleasure to 
work with you in terms of your duties as an MLA, and I know 
that you’ll conduct yourself with a great deal of professionalism 
and responsibility and impartiality in the role that you are now 
filling. And on behalf of all of the legislators I would like to 
thank you for your commitment to the office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I would like to also offer my personal 
congratulations to all of the new members of the opposition and 
of government on their election to the responsibilities as 
members of the legislature. I remember with a great deal of 
fondness 1995 when I assumed the honour of being the member 
of the legislature for Melfort-Tisdale at that time, and it actually 
took me some time to appreciate all of the dimensions of the 
responsibility that I had assumed on behalf of my constituents. 
 
And all that I can say to new members on both sides of the 
House is, savour the opportunity and savour the responsibility, 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

and treat it with a great deal of gentleness and respect because 
the people that elected you are certainly counting on you to do 
your very best job of representing their interests. 
 
And no matter how much we kind of take pride in how well 
we’ve done in our own elections, we all have to remember . . . 
is that no one got elected by unanimous consent. No one won 
100 per cent of the votes of their constituents. And so there are 
always people out there who think differently than we do, and 
that’s a good thing. But once we become members of the 
legislature for that constituency we’re honour bound to 
represent not only those who supported us — even though 
that’s much easier to do sometimes — we’re there to also 
represent those who differed with our opinions. And that is a 
thing that I think does each of us well to remember at all times, 
that we are members of the entire constituency, and make sure 
that our constituency offices and our own time are available to 
all as we conduct our duties and discharge our responsibilities. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I also would like to thank those veteran members that have let 
their name stand on opposition and on government side of the 
House and who have been successful, and also to thank those 
who were not successful who let their name stand and sought 
re-election and were not successful. No matter how you cut it, 
when veteran members are coming back to the legislature or 
allowing their names to stand again, they have brought with 
them a lot of experience and a lot of commitment and many 
years of service to the people of this province, and as such need 
to be noticed and respected for the work and the contributions 
they have made. 
 
Many of us over the years have had opportunities to attend 
parliamentary functions representing our province in other 
jurisdictions in Canada and nationally and internationally. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think everyone realizes that when we 
represent this province — members of the opposition and 
government — we have a responsibility to always do our best, 
and the veteran members of this Assembly have always 
represented the province of Saskatchewan very, very well. And 
it has always been a very prideful thing to participate with other 
members in representing this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to recognize and congratulate 
the Opposition House Leader on his responsibilities. I certainly 
have come from that office and recognize how important it is in 
order to have the affairs and conduct of this Assembly function 
in a smooth and a efficient way, that you absolutely need the 
co-operation and support of the opposition and government 
House leaders, and also working with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the Speaker of the legislature to make sure that the business 
and the agenda of the legislature is properly conducted and that 
we can indeed do the jobs that we are called to do, recognizing 
that we have different agendas, that we have different 
responsibilities. But at the end of the day we’re all part of the 
big, broad Government of Saskatchewan, if you like, that is 
discharged to represent all of the citizens of this province. 
 
In taking my seat again in this legislature there are some special 
thank yous that absolutely have to go out. And I will try not to 
mention a lot of individual names at the risk of leaving some of 
them out. But the first name that I will mention, I have no 

hesitancy of mentioning the name at all because this individual 
is so important to everything that I am and everything I have 
been over these many years, and that’s to my good wife Carole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Carole has been always there. She’s 
been always supportive. She was the best campaigner in this 
election, certainly was an active and assertive and pleasant door 
knocker, was pleased to attend functions in communities with 
myself through the campaign. And even as the campaign ended 
and we were pleased to receive the news that we did in terms of 
our own personal and the party support and the likelihood of 
new responsibilities, she has never wavered in terms of her 
undying support for this office that I hold and I cannot take 
enough time and often enough to thank her publicly for all of 
her great service. 
 
I also want to recognize our family. We have three daughters, 
three sons-in-law, and six grandchildren. And I received a text 
message just a few minutes ago that a seventh grandchild may 
be imminent and so I’m a little bit nervous about standing here 
as potentially a new grandpa . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m waiting for the PalmPilot to 
vibrate again and to say, way to go grandpa, or something of 
that nature. And so I must assure the House that I would much 
rather be doing something else, but if I get a message this 
House and this Assembly will be the first to know. 
 
You know when you speak of your family, quite often over the 
course of events the girls have said, you know sometimes, Dad, 
I have to answer questions on your behalf, that I’m confronted 
in my workplace or my profession or with friends that are 
asking questions that perhaps you should be more responsible 
and maybe more appropriate to answer. 
 
And so I think we have to recognize that very many times that 
in service to our constituents and service to the province, it puts 
our family members on the hot seat. And I think that it’s 
important for all of us not, for me at this stage, to just recognize 
my own family but to recognize families of all members and to 
thank them for the awkward times, the awkward situations, and 
sometimes the situations where they’re really put on the hot seat 
on behalf of their parent for the office that they hold. So thank 
you to all the families. 
 
I would like to mention my Melfort constituency campaign 
team. You know each of us think that we are pretty important in 
our own right as the candidates that go into an election, but I 
have to tell you that most of us rely so very heavily and so very 
fundamentally on the team of men and women that come 
around us and support us through a campaign. There are any 
number of jobs and tasks that simply are too formidable for us 
to do on our own, be that from stuffing pamphlets to baking 
muffins, to putting up signs and to making phone calls, and to 
coming along on door-knocking occasions or whatever. And I 
would like to, without naming them specifically, to thank very 
much the campaign team that worked so very, very hard to get 
me re-elected. 
 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

I would like to thank the people of the constituency of Melfort 
who have placed their trust in me. You know, I grew up in 
Watson, Saskatchewan and a very good friend in Watson is a 
lady that’s 90 years old by the name of Edna Rowlett. And 
Edna, after the election, used to . . .  
 
I should back up a bit. Edna used to work with my father, who 
passed away in 1968, but they were long-time working 
colleagues in Watson, Saskatchewan. And after the election 
Edna sent me a little note and she said, it’s really too bad that 
your dad isn’t here today because he would be so very, very 
proud of you. But I want you to know that I’m proud of you. 
And that meant an awful lot to me in terms of the people and 
expressing some of the sentiments of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and certainly sentiments from my hometown 
that I have the great pleasure of representing as a part of the 
Melfort constituency. 
 
You know, in assuming my responsibilities as the minister in 
charge of Finance, I was really daunted in the thoughts of the 
task that was before me. And one of the very great comforts that 
I had in the very first day of the role I was assuming was to hear 
that Mr. Doug Matthies, the deputy minister of Finance, had 
agreed to stay on and to serve the people of Saskatchewan most 
incredibly. 
 
And I certainly want to not only thank Mr. Matthies for his 
service in the past in a number of roles with the public service, 
but his continued service to the people of Saskatchewan as the 
deputy minister of Finance and would like to, on behalf of 
government members, thank all of the people in the Department 
of Finance who do such a very, very good job of making sure 
that the people of Saskatchewan, and in particular their 
finances, are truly and properly safeguarded so that the 
decisions that we make are based on complete facts and good 
information. And so let me thank the Department of Finance in 
particular and the deputy minister, Doug Matthies, for his 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — You know, I was very pleased in the 
first week, I was pleased in the first week to go and spend a 
couple of hours over at the department. And I said I wanted to 
go over and say hello and thank you and get to see where 
people worked and express my gratitude for all the support, not 
only that they had given up to that stage but all of the support 
that I knew in anticipation of the Treasury Board discussions 
and the preparation of the budget would be required. And it was 
just a delightful opportunity to go and see these truly 
professional people, where they worked, and to say hello and 
thank you on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And I think 
it is probably a very factual statement to say that this was a 
similar experience across the piece for ministers as they 
recognize the professionalism and quality of the civil service 
that support us each and every day. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but thinking back 10 
years ago when eight brave people, four former Conservatives 
and four former Liberals — myself being one of that latter stage 
— dreamt a dream about talking about the possibility of the 
formation of a brand new party in Saskatchewan to break with 
the kind of the stagnation and the stalemates of the past that 

would provide a legitimate change for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it is at some times time 
that you think back and 10 years into the future and dreamt that 
perhaps we would be given the opportunity to govern this 
province. And certainly when I look back now it seems in one 
hand is a long time ago, and on the other hand just like it was 
yesterday when this all happened. And I’m very, very proud. 
And I would be remiss, because seven of us are here, if I didn’t 
mention our former colleague, Mr. Ben Heppner from Rosthern, 
who is now ably represented by the member from Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — With great deal of pride, when I went 
to the new office in the Department of Finance that is reserved 
for the minister, it was with a great deal of pride that I put the 
picture of the eight of us on the mantel of the fireplace and 
that’s where it’ll stay as long as I occupy that office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened with a great 
deal of interest over these last number of days on the Throne 
Speech debate. Members on both sides of the House outline 
their concerns and their aspirations for themselves and for their 
constituents and for the future. And a great many words have 
been said about the content of the Throne Speech. And I would 
like to touch briefly on it as well. 
 
You know, when we campaigned and when we conducted 
ourselves as an opposition, we also tried very diligently to make 
sure that we were representing some hope for the future. We 
said that there were some fundamental things that are needed in 
this province in order to get it onto a sustainable path for the 
future. We needed to make sure that there were some balances 
in terms of the priorities, so that in essence we made sure 
everyone had the opportunity to move forward together. 
 
We said there had to be growth and opportunity. There could 
not be progress unless there was that real belief and dream and 
drive to grow this province. You know I can remember many, 
many times over the past where I would say, you know, why 
can’t Saskatchewan people build Saskatchewan? Because it 
doesn’t take anybody to figure it out very much longer, that by 
and large Saskatchewan people have been very instrumental to 
build Alberta; have been instrumental to build British 
Columbia. Why in the world can’t we turn our attention to 
building our own province for the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And the answer, of course, is that 
there was never the framework and the support and the attitude 
that we could do it. That we could believe in ourselves and, if 
given an opportunity, Saskatchewan people indeed could secure 
futures. And I am pleased to see that that whole situation is 
beginning to turn around. And I’m pleased to see the very 
positive news that is beginning to emerge in terms of the future 
of Saskatchewan. 
 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

We also said that we can’t solely focus in these balancing 
priorities just on growths and opportunity, because you have to 
have a reason for doing it. You have to have some legitimate 
reason for saying, why do you want to prosper? Why do you 
want to grow the economy? Why do you want to increase the 
opportunity for revenue in the province? There has to be reason 
for doing it, or what’s the point? 
 
And of course the point is, is we have to build a more secure 
and compassionate society and province for those people who 
maybe are unable, who are unable to participate to the level that 
they would’ve liked to. And they need to be given a hand up 
and not necessarily a handout. And they have to be given the 
opportunity to fully participate. And that doesn’t matter what 
the colour of these people are, or the country of origin. 
 
We have to be a welcoming place to make sure that our First 
Nations people truly feel at home and legitimately a part of the 
economy of this province. We have to make sure that people 
that have come here from other countries in the world, either as 
refugees or immigrants, feel part and comfortable with our 
economy, and indeed become even comfortable with our 
weather and our winters. 
 
But most important, most important in this day of cynicism, and 
most important in this day of cynicism and particularly after the 
16 years of NDP government, there has to be a government 
that’s known for keeping its word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And so, Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to live up to those fundamental principles that were 
outlined in the Throne Speech that was delivered in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will refrain, so I can allow some colleagues to 
have some time on the floor, from going into the details of the 
programs that are outlined in the Throne Speech. But I would 
say this, is that when we balanced the priorities and we put 
these priorities into place for our first term of government, we 
recognized that there is more to be done than what is outlined in 
this Throne Speech. These are the priorities. These are the 
balancing of priorities between growth and opportunity and 
security and compassion. And we’re going to do those things as 
we’ve outlined them because we’re going to keep our word, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we look forward with a great deal of anticipation to the 
challenges of the four years ahead. And I look forward to 
working not only with my colleagues in this side of the House 
and the Government of Saskatchewan, but also to the 
opposition — but more importantly to work with the people of 
Saskatchewan so they will clearly see and identify that we have 
kept our word. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election to 
the Speaker’s Chair. I know that your experience in this 
Assembly will serve you well and I wish all the best in your 
new role. 
 
This has been quite a year for me. It has been just over a year 
since I was first nominated to be a Saskatchewan Party 
candidate in the constituency of Martensville. Since then, we 
have won two elections in Martensville and formed 
government. 
 
Much to the consternation of the member for Cannington, I 
achieved a 77 per cent majority in the by-election in 
Martensville this past March. For a few months at least, it held 
the record in the highest result for the Saskatchewan Party. That 
result apparently helped to raise the determination of other 
members, and the member for Cannington now holds the record 
by achieving a 78 per cent result in the past election. And I 
would like to publicly congratulate him for his efforts. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the people of Martensville were 
determined to have their voices heard. After years of averaging 
around 3,500 votes for the Saskatchewan Party, we saw over 
6,000 votes in this past election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — The people of my constituency wanted 
change. They voted for change and with their unwavering 
support we achieved that change. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that we would not be here 
without the help of others. Throughout this past year, with all 
the challenges that it presented, one thing was constant and that 
is my constituency assistant, Whitney Friesen. I want to thank 
Whitney for all his help, his support, his advice, and his 
friendship. I would also like to thank Whitney’s wife, Rebecca, 
and his children, Simon, Matthew, and Julieanne for their 
patience and generosity in letting Whitney put in the hours 
necessary to ensure that I was able to stand here today. 
 
I would also like to thank the many volunteers and supporters 
that stood by me this past year. Their time and effort cannot be 
overlooked. Every time our signs were knocked down, folks 
were out the next day putting them back up. Mr. Speaker, it 
must have been incredibly windy during November as my signs 
went down just about daily. I’ve had many phone calls, emails, 
and letters of support which have also been very encouraging. 
 
And to our new Premier I would also like to say, thank you. The 
encouragement that he has offered me over this past year has 
strengthened me as we both adjusted to the loss of my father 
and his friend. And I would like to thank the Finance minister 
for his kind words. My dad is certainly looking down on his 
seven former colleagues with great pride. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — The Premier’s faith in me and his 
appointment of me to his first cabinet is extremely humbling. 
And I’m determined to do my best in my new position as 
Minister of Environment. 
 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

And last but certainly not least I would like to thank my mom. 
Her encouragement and prayers mean more to me than I can 
say. Both mom and dad stood by me as I searched to find my 
place in this world, and I don’t think any of us could have 
imagined that my journey would have ended here. 
 
As I said, the overwhelming support of those around me have 
left me determined to do the very best job I can on behalf of 
those who sent me here. And it is my honour to stand here 
today in support of my government’s first Throne Speech. 
 
I firmly believe that the Saskatchewan Party, its MLAs, staff, 
cabinet, and leader have established a plan to ensure that our 
province’s future is secured. We know that the majority of the 
people of this province believe that as well, as they chose 
positive change on November 7. 
 
I’m honoured to be the Minister of Environment, and I’m 
excited about the environmental policies that we have laid out 
in our platform, policies that will be implemented over the next 
few months and years. 
 
And while the NDP talked, emissions continued to rise. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition continues to use the phrase that 
actions do speak louder than words. And that is true. And while 
the NDP were content to talk, we will take action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I listened with interest as the opposition 
leader ranted the other day about our plan for the environment. 
Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of his bluster is almost laughable. 
During his party’s time in office the NDP oversaw a 62 per cent 
increase in greenhouse gas emissions in our province. That is 
double the national average, and that is their record. The NDP 
would like to claim that they are leaders. The only thing that 
they led on was leading the country in greenhouse gas 
emissions. That is their record. It is not a record to be proud of, 
and it is not a record that we can ignore. 
 
The NDP have complained that there is no mention of our plan 
in the Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, we all know that a Throne 
Speech is an overview of a government’s agenda. The budget 
speech gives the details of that agenda. Keeping that in mind, 
perhaps the opposition leader would like to explain why in the 
NDP’s last budget speech the word environment didn’t appear 
once — not once, Mr. Speaker. That is also their record. The 
NDP cares so much about the environment that they couldn’t be 
bothered to mention it in their budget speech. 
 
In addition, the Leader of the Opposition when he was premier 
appointed himself the minister responsible for climate change. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Riversdale is responsible. 
He is responsible for overseeing the massive increase in 
greenhouse gas emissions in this province. He claimed 
watching An Inconvenient Truth was a significant moment in 
his personal understanding of climate change and its impact on 
Saskatchewan and used money from the Crowns to bring Al 
Gore to Regina. 
 
And with all this being said, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting 
that I stand here on day seven, the second-last day that this 
Assembly sits, and still have not received a single question 

about climate change. For an issue that is apparently of the 
utmost importance to the opposition, I find that pretty shocking. 
And I expect I might get a question tomorrow but I won’t hold 
my breath on that. 
 
I can assure the people of our province that the environment is a 
very important issue to this new government. Yes, the NDP left 
quite a mess and on this side of the House we are determined to 
engage both Saskatchewan residents and our Crown 
corporations in initiatives that will reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 
Through SaskPower we will be offering low-interest loans to 
help people install solar and geothermal power in their homes. 
Through SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] we will 
reduce the registration fees for hybrid cars. We will maintain 
programs that offer incentives for energy-efficient appliances. 
 
And we will do something that the NDP didn’t even think of 
doing. We will negotiate with the federal government to ensure 
that fines, penalties, and offset money will stay right here in 
Saskatchewan. This money will be used to fund technology that 
will further help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in this 
province and contribute to our economy. Through the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority we will ensure that 
Saskatchewan residents continue to have access to a secure, 
clean water supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to look like they were doing 
something prior to the election, the NDP needed some cash to 
throw around to buy votes. And how did they come up with that 
money? They privatized the NewGrade Upgrader. They started 
privatizing Crown assets to pay for promises. But we really 
shouldn’t be surprised, as the member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
in the past openly contemplated privatizing SaskEnergy. The 
people of this province should be breathing a collective sigh of 
relief that the NDP are no longer in a position to sell off our 
Crowns to pay for their election promises. 
 
And as a brief aside, Mr. Speaker, while we’re talking about the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana, I was cheered yesterday to hear 
that an NDP member finally told the truth about election 
advertising money. The member admitted that over $1 million 
taken from the Ministry of Health, money that could have been 
spent on training or hiring nurses, was spent on political 
advertising. I would only hope that now that the admission has 
been made, that the NDP will do the right thing and repay the 
Ministry of Health the money that its party used for its own 
political gain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we will take action to 
secure the future of our province for the generations who will 
come after us. We will ensure that our environment is healthy 
and our resources are protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that the opposition is confused by 
the way that we’re governing because we’re actually doing 
what we said we would do. We understand that this is a foreign 
concept for the NDP. It was the NDP who said that an election 
is no time to talk about taxes and then hiked the PST [provincial 
sales tax] immediately after the election. 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

It was the NDP whose members openly speculated about 
privatizing SaskEnergy and then engaged in fearmongering, 
accusing others of wanting to do the same. It is the NDP who 
claims to value the Crowns and then privatized the NewGrade 
Upgrader so they’d have a slush fund prior to the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are the party who does what we say we will 
do. It is this government who promised fixed election dates. 
Promise kept. It is this government who promised that we 
would remove the PST from used cars. Promise kept. It is this 
government who promised to not risk $100 million of 
taxpayers’ money on a non-binding MOU. Promise kept. And it 
is this government who promised to end the NDP’s style, 
interference in business. Promise kept. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — To raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s the member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in just a few moments ago, the 
member from Martensville raised the issue that, and said, I 
quote, referring to the member from Nutana, finally an NDP 
member told the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rules are very clear that you cannot do 
indirectly what you cannot do directly. And in making that 
statement, she’s in fact calling members of the New Democratic 
Party liars, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask you to review the Hansard and 
rule on that issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 
think that if you will check the record, that you will clearly see 
that the member from Martensville was completely within her 
rights and using the very best of parliamentary language in 
terms of the context of her speech, Mr. Speaker, and I look 
forward to your ruling. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members for their comments and 
having missed the comment personally I will review the record 
before I make a ruling. I recognize the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, it is this government who promised to end the 
NDP-style interference in business — promise kept. It is 
apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP learned nothing on 
November 7. They are the same, tired, old NDP. The people of 
this province spoke loud and clear on November 7, and they 
voted for positive change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province did choose. They chose accountable government and 
rejected NDP vote buying. They chose fairness and doing what 
is right and rejected the NDP’s payoff of Murdoch Carriere. 
They chose the open door policy for business and rejected the 
NDP style of picking winners and losers. They chose a vision of 
hope and rejected the NDP campaign of fear. 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly we are aware of the 
responsibility that we have as the people of Saskatchewan did 
choose this party to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we accept that 
responsibility and will work hard for all people of this province 
to ensure that their future is secure. We will work to ensure that 
this a prosperous and growing province. We will reverse the 
negativity of the past 16 years of NDP rule, the same party who 
didn’t believe that it was statistically possible for our province 
to grow. We will work hard to make sure that our promises are 
kept to the people of this province, and I’m sure in time the 
NDP will get used to that style of governance — keeping your 
word and doing what is right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with pride that I stand here today to support 
my government’s Throne Speech and to reject the opposition’s 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saltcoats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I only have a few minutes today, but I want to start by 
congratulating you on your position as the new Speaker of the 
legislature. I want to also commend the member for Arm River 
for taking on the job as Deputy Speaker, and I know you’ll both 
do a very fine job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interesting even I was thinking about what I 
would say today and I was thinking about question period and 
the areas that the NDP are asking questions in question period, 
after having 16 years to fix all the problems, that all of a sudden 
out of the blue, these problems have become fresh again. 
 
We saw an NDP government that closed hospitals in the early 
’90s. We saw an NDP government that chased nurses out of this 
province in the early ’90s, chased doctors out of rural 
Saskatchewan in the early ’90s, and have the audacity to get up 
in question period and ask what we’re doing to fix it. And 
we’ve been here three weeks, Mr. Speaker. I can’t believe this 
is happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m also surprised, Mr. Speaker, with the problems that we have 
in agriculture right now that we’ve gone two weeks, and we 
haven’t had one agriculture problem. I guess what that tells me, 
Mr. Speaker, is that rural Saskatchewan and agriculture still 
doesn’t rate high on the NDP scale of what’s going on in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the member from Martensville and 
the member from Melfort and others have talked about this 
Throne Speech and what this government will be doing, Mr. 
Speaker, that the NDP government in 16 years neglected to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are going to do is treat Saskatchewan 
people as one — whether you come from urban Saskatchewan 
or you come from rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Finally 
rural Saskatchewan will have a voice in this legislature, and it’s 
been a long time coming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

[16:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have 
said before, this Throne Speech is about growth and 
opportunity. And I think the morning after the election on 
coffee row showed that the best. Everybody was beaming like 
when they come to coffee row. It was fresh air in Saskatchewan 
finally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — After 16 years, 16 years, Mr. 
Speaker, of being held down with walls around Saskatchewan, 
neglecting rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, finally 
Saskatchewan has an opportunity to grow and treat 
Saskatchewan people fairly and bring our kids home from 
Alberta, instead of after Christmas and at Easter, watching our 
kids leave back for Alberta, BC [British Columbia] or Ontario. 
You know what’ll happen after the Easter long weekend and 
they go to Banff skiing? They’ll come back to their jobs in 
Saskatchewan and back and live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few 
minutes. Mr. Speaker, and talk about agriculture and the 
commitments we made during the election. Mr. Speaker, we 
committed to dealing with the education tax on farm land. And 
Mr. Speaker, we will keep that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I must inform the Assembly that under 
rule 29(5) it is my duty at this time to interrupt debate and put 
the question on the amendment. 
 
It has been moved by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
seconded by the member from Regina Douglas Park: 
 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 
 
That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
the Assembly because it has a hidden agenda that picks 
winners and losers, because it puts the interests of the 
federal government ahead of Saskatchewan citizens, and 
because it is already making excuses to abandon election 
commitments. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 

[The division bells rang from 16:32 until 16:45.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 19] 
 
Calvert Harper Junor 
Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Nilson Yates Higgins 
Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 
Forbes Taylor Beatty 
Quennell Broten McCall 
Wotherspoon   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 
 

[Nays — 36] 
 
Stewart Elhard Bjornerud 
Draude Krawetz Boyd 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Hickie Cheveldayoff Heppner 
Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 
Norris Morgan Hutchinson 
Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 
Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 
Weekes Chisholm Wilson 
Duncan Michelson LeClerc 
Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 
Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 19; 
those opposed, 36. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. Debate will 
proceed on the main motion. I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to speak to the 
Speech to the Throne and let everyone know of course that I’m 
very supportive of what the government has put forward here. 
This is a speech that, this is a speech that speaks to the future of 
our province; a future that is very optimistic, a bright future, 
one that we are just beginning to see across this province, the 
optimism that we’ve never seen before. The kinds of things that 
are coming forward point to a very exciting future for this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you will know that this is my first 
time to speak again, other than a little bit in question period 
since I was re-elected. Through the years of ’91 to 2002, I was a 
member of the Legislature, but this is my first time to be back 
in the Legislature and I’m very happy . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Just to sum up my feelings, Mr. Speaker, in 
a few short words, I would look back to the past a little bit to 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 2007 

the immortal words of . . . that sum up my feelings about being 
back here, the immortal words of Mama Cass when she said, 
I’m back. I’m back baby; I’m back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mama Cass kind of sums it up. But I’m 
also, Mr. Speaker, very humbled by the fact that the good folks 
of the Kindersley constituency again exhibited their confidence 
in electing me once again. I had the very distinct pleasure of 
being elected in ’91 with a very small, very small majority at 
that time. I think it was around 500 votes; the next election in 
’95 with a bigger majority, the next election in ’99 with a bigger 
majority, and this one with an even bigger majority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I don’t know the figure right off the top of 
my head, but I think it’s 66 per cent, something in that 
magnitude, which isn’t too bad for a farm boy from Eston, 
Saskatchewan in a good constituency like Kindersley. 
 
The people of that constituency, Mr. Speaker, you would know, 
are very, very good people. I think they represent the salt of the 
earth. I think they represent all what is good about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — They believe in things like hard work. 
They believe in getting up in the morning and pulling on your 
boots, pulling on your jeans, and getting down to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — They believe in things like, they believe in 
things like being a part of their community. They believe in 
things like investing in Saskatchewan. They believe in investing 
in a business, investing in opportunity in Saskatchewan. They 
believe in things like church. They believe in things like 
schools. They believe in all of the services that are good for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the kind of constituency that Kindersley is. They are the 
people that believe in creating opportunity. And that’s why we 
see, not just agriculture, but we have a strong economy based 
on agriculture, farming, and ranching. We have an economy 
based on oil and gas sector. We have small business. We have 
larger businesses. We have, I think, what represents the broad 
base of Saskatchewan people in this province. And I would say 
to the people of Kindersley, I am so honoured to be a part of 
that constituency, so honoured to be the member elected in that 
constituency. And I look forward to serving them for a long, 
long time once again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And I would, I would say that in a decade 
or two when the young man that sits opposite from me here, in 
a decade or two when he decides to step down as the Premier, 
he will hand it off to another person just as it’s been handed off 
to him. And it will be a good day for Saskatchewan when we 
see after 20 years of service from this Premier here. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — We will see at that time, we will see at that 
time a province that has grown dramatically, a province that is 
prospering, that has continued to prosper through the years 
because of the policies that our Premier has put in place — the 
policies that are exhibited, the policies that are exhibited in the 
Throne Speech, that everyone in Saskatchewan is looking 
towards the optimism of this province for the first time in 
decades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — A province, a province, a province that has 
been waiting with bated breath for a change of government. 
And no matter where we go in Saskatchewan these days, we see 
that from the people of Saskatchewan. At every event that 
members of this side of the House, the government, have 
attended in the last couple of weeks, person after person after 
person are coming up to us and saying, finally in Saskatchewan 
we got it right. We got a government that’s going to build this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Finally in this province, finally in this 
province we have got a government that’s going to speak 
towards the optimism, are going to put in place policies that 
allow the creation of wealth in this province, allow for jobs, 
allow for employment, allow for the kind of things that we are 
going to put in place that are going to build this province like 
we’ve never seen before. 
 
The Throne Speech speaks to all of those kinds of opportunities. 
Our platform speaks to all of those opportunities. And I think 
it’s important that everyone in Saskatchewan understands the 
kinds of things that the Saskatchewan Party is going to put in 
place. And the Throne Speech speaks to all of them. 
 
You would know, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve just gone through an 
election campaign in the last little while — November 7. And in 
the lead-up to that election campaign we saw a lot of things 
happen. We saw a lot of things happen in this province. We saw 
a government, the members opposite that represented that 
government, that went on a spending binge like we have never 
seen before in an effort to try and shore up their electoral 
possibilities. 
 
But the good news was, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province saw through it. For the first time in a long, long time 
they saw through the kinds of things that a government, a failed 
philosophy, a failed government, and a failed premier had put in 
place. Now what they see is the kind of optimism that’s opened 
up that is unprecedented in the province here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It was a campaign, our campaign, the Saskatchewan Party’s 
campaign was a campaign that’s based on our philosophy — 
one that says that we believe in hope, one that says that we 
believe in dreams, one that says we believe in rewarding hard 
work and success. Those are the foundations of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



December 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Those are the kinds of things that speak to 
the optimism that is in Saskatchewan that we’ve never seen 
before in the past 16 years exhibited by the members opposite. 
 
In direct contrast to that, Mr. Speaker, what did we see from the 
NDP? What did we see in the lead-up to it? What we saw in the 
election campaign was a campaign based on fear, a campaign 
that was based on negative attitudes, a campaign based on 
negative advertising, a campaign that was based on everything 
that we should be opposed to in Saskatchewan in the most 
vigorous fashion we can possibly be. We should never allow 
this province to ever sink back into that kind of negative type of 
advertising, negative type of campaign. We will never, we will 
never allow that sort of thought pattern to permeate this side of 
the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, that 
campaigned through a number of elections — and many of my 
colleagues have campaigned through a number of elections as 
well — I can only imagine what it must have been like during 
the election campaign for people that were supporting, or put 
their names forward as candidates for the NDP, to get up every 
morning and say to yourself, how can I be the most fearful? 
How can I spread fear in a fashion that’s going to cause some 
people to doubt the optimism that there is on our side of the 
House? How can we do that? 
 
It’s difficult to understand, Mr. Speaker. Every day when I 
wake up, and I know every day when the members on this side 
wake up, they wake up with an optimism in their heart. They 
wake up with some hope. They wake up with some dreams. 
They wake up and say to themselves, what can we do that’s 
good for our province today? 
 
The alternative wake up and say, how can we tear down? How 
can we spread fear? How can we convince people in seniors’ 
homes that they should be afraid of the Saskatchewan Party? 
How can we create in the minds of labour that we should be 
afraid of the Saskatchewan Party? How can we create in 
agriculture how people should be afraid of the Saskatchewan 
Party? How can we make students feel that they should be 
feared by the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
All of those kinds of things, all of those kinds of things were 
what the campaign was all about. And as a result of that I think 
it was very, very clear to Saskatchewan people for the first time 
in a long, long time. I think they got fooled in the last election 
campaign, but on November 7 they are no longer fooled by that 
kind of campaign any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Never again. And I would invite the 
members opposite, if they haven’t heard the Premier speak in 
the speech that he made in Saskatoon in one of the rallies that 
we had at the end, I would invite you to look it up on the 
Internet and you will hear a speech that speaks to the kind of 
optimism that this party’s all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And you know, I was out in Alberta in the 
last few days at The Energy Council that Saskatchewan is now 
a part of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — For the first time we are a part of that 
organization. We have been pushing the members opposite to 
belong to that for a long, long time. But I’ll tell you what was 
happening out there. They had a great big banner up welcoming 
Saskatchewan to The Energy Council. The Energy Council will 
be the council that sets energy policy for North America . . . 
[inaudible] . . . very, very soon. And I can tell you that while 
you don’t want to be a part of the future, the Saskatchewan 
Party does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The Saskatchewan Party is going to 
continue with that kind of growth agenda here in Saskatchewan 
because it’s exactly what we believe in. We believe that if we 
are going to lead in this country and lead in North America, 
we’re going to have to be a part of the organizations that believe 
in those kinds of things as well. We’re not going to be an 
observer status type of operation like you people were — an 
observer status, which is the only thing that you guys wanted to 
be a part of rather than being a full participant. Someone at the 
table that can help set policies here in this province and in 
Canada and in North America. You sat there in observer status 
rather than being a part of it. And it also speaks to the kinds of 
concern that we see in agriculture as well. 
 
We see in agriculture the kind of thing where we in 
Saskatchewan and over the years used to set agriculture policy. 
And unfortunately now we don’t set agriculture policy, as a 
result of the activities of the member opposite. But I dare say, 
under the new Agriculture minister, we will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The hour’s approaching the adjournment 
time, Mr. Speaker. But prior to saying that, I just want to 
conclude the debate off here this afternoon by saying that this 
Premier was going to be here for a long, long time. This young 
man is going to be the Premier of this province for a long, long 
time because he represents the generational change that was so 
necessary here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hour now being 5 o’clock, this Assembly 
now stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Norris .........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Wotherspoon .............................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................163 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................164 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Rink in Caswell Hill 
  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................164 
 Good News 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................164 
 Award-winning Prince Albert Musician 
  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................164 
 Traditional First Nations Feast 
  Schriemer ..................................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Saskatoon’s Columbian Manor 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Department of Health Pre-election Advertising 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Regina Police Service Awards Ceremony 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................165 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Equalization Negotiations with Federal Government 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................166 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................168 
  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................168 
 Attracting People to Saskatchewan 
  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................169 
  Norris .........................................................................................................................................................................................169 
 Recruitment and Retention of Health Professionals 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................170 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................170 
 Seniors’ Drug Benefits 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................171 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................171 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 
  Norris .........................................................................................................................................................................................171 
 Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 
  Norris .........................................................................................................................................................................................171 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................172 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................172 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................172 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................172 
 



 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................177 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................179 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................182 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................187 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................190 
  Yates (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................192 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................192 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................192 
 Recorded Division (amendment) .................................................................................................................................................193 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................193 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


