


















































Hansard: April 23, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 23, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1359 
 April 23, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
today again a petition in regards to the need for dialysis units in 
the province of Saskatchewan to attack the issue of diabetes, 
and I read the prayer in regards to a dialysis unit in the 
Broadview Union Hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by folks of 
the community of Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition signed by residents and voters, asking the 
government to maintain full service of the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, they are concerned that if the office 
closes, the citizens of Rosetown and surrounding communities 
will not have a personal contact with a SaskPower 
representative. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe all of the signatures on this petition come 
from the community of Rosetown. I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
a petition with citizens concerned about their safety when 
driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Middle Lake, 
Watrous, Norquay, Yorkton, Canora, Humboldt, and Meacham. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of residents of this 
province who are very concerned about the condition of 
Highway 18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Radville and 
Regina. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens of Biggar concerned about 
possible reductions of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and Biggar and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

rise with a petition from citizens of the Lafleche and district that 
are extremely concerned that the withdrawal of lab services 
would cause undue hardships, especially to seniors. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Lafleche, 
Woodrow, Glentworth, and Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of our health care system and 
recruitment of doctors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are all from the fine community of 
Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition that concerns the condition of Highway 368, 
starting 4 miles south of Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of St. 
Brieux. And they’re very concerned that the highway endangers 
the safety of drivers and harms economic growth in the area. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lake 
Lenore, St. Brieux, and Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
citizens opposed to possible reductions of services to the 
Davidson and Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available as well as lab, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to users from the Davidson and Imperial areas 
and beyond. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
towns of Davidson, Bladworth, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition calling for the widening of 
Highway No. 5, a highway that goes from Humboldt to 
Saskatoon and is one of the main corridors east to west. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from RR [rural 
route] 6, adjacent to Saskatoon in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Southeast. I so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 55 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what is the 
proposed date for the start of construction for the clean 
coal plant at the Shand power station at Estevan? 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
individuals purchased GreenPower from SaskPower in 
2006? 

 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

And in addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
organizations — with a breakdown of how many NGOs, 
government department or agencies, and private 
organizations — purchased GreenPower from SaskPower 
in 2006? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure on behalf of the Premier to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly guests 
who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and who are the 
provincial leadership of the Knights of Columbus.  
 
The Knights of Columbus is a Catholic family, fraternal service 
organization with over 11,000 members in Saskatchewan and 
1.7 million members internationally. 2007 is an important 
milestone in this province as it marks the 100th anniversary of 
the Knights of Columbus coming to Saskatchewan. In fact 100 
years ago, the first Knights of Columbus council was chartered 
right here in Regina, the Regina council no. 1247. 
 
The Knights serve their church and their communities in 
various ways, and last year, Mr. Speaker, the Knights of 
Columbus in Saskatchewan gave just under 1 million hours in 
volunteer work and donated in excess of $1.5 million to various 
charities. The Knights in this province support such needs as the 
Special Olympics, senior citizen housing. They provide college 
bursaries and assist medical programs and youth projects. In 
recent years, Knights in Saskatchewan provided financial aid to 
Manitoba flood victims and last year sent four semi truckloads 
of clothing and household effects to Hurricane Katrina victims 
in Biloxi, Mississippi. The Knights of Columbus principles are 
charity, unity, fraternity, and patriotism. 
 
We have the provincial leaders of the Knights of Columbus 
with us, and I’d introduce them and I would ask that as I 
introduce them if they would just stand and then we’ll 
acknowledge all of them together at the end. I’d like to 
introduce, Mr. Speaker, to you and the members of the 
Assembly, the number one knight in the province who is a state 
deputy, Marvin DeSchryver of Denzil. He is accompanied by 
the immediate past state deputy, Bob Barkman of Saskatoon; 
also state chaplain, Father David Tumback of Saskatoon; state 
secretary, Arden Andreas of Lancer; and state treasurer, Ed 
Gibney of Saskatoon; state advocate, Gilles Doiron of Moose 
Jaw; and state warden, Dennis Carignan of Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly join 
me in welcoming the provincial leaders of the Knights of 
Columbus to their Assembly, and at the same time congratulate 
them on 100 years of service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition and as a member of the Knights of 
Columbus, it is a pleasure to welcome the representatives of the 
Knights of Columbus to their legislature today, a privilege to 
have them with us today as they celebrate their 100th 
anniversary this year. 
 
Since the first Knights of Columbus council was formed here in 
Regina in June 1907, the organization has grown from 64 
members to well over 10,000 members who sit on more than 
150 councils in the province. I have the privilege to belong to 
Biggar council 6169. We are truly blessed in Saskatchewan to 
have such an active Knights of Columbus organization. 
 
The Knights participate in a wide variety of volunteer activities 
and projects that contribute to the betterment of life in 
Saskatchewan. Many in this Assembly are familiar with the 
Knights of Columbus track meet held annually in Saskatoon, an 
event that continues to support young people and sport and 
draws on international talent to Saskatoon. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to thank all of 
the Knights of Columbus in Saskatchewan for the dedication 
and service to the Saskatchewan communities. We are all richer 
for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just tell a little story about our present 
state deputy, Marvin DeSchryver. Back a number of years ago I 
had the privilege of running for the position of state warden. 
And Marvin DeSchryver came out first and I suffered my only 
election loss to date. So, Mr. Speaker, please join me in 
welcoming the Knights of Columbus state board to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great honour 
and pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 
the members of Assembly a group of 26 grades 5 and 6 students 
seated in the west gallery along with their teacher, Ms. Sandy 
Jost, and I believe there’s a chaperone or two but I’m sorry I 
don’t have the names here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Huda School members represented here would 
look a little familiar because they’re similar to a group that 
opened our legislature one time and shared a couple of songs 
with us. 
 
And I want to commend all the Huda School and the Huda 
community for teaching peace every day in their school, and I 
want to just very proudly share that one of the happiest 
treasures I have in my office is a prayer rug that was gifted to 
me by the Huda School. 
 
And I’m very, very proud of that and I’m very honoured that 
they would come and share their time with us in the Assembly. 
I look forward to meeting them later for pictures and then an 
opportunity to exchange some thoughts. And I’ll learn, I’m 
sure, from these grade 5 and 6 students of the Huda School. 
Please, members, join me in welcoming the Huda School. 
 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
see seated in your gallery, and I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, Mr. Dale 
Renneberg and his wife. I’m sorry I don’t remember Ms. 
Renneberg’s first name but Dale and Ms. Renneberg run a 
successful restaurant operation in Tisdale and certainly good to 
see them here in the Chamber today. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, this Chamber is a place that Dale 
will become even more familiar with because he’s the candidate 
for the New Democrats in Melfort, and I’m quite convinced 
he’ll be elected to the legislature in the next election. Thank you 
very much and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today in the 
Speaker’s gallery are two special visitors, two visiting Clerks 
from the province of Alberta. They are Louise Kamuchik, Clerk 
Assistant and director of House services, and Micheline 
Orydzuk, Clerk of journals and table branch. 
 
The Alberta legislature recently adopted changes to their rules 
to reform their committee system. They based many of their 
changes on our committee system. Ms. Kamuchik and Ms. 
Orydzuk are here to observe our committee proceedings and to 
receive briefings from Assembly staff on implementation of 
such changes. 
 
And with them today is Michel Carpentier, former intern and 
researcher with the Legislative Assembly Service. Members, 
would you please welcome our two guests from Alberta. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Al Gore’s Presentation on Climate Change 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How fitting today, the 
day after Earth Day, that we in Regina and Saskatchewan got to 
welcome former vice-president of the United States Al Gore at 
the Brandt Centre. 
 
Mr. Gore, former Vice-president Gore gave just the most 
moving speech I have ever witnessed, outlining many of the 
problems that we face, many of the challenges that we face, and 
many of the opportunities we face. Throughout his speech — 
that was filled with both scariness and much hope, Mr. Speaker 
— throughout the speech we all knew that we have the 
solutions and we just need to have the political and the 
individual will to make it happen. 
 

Former Vice-president Gore was brought here courtesy of 
SaskTel sponsorship, and I’m grateful that we have a Crown 
corporation able to do that. Vice-president Gore lost an election 
because of some judges. The loss of the United States 
presidency was a loss for the Americans but it was a great 
benefit for the environmental movement and environmentalists 
worldwide. Mr. Gore has been using his abilities, considerable 
abilities, very, very well in the meantime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank former Vice-president Al Gore for all that 
he has done and particularly what he did in Regina today. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Proposed Children’s Hospital in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Idea no. 9 on 
the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas for the next 100 years calls 
for the establishment of a children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. 
The Saskatchewan Party was pleased to learn of the site choice 
for a children’s hospital on Friday. 
 
However, Saskatchewan residents are frustrated that we’re 
really no farther ahead than where we were before the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] finally adopted the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan for a children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. In fact 
Friday’s news conference, Mr. Speaker, would be better 
described as a desperate attempt to garner support by an NDP 
government on its last legs. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, the NDP forgot to bring the 
dollars or a plan to the event. What we did get on Friday was an 
underwhelming promise of $1 million from the NDP towards a 
$200 million project — hardly a commitment in my books, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you about what is a commitment when 
it comes to the children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. It’s the 
hard work and dedication of the Saskatchewan Children’s 
Health & Hospital Foundation under the leadership of Brynn 
Boback-Lane, her staff, board of directors, and many, many 
volunteers. I would like to thank the foundation members for 
their tireless efforts in calling for a children’s hospital and 
educating the public and government about the benefits of 
having such a facility in our province. 
 
In spite of detractors saying it would be an unnecessary 
duplication, the Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation 
remains steadfast in their goal, and because of that commitment 
they are true to their belief that children in our province deserve 
the best possible health care. It’s too bad that they have to wait 
10 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

New Democratic Party Candidate in 
Saskatoon Massey Place 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — On a positive note, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
extremely pleased to rise in the Assembly today to announce 
that Cam Broten is the new NDP candidate for the constituency 
of Saskatoon Massey Place. And, Mr. Speaker, he will be the 
next Member of the Legislative Assembly to represent the 
people of Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cam Broten was just one of three excellent 
candidates vying for the nomination, and I want to take this 
opportunity to congratulate and thank Diane Boyko and Monica 
Goulet for the energy, ideas, and passion they brought to this 
nomination contest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this race generated great interest throughout the 
city of Saskatoon, and it was reflected at Thursday evening’s 
nomination meeting with a crowd of more than 400 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cam Broten is young, enthusiastic, intelligent, 
hard-working, and absolutely dedicated to the ideas and values 
at the heart of Saskatchewan’s success. And he has deep roots 
in our party. His grandfather, Hans Broten, served as a CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] in the 1960s. And at 28 years of age, 
he is at least 12 years younger than me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Cam Broten on his nomination, and 
I have every confidence that he will prove to be an outstanding 
representative for Saskatoon Massey Place. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan Awards of Excellence 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Tourism Saskatchewan hosted the 
18th annual Tourism Awards of Excellence last Thursday night 
here in Regina, and all in all it was an excellent evening, a night 
that showcased Saskatchewan’s vibrant tourism industry. And 
while there were many first-class nominations, unfortunately 
everyone is not able to win an award. 
 
It should be noted, however, Mr. Speaker, that southwest 
Saskatchewan was exceptionally well represented. There were 
11 award submissions from my region of the province. Five of 
those groups made it to the final round. And, Mr. Speaker, of 
those five, three of them from southwest Saskatchewan walked 
away with awards of excellence for their efforts in tourism 
throughout the province. 
 
They include the Old Man on His Back Interpretive Centre 
southwest of Eastend as Rookie of the Year. The Windscape 
Kite Festival in Swift Current won for the 
promotional/marketing campaign for a festival under $20,000. 
And the historic Reesor Ranch in the beautiful Cypress Hills 
took home the Spirit of Saskatchewan Award. 
 
While I don’t have time now to name all of them, other award 

winners included Dakota Dunes Golf Links for Business of the 
Year with less than 50 employees, and IPSCO Place for 
Business of the Year with more than 50 employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer the official opposition’s most 
sincere congratulations to all the award recipients, and our 
thanks to all other nominees. Together they continue to do 
excellent work in highlighting the best of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Vibrant Economy in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t easy 
these days to find a real estate agent in Meadow Lake but that’s 
only because, Mr. Speaker, they’re all so busy selling houses to 
new residents. 
 
In the past year alone about 50 new jobs have popped up in our 
community, and it’s not just locals that are snapping them up 
either. In spite of the so-called Alberta advantage, Mr. Speaker, 
Meadow Lake has attracted the attention of many Albertans in 
recent years because of the affordability of housing, the 
economic opportunities, and the vibrancy of our community and 
of course the wonderful lifestyle. 
 
It has been estimated in the past eight months about a dozen 
families have moved to Meadow Lake from Alberta alone, Mr. 
Speaker. According to last year’s census the population of 
Meadow Lake is up by over 200 to the previous census and 
Mayor Darwin Obrigewitsch has predicted that the town will 
continue to grow at a rate that matches available jobs. 
 
I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that due to the efforts of the 
hard-working residents of the community of Meadow Lake 
coupled with the sound economic planning of this NDP 
government with its socially progressive policies, Mr. Speaker, 
the job demand in Meadow Lake is expected to increase in the 
future and our vibrant economy is about ready to meet that 
demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Meadow Lake is yet another example of a 
Saskatchewan community that is thriving, contributing to make 
Saskatchewan the best place to live, to work, and to raise your 
family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Poll Results on Premier’s Popularity 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. John 
Diefenbaker once said that “dogs know what to do with polls.” 
However, a recent survey conducted by Environics Research 
will be of particular interest to the voters in Saskatchewan. 
Environics phoned over 2,000 Canadians between March 13 
and April 3 of this year. They asked the people in each province 
whether or not they approved of the performance of their 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

premier and the answers were quite telling. 
 
Alberta Premier Ed Stelmach has seen his popularity rise two 
points since last December. Danny Williams, the outspoken 
Premier of Newfoundland, is up by 14 points. Gary Doer, the 
Premier of Manitoba, is unchanged. The rest of Canada’s 
premiers have seen their popularity drop, but which premier has 
seen the nation’s largest drop in popularity? Well it’s the 
premier for Saskatchewan. According to the Environics poll, 
the Premier of Saskatchewan leads the nation with a 10 per cent 
drop. 
 
And what could account for this plummeting popularity? Could 
it be his deficit budget? Could it be his appalling handling of 
the Murdoch Carriere scandal? Could it be his failure to address 
the concerns of rural parents facing school closures? Could it be 
the shortage of doctors, nurses, and the closures of hospital beds 
or even hospitals? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people who responded in the 
Environics poll, along with everyone else in Saskatchewan, 
agreed the answer is, all of the above. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Views on Global Warming 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, just moments ago here in this 
city, former Vice-president Al Gore gave a powerful 
presentation on global warming. And I’m wondering if the 
opposition members will learn anything from it, Mr. Speaker, 
because they have a history of claiming that the science of 
global warming is somehow wrong. 
 
Will the member from Estevan admit that she was wrong when 
she said, quote, “Scientists . . . can’t assure us that there is a 
trend to global warming.” Will the member from Thunder 
Creek admit that he was wrong when he said, quote, “. . . the 
scientific community . . . [can’t] even agree as to whether or not 
any global warming is occurring . . .” 
 
Will the member from Biggar admit he was wrong when he 
said, quote: 
 

There’s also significant debate within the scientific 
community about the validity of the conclusion that . . . 
man-made greenhouse [gases] . . . are causing climate 
change or global warming. 

 
And as recently as 2006, the then Sask Party Environment 
critic, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood said, quote, 
“I know there are varying views on climate change, and is it a 
real issue, and isn’t it a real issue?” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a real issue, and today I am calling on 
the members of the Saskatchewan Party caucus to admit they’ve 
been wrong to deny it — which is literally the least they can do 
to begin to address the real issue of climate change in this 
world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Flooding Conditions 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
flooding situation in the eastern part of the province is 
absolutely devastating. Sixteen communities have declared 
disaster zones. The RM [rural municipality] of Foam Lake has 
39 road washouts; the RM of Invermay, 70; and the RM of 
Sasman, 44, and they’re more severe than last year. 
 
Yet this NDP government went on a spending spree with the 
rainy day fund — the stabilization fund — and they actually 
allocated $550,000 for the provincial disaster assistance 
program. Well it’s raining, Mr. Speaker, and it’s doubtful that 
$550,000 is going to fix the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government using the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund for things like helping families in 
communities and dealing with flooding is a good idea rather 
than handing out election goodies. How much does the minister 
estimate it’s going to cost for the flooding crisis in the province 
this year? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Public 
Safety. Order. Order please. The Chair recognizes the Minister 
for Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the past couple of years, we’ve seen more activity under the 
provincial disaster assistance program in the past two years than 
we’ve seen in the previous 30. And in each of those years, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has been forward to make the 
resources available to meet the claims, to try and streamline the 
process, to get the money in the hands of the community more 
quickly, to make the program itself more responsive. We had a 
discussion of this very thing in estimates, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 
we can have another discussion again but the point being, as the 
claims have come forward, this government has met those 
claims with resources to respond to these disasters. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Flooding in the 
Fishing Lake area has gone from bad to worse, and the residents 
of that area are in desperate need of two things: immediate 
assistance and a long-term plan. Many still have a copy of a 
StarPhoenix article from June 1997 that discusses SaskWater’s 
proposal to construct a ditch to drain the water eastward that 
would solve Fishing Lake’s problem. 
 
An NDP MLA at that time was quoted in a paper promising the 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

government would build a Fishing Lake drainage ditch as soon 
as possible. He says and I quote, “This is not a quick fix. This is 
a slow, down-the-road insurance plan.” 
 
That statement was made 10 years ago. That is NDP slow, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what and where is the so-called 
insurance plan this NDP government promised the people of 
Fishing Lake 10 years ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago when there 
were high waters in that area, the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority assisted the local people to establish the Fishing Lake 
Watershed Association, and it was established in August 1997. 
A plan was then developed out of that group working together 
with the experts, and the project was to relieve the flood risk 
and to provide engineering around a project. 
 
The watershed association did not proceed with the project due 
to environmental issues and opposition from the downstream 
landowners, many of the farmers, where there were easements 
that were needed, and also there was a fair degree of opposition 
from other people within that community. So that plan was not 
followed through by the watershed association at that time 
because of opposition from other people in the area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the other issue is this government 
shuffled the problem from one department to another for the 
last 10 years. Fishing Lake has faced serious flooding three 
times in the last 10 years, and each one costs hundreds of 
thousands of dollars. The 1997 StarPhoenix article goes on to 
say, and I quote, “SaskWater’s local resource supervisor, said 
Friday, the $288,000 project would be cost-shared between the 
Crown corporations and local governments.” 
 
$288,000 was supposed to be the cost or for about the same 
amount of money that this NDP government just brought in Al 
Gore. This NDP government could have solved the flooding 
problem and had a permanent flooding solution for the people 
of Fishing Lake for $288,000 10 years ago, and we still have 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the total cost of the damage that could 
have been prevented if this NDP government would have kept 
its 10-year-old promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, the 
Fishing Lake Watershed Association tried to get the agreement 
of other people in that area; they were not able to do that. Last 

year when the waters were starting to rise again, the watershed 
association, working together with the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority, did go ahead with some projects to remove 
obstructions to increase the channel capacity between Hazel 
Lake and Stony Lake so that they could mitigate the impacts on 
Fishing Lake, but those were not sufficient to prevent what’s 
going on this year. The amount of water this year is predicted to 
be much greater than it’s ever been in the record of that area. 
And, Mr. Speaker, everybody has to work dealing with the new 
climatic conditions that are here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of that area were 
allowed to do last fall was go in with an axe and chop down a 
few trees in a channel. That wasn’t providing an outlet at all. 
The people of Fishing Lake are desperate for the government’s 
assistance, and they wanted me to relay the urgency of the 
situation to the minister. The people need to know that after 10 
years of promises that this government will finally take action. 
The people want the minister and his officials to go out there 
and see the devastation today. 
 
We saw the people in boats this weekend — taking their 
motorboats up to a cabin, loading their possessions in a boat, 
and sailing them down what used to be a road to their truck a 
half a mile away. And right around the lake there were groups 
of people helping sandbags to save a cabin if they could, 
thousands and thousands of sandbags. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister personally tour the Fishing Lake 
area and will he personally meet with the people who 
desperately need answers from this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority did work with the watershed group in that 
area to provide a plan. And they set out all the technical 
information about how to do this, but the plan did not proceed, 
as I indicated earlier, because there were concerns about 
impacts on the town of Canora’s water supply for example, 
because what effectively would be happening is moving that 
water down faster to cause troubles there. 
 
There was also opposition from many of the farmers and 
ranchers who had lands in that area downstream from the water, 
and the Fishing Lake First Nation also had concerns. Last year 
the people who were involved have come together. I’ve talked 
with some of the local people who have been concerned about 
this spring already. And, Mr. Speaker, this is an area that I 
regularly travel through because I have a farm just north of 
there, and I do intend to go by and take a look. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

Martensville. 
 

Climate Change 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the pictures have been taken. 
The photo op is done, and the power point presentation has 
been packed up. Now all that remains is the grim task of 
cleaning up after the NDP’s 16-year-long record of regulatory 
incompetence. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to hear a debate about the future 
of our environment. They deserve to see the studies that have 
been done so far on energy alternatives. Mr. Speaker, why 
hasn’t this government come forward with a clear plan to 
reduce carbon emissions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that member and 
others from across the way who were there listening to the 
vice-president this morning missed the main point of his 
speech. And his point is that the issue of what’s going to happen 
with our globe is above politics. And I ask that member to end 
up coming and working with us as we move forward on this. 
 
As I’ve indicated, we will be setting out our plan for this 
particular province and for how we will deal with a whole 
number of the issues around climate change in a couple of 
weeks. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be setting out some very, 
very challenging goals for all of us. But we have to work 
together to do this. And for that group opposite to play politics 
with this is exactly the opposite of what we want to do in our 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, what Mr. Gore said this 
morning was that the time for talk was over, and it is now a 
time for action. And that’s what we’re asking of this NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, because of the NDP’s ineptitude, this 
province has seen a 62 per cent increase in greenhouse gas 
emissions. Under proposed federal legislation, Saskatchewan 
will have to meet emissions targets by the year 2012. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will an NDP plan call on SaskPower to reduce 
emissions targets through actual reductions or through offsets? 
And if by offsets, what will that cost? And are they planning to 
increase rates to pay for these offsets? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are legitimate questions on climate change 
proposals for our province. Mr. Gore has come and gone. It’s 
this party’s responsibility to act now. When will the real 
questions be answered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 

Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, within the next two weeks, 
the member will have answers to those questions as we set out 
our whole plan. And, Mr. Speaker, what we will continue to do 
is fight the doubters. We’ll fight those people who seed doubt 
throughout society around the kinds of facts that scientists have 
now laid before us. But, Mr. Speaker, their confreres in Ottawa 
last week made some comments that are of no assistance to 
Canadians. And, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we will 
be working with all of the people across this earth to make sure 
that what’s here for our children and our grandchildren is better 
than what we have now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP had 16 years to come 
up with a plan, but Saskatchewan is lagging behind other 
provinces in the debate over greenhouse gas emissions. Other 
provinces are already taking action. Other provinces have 
already set targets. In Alberta the Climate Change and 
Emissions Management Amendment Act sets specific targets, 
and those targets for emission intensity reduction have to be 
met by July 1 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this NDP government failed to keep up? 
And why is it only interested in photo ops with former 
American politicians? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we 
like to stand with those global citizens who are speaking the 
truth to all people across the earth. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
invite people to come from many places to be part of the 
discussion, to educate our people, and for sure to deal with the 
kinds of doubts spread by people like the members opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that with a 
steadfastness because many people in this province are 
concerned about what kinds of things are going to happen to our 
country of Canada and to what’s going to happen to 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to set out a plan to deal with that. I 
ask the members to join with us as we do the things that we 
need to do to have the earth there for our children and our 
grandchildren. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Physicians 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday nearly 100 people attended a meeting in Shellbrook 
regarding their shortage of doctors. There were representatives 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

from the town, the RM, local doctors, and representatives from 
the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region. There were local 
people that were concerned about the potentially dangerous 
situation that is developing in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are there serious problems in Shellbrook, and 
why are they such a low priority for the Minister? And why is 
he continuing to ignore shortages of medical professionals 
throughout rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Thursday I invited the Minister of Health to 
this meeting. He did not attend. Was there someone there 
representing the minister? And has the minister received a 
report from that meeting? And what was in that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite knows the recruitment and retention 
of professionals in this province is a top priority for this 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, we have taken extraordinary 
steps over the course of the last two years to put in place 
incentive programs in conjunction with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we remain 
competitive in a very competitive market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authority is the primary 
recruiter of physicians, not only in the Prince Albert Parkland 
area, Mr. Speaker, but in all jurisdictions in Saskatchewan. The 
Prince Albert Parkland Regional Health Authority was 
represented at that meeting, likely indicated that the hiring of 
professionals to work in Shellbrook, Spiritwood, and Big River 
is their first priority in recruitment, Mr. Speaker. They are hard 
at work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Shellbrook 
currently has five doctors, and at the end of June it will drop. 
Two doctors recruited to this area are no longer coming, so now 
this is a crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Elias Nesdoly is well known to the Premier and 
the opposite members. In a letter to the Premier he writes, and I 
quote: 
 

Is it . . . [the plan of] the Government of Saskatchewan . . . 
to close the Shellbrook Hospital and is the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons helping out in this plan . . . [to 
sabotage any] . . . attempts to get qualified physicians? I 
would appreciate your answer to this question because it 
goes to the very root of what . . . [the] NDP . . . [stand for 
in this province] and I would be very distressed and . . . [it 
would anger me in so doing]. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when will the minister take immediate steps to 
assist Shellbrook and other rural communities in finding doctors 
for their communities? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP government considers the issue in Prince Albert Parkland, 
and specifically Shellbrook Hospital, Mr. Speaker, to be a 
priority of this government. And we are continuing to work 
with all of those, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this comes 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite misrepresented the nature of 
that meeting in this Chamber on Thursday, Mr. Speaker. He 
misrepresented the government and the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons at that meeting in Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker. We 
continue to be committed to that community, and we will work 
with that community, Mr. Speaker, to help them, help the 
region, help the province to establish the correct number of 
physicians working within that community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I can guarantee you Elias Nesdoly wouldn’t be happy 
with the answer that was just given. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are problems . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are problems in Shellbrook. There’s problems in Spiritwood. 
There’s also problems in Hafford and Big River. And all of 
these problems will make things more difficult for the hospital 
in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, unless new doctors are found 
shortly, remaining physicians in the Shellbrook Hospital will 
think of stepping down. They are frustrated and they will leave. 
The problem will only get worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what immediate steps will the minister take to 
assist new communities, these community in resolving this 
potentially dangerous situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If 
the member opposite consults the jobs, HealthCareersInSask.ca 
jobs listing on the Internet, Mr. Speaker, he’ll see that Prince 
Albert Parkland is currently recruiting for three family 
physicians in the region — one for Shellbrook, one for Big 
River, one for Spiritwood — Mr. Speaker, very aggressively 
recruiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member asks, what can this government do to 
facilitate that? Mr. Speaker, we need people like the member 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

opposite to work with his community to create corporations or 
organizations or whatever, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 
community is ready to retain and recruit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can work with his 
community, can work with others around Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that the community is as well prepared to 
recruit and retain as others in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Emergency Health Services 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve just 
learned that there’s going to be a disruption of emergency 
services at the Gull Lake Health Centre. And from what I 
understand, there will no longer be 24-hour coverage available 
at that facility. In fact services have been clawed back to 
daytime only. So I guess the people in this area of the province 
should make sure that they don’t have any accidents after 7 p.m. 
because they might not get care at the Gull Lake facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason cited for this reduction of services is a 
shortage of registered nurses. How long will the people in Gull 
Lake and area be without full-time emergency services? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite knows that regional health authorities make 
decisions on a day-to-day basis to ensure the safety and 
protection and security of the people who live within the service 
areas of various facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, from time to time there are vacancies created 
either by professional development days, sickness, maternity 
leave, or other matters affecting staff within a facility, and the 
regional health authorities take action to ensure the safety of the 
clients and patients. Mr. Speaker, the members of the . . . people 
surrounding the Gull Lake facility have been or are being 
notified about the temporary restriction of hours at the Gull 
Lake facility, Mr. Speaker, and they are being advised to ensure 
that if they have an emergency, to call 911 to ensure that they 
are transported to the nearest available facility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Gull Lake is on the No. 1 
Highway, and that stretch of road has had and still has a 
reputation for serious car accidents. And as the minister well 
knows, sometimes the first hour of treatment can make the 
difference between life and death. How could this government 
let health care services erode to the point that communities 
around the province can no longer rely on 24-hour emergency 
services? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
regional health authorities recognize and understand the 
challenges that are faced by individuals when there are 
temporary reductions in hours at facilities. Mr. Speaker, the 
regional health authority is doing all that it can within the 
human resources available to them, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 
the patient’s safety is first and foremost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can assist by assuring that 
members within the area, within the community, recognize and 
understand the notices that they’ve been provided, and that 
they, in an emergency situation in the evenings or early 
mornings, contact or call 911 to ensure that the ambulance is 
there to ensure that they go to a facility that is fully staffed and 
prepared to accept for treatment any individual who requires it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I have also learned just in the last 
little while that the Cabri health centre has had to reduce 
emergency service over the weekends. The minister is on record 
saying that rural closures are a fact of life. And yet when 
challenged on that statement, he then tried to downplay the 
issue saying that there are only a few areas in the province that 
are having staffing issues and closures. Only a few, the minister 
says. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s review the communities that are 
constantly being affected by health facility closures. There’s 
Spiritwood, Big River, Shellbrook, Preeceville, Canora, 
Kamsack, Arcola, Bengough, Coronach, Broadview, Central 
Butte, Vanguard, and now, Mr. Speaker, we can add Cabri and 
Gull Lake. That’s almost every corner of this province. How 
could this NDP government allow rural health care to erode to 
this point? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite has good accumulative math, but, Mr. 
Speaker, his math on a day-to-day basis is not very good. There 
are currently three facilities that are temporarily closed because 
of a nursing shortage, Mr. Speaker — Arcola, Gull Lake, and 
Cabri, Mr. Speaker — just three. 
 
The member also knows from a discussion that occurred in this 
House last week, Mr. Speaker, that on the website there are 
some 780 health-related jobs that have been posted. Mr. 
Speaker, he also knows that we have now received more than 
850 applications for those jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thanks to the work, the incentive, and the programs that have 
been put in place by this government and our partners in the 
health care sector, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with — 
incrementally, Mr. Speaker — we are dealing with the health 
care human resource shortage, Mr. Speaker, in this province, 
and we will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that we have a 
severe shortage of registered nurses and doctors in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And it should come as no surprise to the 
members opposite that this result came about as a result of 
decisions that they have made to put us into this mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when staff levels become dangerously low, 
facilities have to reduce services or close. Mr. Speaker, the 
question is, is this part of the NDP’s plan to abandon rural 
health care and to close more facilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The simple answer, Mr. Speaker — and 
I’ve given this answer before when I was asked this ridiculous 
question, Mr. Speaker — the simple answer is no. The member 
opposite is aware that the retention and recruitment of health 
professionals in this province, Mr. Speaker, is a priority for this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also aware of the incredible competition 
that’s occurring in North America, Mr. Speaker, for individuals 
with these skills and these credentials. Mr. Speaker, we are 
remaining competitive with other jurisdictions in North 
America, Mr. Speaker, because of the efforts that we have made 
over the last six years, Mr. Speaker. We are committed to and 
will continue to work to ensure that we have an adequate 
number of health care professionals in our province — 
recruitment, retention, education, and bursaries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

Surgical Care Initiatives 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to call your attention to Saskatchewan’s recently 
announced plans for our surgical care system and our efforts to 
address wait times for services. 
 
As you know, the federal government has provided 
Saskatchewan with about $25 million in one-time funding in 
exchange for introducing a wait time guarantee. We were 
required to choose from one of the five priority areas in which 
pan-Canadian benchmarks have been set: cardiac surgery, sight 
restoration, joint replacement, cancer treatment, and diagnostic 
imaging. Saskatchewan made a commitment to guarantee wait 
times for cardiac bypass surgery by or before 2010. 
 
Of course we do very well already in the area of cardiac surgery 
and we are well positioned to meet cardiac benchmarks. The 
capacity we have built in this area will enable us to do some 
fine tuning, plan for the long term, and hopefully not have to 
resort to sending patients elsewhere to receive services. 
 

It will also ensure that we can use the federal funding in other 
areas of need. I must make it very clear we are not required to 
use the funding exclusively for cardiac services, though some 
will be directed in that area. Mr. Speaker, we plan to invest the 
funding in projects that help us build our system’s capacity to 
provide other services and to further shorten wait times across 
the board. 
 
First we will build a free-standing ambulatory surgery centre in 
Regina. This facility will be used exclusively for day surgeries 
and day procedures. When fully operational, it will be able to 
handle about 5,000 cataract surgeries and 4,000 other 
procedures every year. This type of centre has been very 
successful in other jurisdictions. We are confident it will 
provide not only immediate benefit for patients, but will have a 
significant and sustained effect within our health system. 
 
The centre will help us to reduce wait times for patients needing 
cataract surgery — another of the five priority areas identified 
by the first ministers. It will help us keep up the growing 
demand for day surgery and reduce the backlog of patients 
waiting for such procedures. It will relieve pressure on hospital 
operating rooms and free them up to do more complex 
surgeries. That in turn will have a positive effect on those who 
have been waiting longest for surgeries, many of them 
orthopedic patients. 
 
Most important, this facility will put patients’ needs first and 
foremost. They will typically be people in fairly good health 
who require less complex surgery. The centre will not handle 
emergency cases so there will be very little chance that 
surgeries will be cancelled. Patients will also minimize their 
exposure to organisms that can be present in hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will work closely with surgeons and other 
health providers as planning for this facility progresses to 
ensure that we are fully prepared and fully staffed when the 
centre opens. We have achieved considerable success in 
recruiting and retaining health professionals and will continue 
working with the health regions to meet the demand for nurses, 
physicians, and specialists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second major area to receive funding is cardiac 
services. About $6 million will fund capital improvements and 
equipment purchases in Saskatoon and Regina. These measures 
will very quickly improve the way cardiac patients move 
through the process of diagnosis, treatment, and recovery. They 
will also help to ensure that we meet wait time benchmarks for 
cardiac bypass surgery. 
 
Third, we will provide funding to purchase and upgrade 
equipment in provincial and regional hospital operating rooms 
and recovery rooms. And finally, we will direct funding on a 
pilot project on patient recourse, one of the federal 
government’s conditions in providing Saskatchewan with 
additional health funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these initiatives will help us build on our 
successes and improve access to a variety of services. They are 
not only good news for residents in urban centres, but also for 
those in rural areas. 
 
Saskatoon and Regina Qu’Appelle health regions provide 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

specialized services for all Saskatchewan residents. In fact last 
year one-quarter of Regina’s surgeries and more than a third of 
Saskatoon’s were for patients from other health regions. Our 
tertiary centres also serve significant rural populations within 
their own regions. 
 
Initial planning for the new free-standing ambulatory surgical 
centre have already been completed. The centre is only one of 
many capital construction projects under way across the 
province. Others are proceeding and some will be completed 
this year in a number of communities including Swift Current, 
Maidstone, Preeceville, and Moosomin. 
 
Saskatchewan’s health capital construction process follows best 
practices for planning, design, and construction. We work hard 
to complete projects in a timely manner to provide rural and 
urban patients with access to high-quality facilities. Mr. 
Speaker, all Saskatchewan people will benefit from shorter wait 
times, more efficient processes, and increases in our capacity to 
provide health services. 
 
Saskatchewan has a comprehensive plan and we are making 
progress. We are committed to meeting Saskatchewan’s target 
time frames for all surgeries and pan-Canadian wait time 
benchmarks. Our innovative approach and our careful planning 
are making a difference for patients. 
 
We will continue to press the federal government for a 
long-term funding commitment that will ensure sustainable 
progress. And we will continue working towards our goal of 
serving the best interests of Saskatchewan people by providing 
all patients with timely health services. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand and respond to the ministerial statement that was sent 
over before lunch, and I appreciate it. You certainly see them 
coming when they come in these pink file folders. You can’t 
miss them. 
 
Anyway the issue around the announcement that was made on 
Thursday of last week. The minister is talking about the main 
structure, I guess, is the free-standing ambulatory care centre. 
He talks about, a little bit about first of all where the money 
came from, and it was an agreement signed with the federal 
government that saw some money come to Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I found it really interesting. I happened to be at the 
announcement when the minister was sitting beside the federal 
minister, Tony Clement. I was at that announcement. I was also 
at the announcement on Thursday when the minister spoke 
about this ambulatory care, stand-alone centre. And I do notice 
there was quite a marked difference in the minister’s demeanour 
when he was sitting beside the federal minister, Tony Clement. 
He was wanting that $25 million badly but he just could not 
stand sitting there, and it was so obvious to the media. That was 

the question that the media put to him many, many times. 
 
It was a terribly uncomfortable situation for him to be in, but he 
had to be there because he needed, he wanted the $25 million, 
which I would have welcomed — the $25 million. But it was 
just the conflict, I think, and just the uncomfortable feeling he 
had sitting beside a Conservative federal minister when he came 
with a cheque. And that certainly was evident. He wasn’t quite 
so uncomfortable on Thursday, though. 
 
And I certainly would say, if there is one thing that I have 
noticed more than anything else over the last couple months, is 
the announcements after announcements. I would almost be 
assured that this government was in its fourth year, only weeks, 
maybe months away from a general election. And that’s exactly 
what the announcement on Thursday looked like, and it’s 
exactly what the announcement on Friday looked like for the 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
The government has been in power for 16 years. This 
government has been in power for 16 years. We’ve kept raising 
the issues on health care and the wait times, and just on the eve 
of a provincial election I believe the government is now saying 
it will start making announcements . . . or start making a 
difference and making promises. 
 
This facility that he talks about today and talked about last 
Thursday will be a couple of years in the making. It’ll be two 
years or better before we see it in service, which certainly raises 
some concern because we have the longest waiting lists in many 
of these areas right now, and their solution will be two years 
down the road. So the wait lists that we see in our province that 
has been, I think, has been caused in large part due to some of 
the decisions this government has made over the last 16 years, 
the solution to those problems are two years down the road, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s a lucky thing that we have elections every four 
years; otherwise the government wouldn’t have made that 
decision. They wouldn’t have tried to improve the lives of 
people in our province. They would wait until the 11th hour 
again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, certainly a stand-alone ambulatory care or 
just more resources into ambulatory care is a good thing. It 
certainly will work towards reducing the wait times. 
 
Our biggest concern is, and we saw it again today — whether it 
was in Gull Lake, a shortage of registered nurses in Gull Lake, 
whether it’s in Spiritwood or Shellbrook or Big River — there’s 
a huge issue around doctor retention, shortage of doctors. It’s 
great to build a stand-alone clinic, but it doesn’t work very well 
when that’s all it is, is just a clinic, because all of these things 
operate and run on human resources. And we are in a huge 
issue, a huge shortage for human resources across the province. 
 
And, you know, talking about building another facility, will we 
have the doctors and the nurses there to equip it? Or are we 
going to be robbing from Peter to pay Paul — taking from other 
areas so we can cover off this facility and leaving other areas 
short? 
 
I found it really quite ironic to have the announcement at the 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

Pasqua Hospital in Regina on Thursday, talking about the new 
facility they’re going to build, when the week before they had 
closed eight beds because they didn’t have enough human 
resources to fill those beds. And yet we’re talking about 
building another facility. 
 
And the other irony . . . That was the one irony. But the other 
irony was hearing this government talk about eight or nine 
years — no, more than that — a number of years ago, probably 
15, when they closed the Plains hospital. They closed the Plains 
hospital. We had more than enough capacity, and so we don’t 
need a third facility in Regina. So they had no problem closing 
a third facility in Regina and then announcing on Thursday that 
we don’t have enough capacity; we’re going to have to build 
another facility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the absolute short-sightedness of this 
government was never more evident than the announcement on 
Thursday, Mr. Speaker. Although we will agree that we need to 
reduce the waiting list, whether it’s cataract surgery . . . And if 
this will go towards that and reduce the waiting list, we’re in 
favour of it. But the government has a huge human resources 
shortfall, and that will be the issue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce Jessica Heath, 
who is in the west gallery. Jessica is graduating from the 
College of Vet Medicine this spring with a Doctor of Veterinary 
Medicine. She has been an active member on the students’ 
council representing the vet med college throughout the past 
several years. 
 
Jessica originally hails from the coast, the west coast of British 
Columbia — the island actually. And it’s her intention to go off 
on an adventure to the Yukon and practise vet medicine there 
for a few years and then eventually make her way back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Joining her this afternoon is Gavin Gardner, who has also been 
involved in student issues at the University of Saskatchewan 
campus. Jessica and Gavin were here listening to Al Gore. And 
obviously these two young people are interested in the future of 
the globe. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome Jessica and Gavin to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — We have joining us today in the House a 
former MLA for the Lloyd area, Violet Stanger. And I have to 
tell you that she’s as passionate about politics today as she was 
when she sat in the House. I think she got a little inspiration 
from Al Gore today. But whenever I want to find out what’s 
going on in the world outside our doors, I phone Vi and I say, 
what are they saying down at Curves? So she lets me know. 
And I’d like everyone to join me in welcoming her to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 66, the 
occupational health and safety amendment Act, 2007 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 66, The Occupational Health and Safety 
(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 1,274 through 
1,295 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,274 to 1,295 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
The Speaker: — Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. It’s my pleasure to rise 
today to give second reading to an Act respecting a Graduate 
Tax exemption and repealing The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax 
Credit Act. 
 
In this year’s budget, our NDP government created a graduate 
tax exemption program for post-secondary graduates who stay 
in or come to Saskatchewan. Beginning this year, any graduate 
of an approved post-secondary education or training program of 
at least six months will be eligible for this benefit. 
 
This new initiative allows for $100,000 of tax-free income 
during the first five years following a student’s graduation. This 
means an additional $5,500 in the pockets of new graduates, 
allowing them to purchase a home, a car, and make investments 
in their futures or, Mr. Speaker, paying off a student debt. The 
program also reaches back one year for students who graduated 
in 2006. Those graduates received the 2006 postgraduate tax 
credit of $850, and they too will receive the graduate tax 
exemption for the next four years. 
 
This is a major investment in the future of our province and our 
young people and a statement of how serious we are about 
keeping young people right here in Saskatchewan. The graduate 
tax exemption program is an important component of our 
government’s seven-point plan to address our labour shortage, 
increase our population, and bolster our booming economy. 
 
It will complement our initiatives to increase training, link 
employers and workers, increase immigration to our province, 
promote our province across the country, and make 
Saskatchewan an even better place to live, work, and raise a 
family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 64, The 
Graduate Tax Exemption Act be now read a second time. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 64, an Act respecting 
Graduate Tax Exemption and repealing The Post-Secondary 

Graduate Tax Credit Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in this province applauds any 
efforts that are being made by any government in order to 
encourage our graduating students to locate and to establish 
their careers in our province. For far too long, many of the 
students that have graduated from our universities and 
post-secondary education training facilities have simply had no 
alternative but to leave this province, and that has been a great 
tragedy as we’ve watched the out-migration figures month after 
month over these last number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are hopeful that this tax credit program is 
going to bear positive fruit and certainly the amount of monies 
involved have some significance over the five years. 
 
It’s interesting to note that on budget day or after budget day 
when the program was first announced, the University of 
Regina vice-president for external affairs, Kathleen Wilson — 
who happens to also be the Saskatchewan Young New 
Democratic Party’s secretary — was quoted on CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] and I quote: 
 

Students don’t take tax credits into consideration. I mean 
it’s a pretty small detail and especially students who 
haven’t paid taxes before really. I don’t think it’s a big 
consideration. I mean students are going to go where the 
jobs are. 

 
Mr. Speaker. I think that is the fundamental truth of the matter, 
and until recently there hasn’t been the jobs in this province, 
and our students have been forced to leave in too many 
instances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also note with interest that other jurisdictions 
have decided to take other methods into account in terms of 
making these kinds of programs. For example the province of 
Manitoba in its Throne Speech this year announced a 60 per 
cent rebate for tuition fees. And so for example, a person 
graduating with a four-year arts degree would have a $7,800 
rebate coming. Person graduating from medicine would have 
over $24,000 coming. And so, Mr. Speaker, many jurisdictions 
are trying to retain their graduates from their programs as well 
as Saskatchewan. 
 
At the end of the day, we will see if it is a better plan, has been 
a better plan to use tuition-fee-based kind of rebate or an 
income tax rebate. We’re supportive in the fact that something 
is being done. And in order for us to consult with students and 
employers who will benefit potentially from this program, at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 64 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank very you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill No. 65 which is 
the Act to amend The Income Tax Act of 2000. 
 
In last year’s budget, members of the Assembly will know that 
this government announced its plans to carry forward major 
reforms of the business tax system. These business tax reforms 
moved forward with eliminating the general corporate capital 
tax, reducing the general corporate income tax rate, and 
increasing the small-business income thresholds, and improving 
the tax incentives for manufacturing and processing. 
 
In addition we have subsequently announced the reduction of 
the small-business tax rate, and we’re very pleased to announce 
the reduction of the provincial sales tax from 7 per cent to 5 per 
cent. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Just moments ago my colleague, the Minister of Advanced 
Education and Employment, brought forward the graduate tax 
exemption changes that this government was very pleased to 
announce in the budget. This Bill contains in it provisions that 
will allow this graduate tax exemption to be deducted in 
determining provincial income tax and will allow any unused 
portion of each year’s exemption to be carried forward for up to 
five taxation years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last November I also had the pleasure to announce 
that Saskatchewan’s personal income tax system for 2007 
would be fully indexed to match the national rate of inflation. 
That announcement continued the full indexation of the 
provincial tax system to the national rate ever since the income 
tax reform was completed in 2003. The cumulative impact of 
these indexation adjustments is saving taxpayers about $85 
million in 2007. Furthermore in this most recent budget that I 
had the pleasure to table, we announced that beginning the 2008 
taxation year, Saskatchewan’s personal income tax system will 
be automatically indexed to the national rate of inflation. The 
Act is therefore being amended to establish automatic annual 
indexation of the income tax system based on the annual change 
in the national inflation rate. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments that will 
expand the eligibility of the income tax credit for manufacturing 
and processing to certain types of energy conservation 
equipment used in the production of electricity for sale. These 
amendments will modify certain federal definitions to allow 
them to apply here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I do look forward to answering questions in committee 
pertaining to the income tax amendments that we are providing 
today and to looking forward to discussing with members as the 
Bill comes forward for review. As such I move second reading 
of An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 65, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, in our preliminary reading 
of this legislation, we recognize that there are a number of 
housekeeping-related type of programs in here that make sure 
that the income tax is fully compatible with other initiatives that 
are announced by the government, in particular The Graduate 
Tax Exemption Act which we spoke to just a moment or two 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also recognize there are provisions in this 
legislation that provide for indexing of The Income Tax Act, 
and that is an important initiative as well as an investment tax 
credit for manufacturing and processing in certain types of 
non-renewable energy and energy conservation equipment 
between certain dates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these things are important updates to our 
income tax legislation, and we look forward to discussing these 
items in detail with the minister. And in order for us to have 
proper consultations with affected industry personnel, at this 
time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 65, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair so the Assembly can 
convene into the Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — Before the minister begins, I recognize the 
Minister of Justice. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce a guest, Madam Chair. 
 
The Chair: — The hon. member has asked leave to introduce 
guests. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to give leave? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, and thank you 
to the members of the committee. This is an opportunity I didn’t 
want to miss. In the Speaker’s gallery is my son, Nathan, who I 
do not believe I had the opportunity to introduce to the 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

Legislative Assembly. Nathan is currently studying at the 
University of Saskatchewan, but he is also a corporal with the 
communication squad in reserve and in about a week starts 
training for an overseas tour. And I may not have had an 
opportunity to do this again any time in the relatively near 
future, so I hope that the members present will join me in 
welcoming my son to the Legislative Assembly and wishing 
him good luck in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — The matter before the committee this afternoon 
is interim supply, and I would recognize the Minister of Finance 
to introduce his officials and give some introductory comment. 
The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 
am pleased today to be joined by a number of officials from the 
Department of Finance. Seated directly to my left is Doug 
Matthies who’s the deputy minister of the department. Seated 
behind me is the assistant deputy minister responsible for the 
treasury board branch, Karen Layng. Next to her is Joanne 
Brockman, the executive director of the economic and fiscal 
policy branch. And seated to my right is Arun Srinivas who is 
the senior tax policy analyst, taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs branch. 
 
Madam Chair, as you will be aware, we are dealing with interim 
supply today. Interim supply of course allows the government 
to receive approval for certain monies permitting that the work 
of government can happen even though the budget for the new 
fiscal year has not been officially approved in detail. 
 
As was the case last year, introduction of the first interim 
supply Bill is coming now in April as opposed to March 
because of recent changes made to The Financial 
Administration Act, 1993 that provides for departments to have 
up to one-twelfth of their last year’s appropriation as a 
temporary measure to finance ongoing government business in 
April. 
 
With this interim supply Bill that we will be discussing today, 
we’re seeking approval for an appropriation equal to 
two-twelfths of the budgeted vote amount for the department 
with two exceptions. The supply Bill seeks approval for an 
additional $19.567 million for the Department of Learning 
which represents two-tenths of the operating grant for K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] schools, recognizing that these 
boards are funded on a ten-month basis. 
 
And there’s an additional $4.6 million for the Department of 
Property Management for end-of-the-model-year vehicle 
purchases that are made between April and May. 
 
With this level of funding requested in the interim supply Bill, 
departments and agencies will be able to cover their expenses 
for the months of April and May, and it’s anticipated, at least I 
anticipate, that the main appropriation Bill will be passed prior 
to the announced closure of the House on May 17. However, 

should this not occur or be delayed significantly, a second 
interim supply Bill would be introduced to ensure the work of 
government can continue. As such, I would move: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $1,320,506,000 be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 2008. 

 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that, number one: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,320,506,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2008. 

 
To the motion before the committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Madam Chair, I request the information 
on the interim supply. I have received absolutely nothing from 
the minister. I haven’t received any prior notification 
whatsoever. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. Oh, the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Chair, I am very pleased to 
provide this. Of course it is a fairly simple two-twelfths of the 
budget except for the two noted exceptions. Interim supply is a 
routine proceeding of this Assembly, and I am sure the member 
will find this to be in order. I apologize if he’s surprised that 
we’re doing interim supply in April. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair. It’s always 
nice to have information provided earlier as a courtesy, but 
we’ll overlook that this time. A question to the minister, then, 
on the Learning funds — the 19.567 that he just mentioned, is 
any of that for capital at all? 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The amounts are two-tenths of the 
Department of Learning’s budget. 
 
The Chair: — Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I understand 
that. Can the minister provide any more detailed information 
just than the fact that it’s two-tenths? The question was: is any 
of that going to be dedicated for capital, for some possible 
construction of new schools in Saskatchewan? Can the minister 
provide some detail in that regard? 
 
The Chair: — Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes. This may well be used for capital. 
This is an operating expenditure, but there is capital money 
contained in it. So it may allow some capital projects to proceed 
during this April and May period. 
 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair. The minister 
says it may provide. Can he provide any information beyond 
that? Will it indeed provide some or it just may? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Money that we’re providing is 
provided to divisions. It’ll allow them to undertake operations 
in the months of April and May. It’s the two-tenths that we 
provide. 
 
Boards will make their decisions as to which capital projects — 
that they have been previously approved for — may operate 
during that. This is largely an operational interim supply 
measure. Boards will use the money judiciously. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair. The minister 
also outlined additional funding of $4.6 million for a vehicle 
purchase through Sask Property Management. Can the minister 
outline if indeed other operations within SPMC [Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation] were considered or other 
options were considered rather than purchasing more vehicles? 
Were there other options considered, such as entering into 
arrangements with private operations to undertake the vehicle 
needs of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the central vehicle 
agency undertakes a purchasing program to maintain a central 
pool of vehicles for government. They also involve outside 
clients like SaskPower and SaskTel. It’s been our experience 
that this is a cost-efficient way of undertaking this. And there’s 
been no review of the policy during this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Regarding 
the Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation and the 
building communities fund, can the minister just outline how 
the money is going to be used under that fund? We understand 
that there’s several, several questions that people have across 
the province regarding this fund. Before the applications are 
completed, I understand that funds are already flowing. Others 
aren’t quite clear on the application form and the application 
criteria. So could the minister outline, give us some 
information? Certainly to this time very limited information has 
been forthcoming on this rather large fund. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it is customary that 
we provide for two-twelfths of all of the expenditures within the 
estimates on an interim supply basis with the two exceptions — 
and I noted one for the CVA [central vehicle agency] where we 
are dealing with end-of-year model purchases, and the second 
being the two-tenths issue to deal with the school division year. 
 
The question around building communities fund, as I 
understand the application deadline is April 30. And I would 
anticipate that further to the discussions that have been going on 
within the committee considering Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, that the minister will be in a position to outline 
more about what the program parameters are and what the 
expectations are for approval of the programs once the 
deadlines have been met in April. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Regarding 
Corrections and Public Safety, it looks like the amount, the 

two-twelfths amount I believe is $28,000, if I go from memory. 
I guess the only copy that we’ve received is now being 
photocopied, but from memory, just glancing at it, I believe 
that’s $28,000 under Corrections and Public Safety. Will that 
indeed be enough for what is happening in our province right 
now and the need for extra funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, we are advised 
that this should be sufficient to meet the needs of the 
department over the interim period until the supply Bill is voted 
at the end of May. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
listened to your response, Mr. Minister, on the question to 
Corrections and Public Safety, and you feel that $28,400 will be 
enough for the two months in this department. 
 
Well I know that for the last couple of weeks we’ve been sitting 
in question period and we’ve been talking about the flooding in 
my area and right across the province. I spent the best part of 
this weekend out at Fishing Lake and I saw there were people 
there from SaskEnergy, from SaskPower, from Corrections and 
Public Safety, from SaskWater, from Community Resources, 
the Department of Health. They have a control centre set up 
there for people there. I’m not sure if it’s 24 hours a day, but I 
do know it’s 7 days a week. Are you telling me that $28,000 is 
going to be enough for two months for the Department of 
Corrections and Public Safety dealing just with Fishing Lake 
alone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I don’t understand 
where the member’s getting her information from. We’re asking 
the Assembly for $28.635 million. We believe that’ll be 
sufficient to deal with the department’s needs in the next six 
weeks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. I know that the government is 
trying to save money in strange places, but getting one piece of 
paper 10 minutes before isn’t really saving a lot of money if we 
don’t have the right to ask questions with the numbers that we 
were supposed to be given. So I did not get the numbers. I 
apologize for not having, for using the wrong number. 
 
But maybe now we’re talking about two-twelfths of the 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety. The one area that 
I’m talking about is the provincial disaster assistance program. I 
believe that total amount is something like $550,000. So 
two-twelfths of that would be somewhere around the — the 
minister can probably tell me; that’s why he gets paid the 
money to be the Minister of Finance — he can tell me right off 
the top of his head what two-twelfths of that is. 
 
And I do know from sitting out there for the last number . . . 
[inaudible] . . . and the people that are being devastated — not 
just in Fishing Lake but in Waldsea Lake and right around the 
province — I really do wonder if that amount of money is going 
to last. So could you please tell me how much money the 
provincial disaster assistance program is going to have in the 
next two months and if that’s going to be enough? 
 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member should 
be aware that the provincial disaster assistance program usually 
pays out at the end of an incident, and so I wouldn’t expect, if 
there is a claim under the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance 
program] program, that that would occur within the next six 
weeks. 
 
As the member clearly has identified, the government is doing a 
great deal through a number of agencies to try and assist in the 
operations that are happening at Fishing Lake, in fact at Red 
Earth and other communities across our province. But the 
provincial disaster assistance program is usually one of the last 
payers in terms of insurance claims and the rest. So damages 
that may come available under that program would not happen, 
I would anticipate, would not happen during this six-week 
period. 
 
I think too, to the member’s question, the amount that has been 
budgeted, the $550,000 is what we were estimating. If it ends 
up being more than that, we of course will meet our obligations 
under PDAP. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m really pleased to hear the minister 
admitting that they definitely are the last payer when it comes to 
funds under the provincial disaster assistance program, because 
there are a number of RMs and individuals around the province 
who are still waiting for money from the last two years. So 
being the last payer is definitely what the province is doing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, then the extra money that is costing areas — 
whether it’s Department of Community Resources, Department 
of Health, the different Crown corporations that are out there 
right now — that’s going to increase the expenses to their 
budget which would have to be happening right now. So all 
these different departments, are they paying for it individually? 
And then will they be making funds to the provincial disaster 
assistance program, or does the government pay for these 
additional expenses for each department and stay within their 
own department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Probably the simplest way to answer it, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, is it is the latter. Departments assume costs 
that are necessary to deal with their operational functioning. 
The provincial disaster assistance program is a separate 
program with a very specific set of parameters around it. I don’t 
have the parameters with me today but I’m sure the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety would be more than willing to 
answer those questions during the normal estimates. 
 
I would however say that we are confident that the two-twelfths 
that we are asking for will be sufficient to carry the government 
until May 17 when we expect the main supply Bill to be passed 
by the Assembly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Then for the different municipalities and 
individuals that are waiting for money from the last couple of 
years, does that mean that their money won’t be coming in the 
next two months, or is that from last year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I haven’t seen the schedule in terms of 
what is expected to be paid out under the PDAP program. The 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety would be in a 
position during main estimates to do it. I should however say 

that departments, when they get their two-twelfths vote, will be 
obviously able to move within that to cover their costs. So if, 
for example, there’s a higher drawdown as a result of disaster 
assistance money, they would be in a position to deal with that. 
The details of what may or may not be in the pipeline for PDAP 
payouts between now and May 17 is a question that the member 
may want to pursue with the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I do appreciate 
that and I think what we’re discussing right now, it looks like 
just a number of people in a room. I can assure you that there 
are people right around the province watching this because of 
the disaster problem that’s happening in a large part of our 
province, especially the east and central part of the province. 
People are needing answers. I asked in question period for the 
minister to come out and I’m not sure when he’s coming. He 
did indicate he would come and I’m hoping it’s quickly. 
 
But there are some questions that need to be answered, and one 
of them will be things like for power and energy in Fishing 
Lake and the number of resorts around the lake . . . I think there 
are six different resorts. The power and the energy have been 
cut off. People are asking when they are put back on again, is 
this an expense that’s for them as an individual, or will it be 
picked up because it was a part of a disaster? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The issues as it pertains to the utilities 
having been cut off for public safety reasons would be obvious I 
think to most members. Obviously we don’t want a potential 
explosion or an electrocution or something of that nature. 
 
The actual response in terms of the time period for turning this 
back on would be left to the two Crown agencies that deal with 
it, SaskPower and SaskEnergy. I don’t have an answer here 
today as it doesn’t pertain to these particular estimates. If the 
member were wanting to pursue this in some other forum, I’m 
sure we can provide an answer. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, thank you again, and I’m sure 
that most people realize that the Minister of Finance can’t 
answer all the questions. 
 
But one of the ones that — if you don’t have an answer for us 
now, if you could endeavour to get an answer for us quickly — 
is around the expenses involved. I know that the people out at 
the lakes understood that if they had to have their power or their 
gas cut off that there would be . . . that had to be done to ensure 
public safety. But to have it hooked up again, is that type of 
thing something that the Crown corporations cover, or will it 
have to be picked up by an individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, unfortunately I 
didn’t bring that note with me as Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. I can endeavour to get an answer to that from a 
SaskEnergy standpoint, and I’m sure that the Minister of 
SaskPower will have a similar answer. We’ll attempt to do that 
on a timely basis. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I do appreciate that, 
and I will give it to the people that are waiting to hear the 
answers. 
 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

The other thing that I did learn this weekend was that — I 
learned it, but I guess we all knew it — is the fact that 
Saskatchewan does have a whole population that look after each 
other and they’re there to help out. And I was really pleased and 
excited yesterday to see that there was emergency workers from 
Lloydminster and Regina out working, manning some of the 
checkpoints as we go into the various resorts yesterday. 
 
I believe that this work is all done on a volunteer basis, but 
there must be some cost to them that they’re not funded directly 
by a government agency I don’t believe. Can you tell me is 
there anything that allows them to receive some funding to help 
them carry on their life and the fact that they’re living probably 
four hours away from home for the next little while helping out 
their neighbours in Saskatchewan, even though they probably 
can’t tell you their names? 
 
And publicly I want to tell you that everybody out at the lake 
where I was yesterday was thanking them. They’re just so 
happy at the response that’s coming from around the province. 
And they just want to ensure that people aren’t losing out of 
their own pockets, if there’s some way that they can be 
rewarded for just caring about the province and the people in it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Saskatchewan has a strong spirit of 
support for our neighbours and our communities. I know many 
of these people are giving freely of their time and their energy 
to make sure that these communities are protected from these 
flood waters. As is the case, obviously, when we have fires and 
other disasters across our province, it’s part of our 
Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
I’m not familiar with the specifics around the question that the 
member is asking for in terms of the policy that may be in place 
with Corrections and Public Safety, and as such I’m sure the 
minister who is here will take note of the question and will 
work to provide a response. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Again the RMs that I mentioned in 
question period that talked to me today, this morning, about the 
washouts — 77 in one RM, 44 in another RM — they’re 
incurring considerable expense. I again come back to the 
minister saying that they were using one of the last payers, and I 
appreciate they wait until the bills come in, but at the same time 
they have to pay their own staff and the operators. Is the money 
. . . Is there going to be some effort to get some interim money 
out to the RMs? Are those that are trying hard to keep life going 
in Saskatchewan . . . will there be some pressure put on 
departments or some — I don’t want to say pressure — or some 
help to ensure that they can get their money and pay their bills 
and keep the province going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I know that the 
minister’s concern, his first concern, is public safety. The 
protection of property is obviously a high concern also of this 
administration as there’s a lot of private investment in these 
communities. 
 
Additionally the work that goes on that the municipalities have 
and the risk associated with the municipal infrastructure is an 
important consideration. These are all issues that are normally 
taken into consideration by the Minister of Corrections and 
Public Safety, Minister of Health, ministers responsible for the 

individual Crowns, Minister for Government Relations, and 
there is, in fact, a fairly good working relationship with each of 
the municipalities involved. 
 
So I anticipate that at this hour their focus is first and foremost 
on the protection of individuals to make sure the evacuation 
plans that are necessary are being carried out. Second of all then 
to make sure we can do what we can to minimize the impact on 
personal property, and finally on municipal infrastructure. 
 
The minister will be in a position, as the situation becomes 
more clear in terms of the overall financial impact and as we get 
a better understanding of what the costs are that are being 
incurred, to provide more detailed explanation as to what 
program support may be available. The question the member 
asked, specifically pertaining to whether there’s money in the 
interim supply to deal with it, is one that will need to be dealt 
with by individual ministers. I would say that given that there 
are currently evacuations underway in the province; obviously 
departments are incurring some costs. Some of that money 
would be worked through in terms of their priority areas. 
 
The overall cost and impact of the flooding at Fishing Lake or 
Red Earth or Yellow Quill or other communities, any of the 
municipalities that the member’s familiar with will be worked 
out over the coming months. And unfortunately in these 
situations, it does take some time to work through what the final 
costs are. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will be able to give 
the information that you’ve given me to the different agencies 
and people in my area, and I am sure that they will be waiting to 
hear when we’ve had an opportunity to speak to the individual 
ministers. But just for the record, I’m hoping that, as the 
Minister of Finance at this moment, you’ve got officials 
figuring in the number that it’s going to take to build the outlet 
this year. 
 
We know what it was 10 years ago, and it definitely hasn’t gone 
down in costs. But I assure you from probably this day forward, 
the outlet at Fishing Lake is going to be heard by every 
department within your government as they make sure that 
they’re aware that this is a priority item, not just for the cabin 
owners but for the towns and RMs and the people around there. 
So just make sure, you know . . . This is the first word you’ve 
heard on it, but it won’t be the last word. So thank you very 
much for your help today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I thank the member 
for her questions. I know that she must also have a number of 
concerns for the citizens in Red Earth and Yellow Quill and 
other municipalities, and obviously we do also. And we’ll 
continue to work with all the municipalities and the affected 
communities to make sure that appropriate resources are 
available to deal with their needs. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome to you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to spend a 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

few minutes, hopefully not too long, on one section dealing 
with pensions and pension benefits and specifically dealing 
with the Department of Learning. 
 
Under the Department of Learning, of course the fairly 
significant portion of the Department of Learning’s budget is 
statutory, and I’m wondering if you could explain. There are 
three sections within the Department of Learning that are 
identified as statutory, and you’ve indicated that on the sheet 
that you’ve distributed today that in fact there will be $106.265 
million of statutory money that will not be voted. And could 
you explain to the people of Saskatchewan what that means in 
not having to actually vote on that sum of expenditure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Two things. First of all, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, if I might just revert to a question I was asked earlier 
about SaskEnergy and the supply, the cost of reconnect for 
power. I assume that member will be able to hear the answer, 
but there will in fact be no charge from SaskEnergy for the 
reconnects. This is obviously something we’ve done in the 
public safety interest and as such the citizens that are affected 
will not bear the direct cost of being reconnected to the lines. 
 
With respect to the question the member for Canora-Pelly asks 
about the statutory provision, there are two types of 
expenditures we undertake in the budget. One are a 
discretionary set that are tabled and debated by the estimates. 
The second are a set that are required by law. And of course 
members are aware that the law simply requires a payment, 
statutory payment in this case, to cover off amounts that have 
been established in other Acts of the Assembly. The amounts 
that are reflected on the statutory, not-to-be-voted list are in fact 
those amounts that we expect will be incurred under those laws. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, then 
under the law that indicates that this amount is statutory, will 
we, the province, will the province be incurring that expenditure 
on a two-twelfths basis as well? In other words, do you expect 
that two-twelfths of the $106 million will in fact be paid out by 
the end of May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think I understand now what the 
member is asking. The question is, why are we not doing this 
on a two-twelfths basis also? Why is the statutory amount 
provided all at this time? The simple answer really is that it is 
required all to be paid at some point, and our view is we might 
as well undertake the statutory payment now as opposed to 
doing it in a two-twelfths basis. The remainder of the items are 
for normal government operations and as such are done on the 
two-twelfths basis. But the statutory is required and as such at 
the first opportunity we usually undertake the expenditure. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I note 
that in the Estimates document that you provided to the House 
back on the day that you presented the budget, your document 
indicates that for the statutory amount for last year, in fact, there 
was a significant change from the amount that you presented in 
the initial budget. It rose from $138 million anticipated in the 
estimate document to 159 in fact, you know, $21 million more. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question then is if the $106 million is 
statutory and you need it now as a lump sum amount, do you 
expect that that kind of change will occur again? 

And for the record, if you could have one of your officials 
explain — or yourself explain — why did such a dramatic 
change take place last year where the estimates of the statutory 
amount that had to be spent was out $21 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — A number of issues arise from the 
question the member’s asked. First of all the amount, although 
it is shown as a statutory amount, will be paid out as is required. 
 
Second of all, with respect to the $21 million variance last year, 
we had based that in the teachers’ pension and benefit line on 
an assumption that there would be more retirements from the 
profession than in fact there were. There were fewer retirements 
last year than we had initially projected or that the benefits 
agency had projected. As such, the cost of the program 
continued to rise by more than what we had anticipated. This 
year’s projections are again based on the best estimates by the 
benefits association. If there is something that changes in that 
we would reflect that in, likely at mid-year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I know, Mr. 
Minister, this question is actually going back to a little bit of 
last year. But for me to get a better understanding, the teachers’ 
superannuation plan and the Saskatchewan teachers’ retirement 
plan are the two plans that receive contributions from the 
Government of Saskatchewan, from the Finance department, for 
each of those plans. 
 
Was the plan that forced you to allocate an additional $21 
million, was it the teachers’ superannuation plan only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In fact it’s the new plan where we 
incur the additional cost. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Could the minister explain then why the new 
plan would not have a proper projection for the retirees, based 
on the fact that the people that entered that plan are post-1979, 
and why we would be out that many dollars for retirements 
under the new plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the issue really is 
the projection made by the plan. They had estimated that there 
would be more teachers retiring last year, which would have 
required less cash to be committed. What has happened is there 
were fewer teachers who retired and as such the government 
contribution was up by $21 million last year. 
 
These are just projections. Obviously the plan takes into 
account certain assumptions in terms of the number of 
retirements. Last year they were off. And we expect they will be 
back close to projection this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I’m a little confused, Mr. Minister, and maybe we need 
to determine . . . You were indicating that the additional money 
was required by the new plan. The new plan is a fully funded 
plan that is administered by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation and therefore that plan, that plan is self-sufficient. It 
doesn’t have an unfunded liability. It doesn’t have any degree 
. . . Because the amount of expenditure that you have budgeted 
this year of 40.971 million is based on the teachers that are 
currently in that plan. It’s the contribution that government puts 
into that plan. It’s matched by the teachers. And at the end of 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

retirement as I saw it, Mr. Minister, that any teachers who retire 
out of the new plan, out of the STRP [Saskatchewan Teachers 
Retirement Plan], that pension is determined by the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation according to the rules that 
they have in place. 
 
It was my understanding that the old plan, the teachers that are 
still in that plan — and it continues to decline as teachers retire 
— that of course government has committed that that plan will 
be fully funded, and each year we as taxpayers through your 
department contribute money to that plan. Now it was my 
understanding that it was that plan that was out significant in 
terms of projection, in terms of projection. Things changed in 
the year, and in fact it was the teachers’ superannuation plan 
that had a change. And I’d like you to clarify that and explain to 
me again what you meant by retirements and either a loss of 
revenue or in fact a greater expenditure. Could you clarify that? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The hon. member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’m 
very pleased to introduce in the Speaker’s gallery some very 
special guests: my wife Karen, who’s a teacher; and my son 
David, who’s in grade 12; and my other sons, Eric and Connor 
— sorry, Connor and Eric. And they’re in grade 10. And 
they’ve all skipped school to come down to hear Vice-president 
Al Gore. And if you check the records, they’re here on a real 
reason to address, to hear from Vice-president Al Gore address 
the most pressing issue facing our planet, and that’s the whole 
issue of climate change and global warming. 
 
Joining my family is a very good family friend, Alice Kuipers, 
who is the internationally published author of Life on the 
Refrigerator Door, which will be published this fall in well over 
a dozen countries, and is a constituent of the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. So if I could ask all hon. members to 
welcome the entourage here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
(continued) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Okay. 
After much consultation, I think we understand what the 
member is asking and what the appropriate answer therefore 
would be. 
 
Last year we were expecting more retirements, which would 
have meant we would’ve needed not to put as much money in 
because we wouldn’t have needed to fund the additional 
program. Fewer people retired, which meant there was more 
funding required for the plan in order to meet the numbers of 
teachers that stayed in the plan as opposed to moving into 
retirement. So the more teachers who stay on the payroll, the 
larger the contributions, as I understand how this works, and I 
think this logically holds together. 
 
I am told that this year we are expecting some of those teachers 
that didn’t retire last year will retire this year. Now this is 
getting to be complicated arithmetic, but this is what we are told 
by the benefits agency. And as such, we are expecting that there 
should be less drawdown this year than was initially projected. 
 
So that is why those numbers are there. I mean, they are fluid. 
There’s no doubt it depends on the number of teachers who 
elect to retire or not to retire. So the longer they stay on the 
payroll, the more — of course, because it’s a funded program 
— the more cost that the province incurs to deal with meeting 
their pension. And as we understand, this is the new plan that 
needs to be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then could you explain: as I 
understand it, the teachers’ superannuation plan out of your 
document is the old plan. And if I look at the estimate for ’06, it 
said it was 71.4. You’re now indicating that the expenditure 
required for this year, statutory 63.5. You’ve just told me why 
you have lowered that number because you expect more 
teachers to retire. That is the old plan. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Can I suggest that we simply address 
them by the names of the plans rather than old plan, new plan. 
So what we are looking at is the superannuation plan versus the 
teachers’ retirement plan. Now we’ve referred to the 
superannuation plan as new plan. But for the purpose of what 
the issue of discussion is, it’s about the superannuation plan and 
the change of estimates there. That’s what the problem is, 
because it’s a fully funded liability. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Right. Okay. We’ll 
refer to it as the teachers’ superannuation plan. And we know 
which plan we’re talking about. It’s teachers that have been 
teaching prior to 1979 that are in that plan — or most of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, then as we are aware and you’ve just indicated, 
by the amount of money that the GRF [General Revenue Fund] 
has to put forward to match the pension requirements . . . We’ve 
had actuarial studies done for the Public Accounts Committee, I 
think, that have indicated that the magic year is somewhere in 
that 2014, 2015 where we will see the majority — and I say the 
majority — of those teachers who are still actively teaching 
today, they will now have reached retirement age, and many of 
them may have chosen to retire. In fact the amount that will be 
left in that plan will be significantly reduced. And over a period 
of time there will be no people in that plan because it is a closed 
plan and the contributions that are required. 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

So my question then, Mr. Minister, as the Finance minister, as 
you’re looking ahead to the year 2015, 2020, what do you 
expect to have as the amount necessary for taxpayers of this 
province to have as a expenditure line — statutory as you’ve 
indicated, will not be voted; it is there — for this line of pension 
requirements? Today you’re talking about $106 million. What 
do you anticipate, at that time, when most of the teachers that 
are currently in the teachers’ superannuation plan have retired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, although I 
dare fear I will probably still be the Finance minister answering 
the member’s questions in 2015, my fear is that we will still be 
debating the old plan, new plan issue. 
 
The good news is the Provincial Auditor, as I am told, based on 
advice that we have provided him has provided in volume 3 of 
last year’s provincial audit report a projection out to, I think, 
2020 — quite a ways into the future. I don’t have that 
information with me today. I understand it has been made 
public, though, in terms of what we are expecting the cost to be 
to the treasury to meet our pension obligations. 
 
So that plan has been reviewed by the auditor and, as I 
understand, was reported in volume 3 of last year’s report. I can 
obviously endeavour to make that available to the member once 
we track down a copy of volume 3. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and as your 
colleague has indicated, volume 3 is on a shelf right in my 
office, and I’ll look at it when I get back downstairs right away. 
 
Mr. Minister, then my final question is regarding the 
expenditure for the entire fiscal year related to Learning. 
You’ve indicated on the sheet that this is a two-tenths 
requirement rather than two-twelfths. And my question then is 
the current contract for the teachers. And a large percentage of 
the staff expires, I believe, at the end of August 2007, and 
negotiations, I believe, have already probably started. 
 
What has the department put in place regarding anticipated 
expenditure? Is there a specific number that has been put in 
place for what might be a new contract that will start on 
September 1, ’07? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As these items will be bargained later 
this year, we have simply used an assumption that the 
agreement would be comparable to what we have settled with 
SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union] on. If the agreement is something different than that, I 
will revise estimates at that point or deal with that issue as it 
comes up. 
 
I do want to just indicate that I have in fact of course written the 
Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, asking him to confirm that it is his party’s position that 
the bargaining base should be 5, 5, and 5 as was indicated by 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
We were obviously concerned to see this break out and see 
essentially a bidding war at one of the teachers’ conventions. I 
wrote some two months ago about this. I would anticipate that 
the Leader of the Opposition at some point would be reasonable 
enough to provide me with a response to my correspondence. 

Obviously it’s important for us to know what expectations are 
being driven by opposition parties as we head into a negotiating 
situation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
I’ve indicated to this House many times before, and so has the 
members of the opposition, is that putting a mandate before a 
bargaining team like 0, 1, and 1 does not contribute to good 
negotiations. And we saw that happen in the last go-around. So 
I would suggest that if you’re anticipating that the trend that has 
been set in negotiated contracts thus far is going to set the 
parameters for negotiation with the teachers’ federation, then 
you should be able to indicate to me then what amount of 
dollars have you actually put forward in your estimates booklet 
for an anticipated new contract on September 1, ’07. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have built in an estimate based on 
what the SGEU settlement was. The actual cost allocated will 
need to be determined at the bargaining table. I appreciate the 
member’s concern about establishing mandates which is why of 
course I was shocked to read the comments by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, the Sask Party member, suggesting it 
would be a 5, 5, and 5 which is obviously significantly different 
than what’s been negotiated at other tables. 
 
I trust at some point the Leader of the Opposition would be 
good enough to respond to my correspondence to clear up any 
misunderstanding we may have about what the Sask Party’s 
position is. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, a couple more 
questions for the minister before we wrap this up. Regarding 
Health, we saw a major announcement on Friday regarding a 
children’s hospital for Saskatoon. I see that . . . for 
Saskatchewan. We’ve got two-twelfths interim supply, $577 
million. I guess what was underwhelming — is the word that 
has been used around that news conference — was that this 
government committed $1 million to this project that is 
estimated in the 100- to $200 million range. Can the minister 
outline if there is indeed any additional funding towards a 
children’s hospital that comes from the interim supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Obviously, Mr. Deputy Chair, we are 
seeking a study to ascertain what the full cost of the children’s 
hospital would be before committing the resources to undertake 
it, just as we would any other capital project. 
 
Now the member opposite of course has criticized me at great 
length in this House — well not great length in this House but 
certainly outside of the House, seems unable to find his feet in 
the House to ask me the questions — but was criticizing us for 
unsustainable spending. He now seems to be of the view that 
220 million should be readily available and provided for 
without the detailed planning. 
 
Obviously on this project, we need to make sure that not only is 
the costing undertaken appropriately; we’ve got to factor in 
appropriate inflation. But given the complexity of the 
reorganization that the Saskatoon Health Board is looking at, I 
think we would want to make sure that that plan makes sense 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

also. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well certainly, 
the sustainability factor does come into play when you see a 
budget that has very, very few projections beyond the election 
cycle. And the financial cycle, if you like, of the province has 
been totally ignored. And on that theme, we were talking about 
two-twelfths on expenditures and interim supply. 
 
Can the minister outline on a two-twelfth basis . . . because I 
know he doesn’t like talking about projections of revenue into 
the future too much. But on a two-twelfths basis, can he 
comment on how revenues are looking for this province? Are 
they ahead of the budgetary estimates? Certainly when the 
numbers were calculated for the budget, I’m sure it would have 
been early March, mid-March at the latest. We’re well beyond a 
month to six weeks beyond that. Can the minister outline if 
indeed we will have extra revenue, so we can hope that things 
are sustainable in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well we’re now 23 days into the new 
fiscal year and, as such, I can report to the House that our 
assumptions that we have built into the budget appear to be on 
track. We will obviously, as the year moves on, have a much 
better understanding of what things look like in the other 
300-and-some days of the year. 
 
What we need to deal with again . . . And I appreciate the 
question about sustainability from the member opposite. I find 
it curious that on the one hand, he criticizes us for the spending 
that is undertaken and, on the other hand, pushes us to 
undertake more. It appears that it is all about politics. And I 
think that that is a very unfortunate position that the member is 
at some point going to have to square. 
 
This government, of course, has a proud record in terms of the 
approach that we have taken with paying down the debt — 
almost $1 billion since we were re-elected. The money that 
we’ve been able to provide to support health care and education 
— the priority areas of Saskatchewan people — the money that 
we’ve been able to provide for the 10-year, $5 billion highways 
plan are all items that meet not only the test of public 
acceptability but of sustainability. If the member wants us to 
undertake significant new spending, I would appreciate it if he 
could identify where that would come from. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly it’s 
surprising to hear from the minister who doesn’t want to talk 
about projections beyond the next few months, can’t even give 
us a comment on if we’re ahead of budgetary schedules or not, 
and then announces programs that are, some like the children’s 
hospital, that won’t even start construction for a number of 
years and won’t be completed for ten years, or the budget . . . I 
would contend to the minister that it is indeed about . . . it’s 
about politics from his perspective. But I can tell him that in 
asking these questions and representing people from across 
Saskatchewan, it’s about priorities. 
 
And that’s what this government is lacking. That’s what people 
across Saskatchewan are asking for, is where do you get the 
funding to do these things on a long-term basis? And we look 

through the history of this province, we’ve seen that projections 
have been made by Finance ministers, one after the other, and 
to not have any projections whatsoever. And then to make the 
irresponsible promises, some that begin ten years into the 
future, I would suggest does not serve anybody well. 
 
At this time, Mr. Chair, I would say that we have no further 
questions as far as interim supply and ready for the vote. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I appreciate the comment from the member opposite, but 
I do find it a rather disingenuous explanation that he provides as 
to how it is on the one hand he can scream at the tops of his 
lungs about sustainability as he did during the budget speech, 
and then on the other hand come forth with a laundry list of 
additional spending that he thinks should be easily 
accomplished. It is not as simple as the members opposite 
undertook when that member was participating in Mr. Devine’s 
regime. There is in fact a much more transparent approach that 
we have undertaken. 
 
There is a budget in front of us that meets the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. And I appreciate the fact, I appreciate the 
fact that the member opposite has been somewhat forthright in 
saying that they would repeal the seniors’ drug plan, that they 
would not support the graduate tax credit, and instead undertake 
a health care audit, undertake a number of other changes that 
they seem to believe would be sustainable, while at the same 
time arguing these modest measures we have in front of the 
Assembly are simply not otherwise sustainable. 
 
That being said, I do want to thank the officials for joining us 
this afternoon and thank the members for their questions. I’m 
sure the debate will continue in the days to come. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, the 
resolution before the committee is: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,320,506,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2008. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move that: 
 

Towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty 
on account of certain charges and expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, ’08, the sum 
of $1,320,506,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. I’ll repeat the resolution that 
is being moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2007 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2008, the sum of $1,320,506,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt this resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would move that 
the committee rise and that the Chair report the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I think we’ve all heard the resolution 
moved by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt that resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Committee of Finance has agreed to certain resolutions, has 
instructed me to report the same, and to ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that the 
resolutions be now read for the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the committee sit again? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Later this day. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that by 
leave of the Assembly that Bill 67, The Appropriation Act, 
2007 (No. 2) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 67, The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 
and under rule 57(2), I move the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
under rule 57(2) that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, having accomplished a great 
deal, it’s time to move on. And so therefore in order to 
accommodate the good work of the Private Bills Committee, 
the Human Services Committee, and the Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure Committee, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 



April 23, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

adjourned until 1:30 on Wednesday, pursuant to the April 18 
order of this Assembly. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:54.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1359 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1360 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1360 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1360 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1360 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1360 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1360 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1360 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1362 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1362 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1373 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Al Gore’s Presentation on Climate Change 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1362 
 Proposed Children’s Hospital in Saskatchewan 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1362 
 New Democratic Party Candidate in Saskatoon Massey Place 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1363 
 Tourism Saskatchewan Awards of Excellence 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1363 
 Vibrant Economy in Meadow Lake 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1363 
 Poll Results on Premier’s Popularity 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1363 
 Saskatchewan Party Views on Global Warming 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1364 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Flooding Conditions 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1364 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1364 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1365 
 Climate Change 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
 Recruiting and Retaining Physicians 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1367 
 Emergency Health Services 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1368 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1368 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Surgical Care Initiatives 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1369 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1370 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 66 — The Occupational Health and Safety (Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1373 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1373 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1374 
  Cheveldayoff..................................................................................................................................................................1374, 1380 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 67 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 2) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


