






















































Hansard: April 26, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 52A  THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1399 
 April 26, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I wish, before we proceed with the petitions, 
to table the Ombudsman’s report, the annual report for the year 
2006. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege again today to present another petition on behalf of the 
residents of the Broadview and surrounding regions in regards 
to a very serious need in the area for a dialysis unit. And I read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks, I believe, of the community of Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about Highway 
No. 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Yorkton, 
Semans, Wadena, Foam Lake, Sheho, and Rama. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
seemingly silly practice of transferring patients from one 
ambulance to another on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
cities of Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
a petition with citizens concerned about safety when driving on 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Annaheim, Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Preeceville, and Bruno. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the condition of Highway 
18. And the prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18, so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Radville. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens of Biggar who’re 
concerned about their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition regarding the truly tragic circumstances 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

surrounding the death of Doug Bonderud and the lack of 
acceptance of responsibility by this NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from the provincial constituencies 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs, Saskatoon Sutherland, and 
Saskatoon Greystone. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned that the withdrawal of lab services 
from the Lafleche and District Health Centre would create undo 
hardship to residents, particularly seniors. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche, 
Limerick, and Woodrow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly this morning to present a petition 
signed by citizens of southwest Saskatchewan concerned with 
their health system. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are all from the fine 
community of Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from Saskatchewan people who are deeply 
concerned about the presence of sexual predators that present a 
threat to our communities. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all the steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
a known sex offender in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of 
Cudworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with the citizens concerned about the SaskTel cellular service in 
rural Saskatchewan: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary action to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
in Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Jansen and Lanigan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present a petition requesting an allocation of funding for an 
elementary school in the Stonebridge neighbourhood of 
Saskatoon, an area of Saskatoon Southeast which is my 
constituency. The prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Stonebridge. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Stepney, 
Preston, and Stonebridge in Saskatoon Southeast. I’m pleased 
to present this on their behalf. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition calling on the government to increase 
highway signage at the junctions of Highways 6 and 39. And 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to increase highway signage at the 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

junctions of Highway 6 and 39. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Weyburn, 
Radville, Minton. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the petitions received at 
the last sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) 
are hereby read and received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Committee on Human 
Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 
to report that it has considered Bill No. 40, The Status of the 
Artist Amendment Act, 2006 and to recommend to the 
Assembly that this Bill be not further proceeded with at this 
session. 
 
This conclusion is no reflection on the excellent, excellent 
processes and the working relationship of the committee 
structure. The report itself will explain the work that was done 
and how the conclusions were reached. I move, seconded by the 
member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services on Bill No. 40, The Status of the Artist 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services on Bill No. 40, The Status of the Artist 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I therefore direct that 
Bill No. 40, The Status of the Artist Amendment Act, 2006 be 
removed from the order paper. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 58 move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please provide a copy of the 
most recent update provided to the Sun Country Health 
Region by Deloitte Inc. as part of the occupation and 
safety delivery review undertaken by the health authority 
in January 2007. 

 
I also have a number of written questions, Mr. Speaker, that I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 58 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: which regional health authority 
have engaged Deloitte Inc. to complete operational and 
service delivery reviews, what are the timelines for 
completion, and will the results be made public? 
 
To the Minister of Health: how many new health care 
workers in each profession have been recruited to date and 
are currently working in the province since the recruitment 
agency was established in the fall of 2006? 
 
To the Minister of Health: what is the breakdown by 
profession of the 600 new health care professionals that 
the recruitment agency, department, or regional health 
authorities plan on recruiting? 
 
To the Minister of Health: what was the total amount of 
money spent on ministerial travel in the fiscal year 
2006-2007? 
 
To the Minister of Health: how many people were sent out 
of province for medical treatment in the fiscal year of 
2006-2007? And of those, how many were for orthopedic 
surgery, cancer treatment, sight restoration, cardiac care 
and/or diagnostics respectively, and how many would fall 
under categories other than these? 

 
To the Minister of Health: how much money was spent on 
each specific advertising campaign the department 
undertook in the fiscal year 2006-2007, and which agency 
received the contract? 
 
To the Minister of Health: how much money did the 
department spend on advertising and communication in 
the fiscal year 2006-2007? 
 
To the Minister of Health: what was the total amount of 
money spent on staffing travel with the minister in the 
fiscal year 2006-2007? 
 
To the Minister of Health: how much money was paid out 
in severance and to whom during the fiscal year 
2006-2007? 
 

And finally: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the total payroll for 
the minister’s office for the fiscal year 2006-2007? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly two guests who are seated in your 
gallery today, Mr. Speaker. I would ask them to rise as I 
introduce them and then receive our acknowledgement when 
I’ve concluded. 
 
First of all I’d like to introduce to you Bev Ward. Ms. Ward is a 
Regina resident and is Co-Chair for the District 42 Toastmasters 
spring convention which is being held this weekend at the 
Regina Inn here in Regina. The event brings together over 200 
toastmasters from Alberta and Saskatchewan with some 
toastmasters coming in from Manitoba as well. The convention 
has a circus theme, Under the Big Top. 
 
Beside Bev is Mona Cooley who is district governor for District 
42 of Toastmasters. She’s the highest ranking official for 
Toastmasters in all of Alberta and Saskatchewan. I understand 
that Mona’s been a toastmaster for nearly a decade, Mr. 
Speaker, and has received many awards for her work in the 
organization. Mona and her husband have four children and 
four grandchildren. In her professional life, Mona is a facilitator 
for the Canadian Mental Health Association, the family peer 
support group, and is a program consultant for Parent Support 
Association. 
 
I would ask all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, to welcome these 
two toastmasters to the Legislative Assembly and wish them 
every success for themselves and their colleagues at the 
Toastmasters conference being held this weekend here in 
Regina. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce 21 grade 8 students from Porcupine 
Plain High School sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. With them 
today are their teachers, Debra Zelany and Lawrence Schmidt. 
And we have chaperones, Carol Guest, and a Japanese intern, 
Keiko Iida. I hope I said that correctly. 
 
Thank you very much for coming. I know you had to come on 
some flooded roads to get here, and everybody’s got a big smile 
on their face. So I look forward to meeting with you later on, 
and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
also like to introduce to you and, through you, to the Assembly 

39 grade 5 students from the P.J. Gillen Elementary School in 
Esterhazy. They’re accompanied by their teachers Alisa Leidl, 
Kelsey Shields, Reg Leidl, Melinda Schentag, and Marj 
Deschambault, along with chaperones Crystal Hawcutt, Satti 
Gill, and Cindy Paramour. I would ask all members to welcome 
them here today, and I hope they have a good time in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Member’s Statement 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Before we proceed with 
statements by members, I wish to bring down a ruling which 
may be relevant to members’ statements. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to review Hansard, and I wish to bring 
a matter to the attention of the Assembly. During Wednesday’s 
statements by members, the member for Regina Coronation 
Park referred to another member’s action as underhanded and 
unethical. Later he attributed unethical behaviour to another 
member and to an identifiable group. 
 
Charges of impropriety against other individual members and 
identifiable groups of members are considered unparliamentary. 
We should hold ourselves to a higher standard of debate. 
 
I call upon the member for Regina Coronation Park to 
unequivocally withdraw that statement. I recognize the member 
for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that statement. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 28 
is regrettably an extremely important day of observance in 
Saskatchewan and across the country, regrettably, Mr. Speaker, 
because for 19 years our province has observed the 28th day of 
April as a statutory day of mourning for those workers that are 
killed or injured on the job. 
 
It was almost 20 years ago when the member from Moose Jaw 
North, at the request of former Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour president Nadine Hunt, introduced a Bill to the 
legislature recognizing this day as a day to both honour those 
who have suffered at work and to renew our commitment to the 
protection of workers’ safety. 
 
It is unfortunate that it is necessary to observe a day of 
mourning each year, Mr. Speaker. In the past year, in our great 
province alone, 44 workers lost their lives as a result of their 
work; 13,732 documented others lost work time as a result of 
injury. 
 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

Workers go to their jobs every day to provide for their families, 
not to suffer, not to be debilitated, and not to die. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to ensuring that 
worker safety is a priority in Saskatchewan and to ensuring that 
our labour legislation remains strong. It is my hope and through 
initiatives like the action plan for healthy and safe workplaces 
that one day no new names will be read into the record. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saturday, 
April 28 is the National Day of Mourning for workers killed or 
injured on the job. This day of mourning was officially 
recognized by the Canadian government in 1991, eight years 
after the day of remembrance was launched by the Canadian 
Labour Congress. More than 80 countries around the world 
observe this day of mourning, Mr. Speaker. Saturday is the day 
when we remember all workers who have lost their lives or 
have been injured on the job. It is also a day, Mr. Speaker, when 
we must reaffirm our commitment to providing safe and healthy 
workplaces in an effort to reduce on-the-job death, illness, and 
injuries. 
 
Over the last year in Saskatchewan, 44 men and women lost 
their lives as a result of job injuries or illness. Mr. Speaker, one 
death is too many; 44 deaths are unacceptable and we must do 
better. As a result, the lives of 44 families across this province 
have been changed forever. Our thoughts and prayers are with 
each one of them as they come to terms with the tragic loss of a 
loved one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Canadian Centre for Occupational Health 
and Safety rightly observes, the National Day of Mourning for 
workers killed or injured on the job is, and I quote, “. . . as 
much a day to remember the dead as it is a call to protect the 
living.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

100 Years of Building Strong Kids 
and Strong Families in Regina 

 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Tomorrow evening hundreds of people will gather at the Hotel 
Saskatchewan to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Regina 
family YMCA [Young Men’s Christian Association]. I am 
extremely pleased to have the opportunity to take part in this 
special evening to honour the Y’s charitable heritage and to 
recognize the many contributions the Y makes to the quality of 
life in Regina. 
 
The Regina family YMCA has been building strong kids, strong 
families, and a strong Regina for more than 100 years. The very 
first provisional YMCA was located in a building where the 
Cornwall Centre now stands, but the first full-fledged Y was 
established in 1907. Five years later it was destroyed in the 
Regina cyclone, but thanks as ever to the efforts of dedicated 
volunteers, it reopened a year later. 
 
Now 100 years later Regina boasts two full-service facilities 

serving almost 9,000 members. Mr. Speaker, the new Y on 
Rochdale is a cutting-edge facility and is only one in the 
country with two variable-depth swimming pools. It is quickly 
becoming the family activity centre for citizens of northwest 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Regina family YMCA 
on their 100th anniversary. As a member of the Y and as a 
citizen of Regina, I want to thank the Y’s staff and volunteers 
for their important and ongoing contributions to the quality of 
life here in Regina. All the best to President Donald Black, 
CEO [chief executive officer]; Randy Klassen, program 
director; Doris Gerrand, and the whole Regina YMCA family. I 
wish them every success as they embark upon their second 
century of service to our community. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Public Response 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
our office continues to receive responses to our mailout on the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal. To date we have received 
approximately 7,000 responses. Saskatchewan people are at a 
loss to understand how the NDP government could have 
rewarded a man fired for harassment and convicted of assault 
with a whopping $275,000 plus a top-up to his pension. 
 
I would like to share some of the comments with members 
opposite. From Regina and I quote: 
 

I can barely speak about this issue because I’m so angry. 
For this government to try to justify rewarding a predator 
in the workplace while giving his victims almost nothing 
is inexcusable. I will never forget this and neither will all 
of the women and the men I work with. 
 

From Saskatoon, I quote: 
 

Cover-up does not even begin to describe what the NDP 
did in this case. There is far more to this story and I hope I, 
nor no one I know, is ever in the position these women . . . 
[find] themselves in because protection would not be 
offered. Thank you for not allowing this issue to die down. 
 

Also from Saskatoon, I quote: 
 

I’ve never written to an MLA in my 54 years, but I’m 
appalled and shocked with the Carriere payment. I WAS 
an NDP supporter, but no more! 
 

And finally from Saskatoon, I quote: 
 

This is not appropriate! How dare you disrespect women 
in any way. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Crime Victims Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, April 22 to 28 is Victims of 
Crime Awareness Week here in Saskatchewan. This year’s 
theme is It’s Time to Listen. Victims of crime and traumatic 
events need to be listened to and know that their concerns are 
being heard by the criminal justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are more than 300 dedicated, caring 
volunteers working in victims services programs across our 
province, and I’m sure they would agree that listening is 
probably the most important part of the job of the victims 
services volunteer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Victims of Crime Awareness Week gives us the 
opportunity to recognize the important role these individuals 
play ensuring that victims of violent crime receive information 
and support immediately after a crime . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order, order. I have asked the 
members, as a whole, to keep order in the Assembly and I find 
members are ignoring the request, so I’m going to be a little 
more specific. I ask members to respect those members who 
have the floor. And if they have any debates they wish engage 
in, they should do so at a proper and the appropriate time or the 
appropriate place. The member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the 
following individuals who have provided 10 years of volunteer 
service to victims service program: Trudy Connor, northern 
region victim services; Susan Houle, Saskatoon victim services; 
Val Orb, Regina region victim services; and Gerry Tullis, 
Saskatoon victim services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in expressing our 
appreciation to these dedicated individuals and all our victim 
services volunteers for their years of service to the people of 
their communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Caucus Audit Report 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the member for Moose Jaw North told reporters that 
the NDP caucus had an audit done in 1992 to determine if any 
taxpayers’ money was missing. He said he couldn’t remember 
the results of the audit, but he said it was immediately turned 
over to the police, and the police decided not to press charges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of 
that audit. And the Saskatchewan Party has also obtained a 
1994 memo from NDP caucus director of administration Carla 
Douglas to NDP MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
Pat Lorjé. It appears to contradict the story we heard yesterday. 
The memo says, and I quote: 
 

When I asked why the auditors report has still not been 
shared with me, I was told that in respect of the political 
sensitivity . . . that as few people as possible should be 
involved . . . furthermore the office had decided not to 
press charges in light of the small sum . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, note that the memo suggests that the NDP caucus 
office — not the police — decided not to press charges. The 
memo then says this, quote, “Jim . . . asked why I thought the 
police had the [audit] . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I request the member for Regina 
South to not interfere into the debate or the statements. With 
apologies, the member for Canora-Pelly may complete his 
statement. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Continuing with the quote, Mr. Speaker, 
“When I told him . . . he had told me the police had the report 
he rapidly back peddled and tried to say that I had 
misunderstood him . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, based on this statement, it is unclear whether the 
audit report actually was turned over to the police in 1992. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 
North Central Regional Recreation Association 

Volunteer Awards 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday night the 
North Central Regional Recreation Association held its annual 
Volunteer Recognition Awards in my constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
It was a great evening of music, good food, and company, and 
well-deserved awards to the following persons: Stanley and 
Grace Livingstone who share their African music and their 
pride at being new Canadians; Willie and Sheila Baessler who 
share their German heritage in schools and community events; 
Patrick Markowski, a 15-year-old Wesmor student, who sets an 
example of volunteerism in his school community; Pauline 
Reynaud of Wakaw who compiled the St. Benedict and district 
history book; Catherine Mazurkewich who has served the 
community of Cudworth on numerous recreation boards and 
committees; Heather Pocha of Lily Plain, an active 4-H 
supporter and community volunteer; Dale McLeod who has 
served on numerous boards in Prince Albert and Candle Lake; 
Greg Nolan of Paddockwood who played a key role in 
commemorating the Montreal Lake Trail during our centenary; 
Roberta Burns who seems to be a presence almost everywhere 
in Prince Albert; and Jim O’Sullivan who teaches, referees, and 
coaches judo at all levels of competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the North 
Central Recreation Association for its good work and in 
congratulating the 2007 Volunteer Award winners. They 
exemplify the spirit of volunteerism that characterizes this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Because of its relevance to oral questions, I 
wish to bring down a ruling at this time. Yesterday the 
Opposition House Leader raised a point of order regarding the 
future admissibility of a line of questioning that the member for 
Canora-Pelly was pursuing during oral question period 
yesterday. I wish to thank both him and the Government House 
Leader for their interventions. 
 
Members will be aware that parliamentary rules and traditions 
exist to ensure that oral question period is conducted in an 
appropriate manner. Paragraph 409(6) of Beauchesne’s, 6th 
Edition, states, “A question must be within the administrative 
competence of the Government.” 
 
Marleau and Montpetit, on pages 426-427, further clarifies this 
principle by stating that “a question should not address a 
Minister’s former portfolio or any other presumed functions, 
such as party or regional political responsibilities.” 
 
These authorities have been interpreted and applied in this 
Assembly. In this vein, there have been no fewer than nine 
rulings on such matters over the course of the last decade. Two 
statements made in the year 2000 are particularly relevant to the 
current circumstances. On April 17, 2000, my predecessor 
stated that: 
 
[10:30] 
 

Comments regarding the political responsibilities of a 
minister or the Leader of the Opposition or of any other 
member are properly matters of debate. As such, they may 
be raised during debate on relevant topics in bills, 
estimates, and motions. During question period however, 
only questions touching upon the collective administrative 
responsibility of the government or the current individual 
responsibilities of a minister are properly the subject of 
oral questions. 

 
The questions asked by the hon. member concerned a former 
employee of the government caucus in the early 1990s and 
sought to determine whether she may have been involved in the 
misappropriation of public funds. While I recognize that 
members of the Executive Council do belong to the government 
caucus, the internal affairs of any caucus, as with those of any 
political party, do not fall within the administrative 
responsibility of the government. 
 
The Opposition House Leader cited several instances from 1996 
to support his opinion that the questions should be permitted. At 
the surface, these instances do appear to support the Opposition 
House Leader’s point of view. However the 1996 precedents 
can be distinguished from the matter at hand in that the former 
— the 1996 precedents — did touch upon the administrative 
responsibility of the executive, namely the recovery of public 
funds by the government. 
 
In contrast, the questions at issue yesterday address the internal 
accounting of funds within a caucus. In putting questions to 
ministers during oral question period, members must clearly 

connect their questions to a government responsibility or 
portfolio. The member for Canora-Pelly failed to clearly make 
this connection. 
 
In arriving at my decision, I recognize that it is often a fine line 
that divides those questions that are acceptable and those that 
are not. A ruling dated May 9, 2000, addressed the difficulty of 
maintaining a balance on matters such as the issue at hand. 
 
Firstly, the matter in which a question is phrased is of primary 
importance. As noted in that ruling, “An appropriately worded 
preamble could prompt me as Speaker to intervene, even 
though the question or answer to follow is procedurally 
acceptable.” 

 
The ruling states: 
 

The difficulty that I, as Speaker, must resolve is 
determining whether a question, while it is being posed, is 
in order. In some instances, it is very clear where a 
member is heading and that the subject matter is 
inappropriate. In other instances, it is only after a member 
has completed asking his . . . question that one is able to 
determine its procedural acceptability. In many instances, 
by the time the appropriateness of the question is 
determined the minister has indicated his or her desire to 
respond. 

 
There is another dynamic of question period that touches upon 
the difficulty of the present situation. Upon review of the 
relevant precedents, I have found some examples where 
ministers have voluntarily answered questions. Sometimes a 
minister has answered in terms of their Board of Internal 
Economy responsibilities. Yesterday I did provide an 
opportunity for a minister to voluntarily respond to the 
question. This opportunity was not taken. Therefore the next 
question was called. 
 
Pursuant to a review of precedents and in response to the point 
of order, I rule as follows. Number one, questions must be 
posed in a manner that clearly connects the issue to the 
responsibility of a minister or the government as a whole. 
Number two, when a question is put that is not directly 
connected to a government responsibility, the Speaker shall rule 
the question out of order but provide the government with the 
option to respond. Three, this ruling does not preclude members 
raising this type of issue by other means that are available. 
 
This ruling is in line with the Assembly’s practice to allow 
questions related to political parties when they are posed in 
terms of the legislation, statutes, or administration of the law. It 
is also in line with the practice to allow ministers to voluntarily 
respond to questions outside their ministerial responsibilities. 
 
In closing I want to note a matter of particular concern to the 
Speaker. Yesterday during my initial ruling, a few remarks were 
heard to challenge the impartiality of the Speaker. In future this 
will not be tolerated. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

Misappropriation of Funds by Former Caucus Worker 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a question regarding the collection of the public money. And I 
wish to connect it by referring to page 429 of Marleau and 
Montpetit which talks about raising questions in question period 
regarding the administration of the House. It indicates that these 
questions are in order in question period and should be directed 
to the member of the Board of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Would the 
member just proceed with his question to the minister. A ruling 
has come down, and there should not need be any debate about 
the ruling. The Chair recognizes . . . Order please. Order please. 
Order please. The member may proceed with a question to the 
government or executive members. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is: how much 
taxpayers’ money was misappropriated by Ann Davey and what 
has the government done to re-collect that amount? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as House Leader I will 
voluntarily respond to the question raised by the hon. member. 
Mr. Speaker, back in 1992, early 1992, the New Democrat 
caucus unfortunately hired an employee who was hired under a 
false identification and who subsequently advised the caucus 
that she had misappropriately received funds that were not due 
to her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that led immediately to a meeting with the Regina 
city police where the letter was disclosed, and a audit was 
recommended by the Regina city police. That was done. A 
special audit was done and turned over to the police who 
subsequently advised that the Regina city police did not lay, 
prefer charges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to lay on the Table a copy of that 
special audit that was done at that time when referred to the 
police and also to lay on the Table a subsequent audit that was 
done in 1994 — a complete audit to review all of the 
procedures of the New Democrat caucus which were 
subsequently implemented. I so table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Ann 
Davey admitted to misappropriating $5,900. The audit report 
that the minister has referred to, done in 1992, identifies $6,166 
missing from the NDP caucus office. How much money did 
Ann Davey misappropriate from the NDP caucus office? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member correctly 
reads the audit, he’ll recognize that the special audit indicated 
that there were some payments made for which verification 

could be not documented. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear what this is about. 
Today is the 25th anniversary of the election of the Devine 
government, which many would call the most corrupt 
government in the history of Saskatchewan. And this is nothing 
other than an attempt of the Saskatchewan Party, whose leader 
worked in that government and who also said that he considered 
it a learning experience to have worked in that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a question I ask the member opposite is, if he has 
information which he believes should be taken to the police, 
then has he taken it to the police? If he has not taken it to the 
police, how long has he had it, and why has he not taken that 
information to the police for their consideration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for . . . Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what steps have been taken by 
the NDP to recover the money that Ann Lord misappropriated 
and took from the taxpayers of this province, and how much has 
been recovered? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, let me make a point very 
clear: that the point at which it was thought to be possible that 
there was a case of misappropriation, that information was 
delivered to the Regina city police immediately. 
 
This caucus, Mr. Speaker, took it to the police immediately, 
contrary to the record of the predecessors of the Saskatchewan 
Party, the Conservatives, who made no complaint to the police 
— in fact were the subject of police investigation, and charges 
were subsequently laid and convictions followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today on the 25th anniversary of the election of 
the Devine government, we find questions being raised by the 
Saskatchewan Party whose leader — who worked in the 
Saskatchewan Party operation, or in the Devine government 
Conservative operation — had this to say about that experience. 
He said, “I think it’s an asset that I was involved in a 
government that lost its way on these issues.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when we thought there was wrongdoing, we 
reported it to the police. I ask the hon. members, have they 
taken it to the police? If not, why not? Is this about integrity or 
about politics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has obtained a 1994 memo from former 
NDP caucus director of administration Carla Douglas to former 
NDP MLA Pat Lorjé. The memo says, and I quote: 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

At this point Jim sat me down to “discuss the matter” of 
Ann Lord in more detail. What he shared with me was that 
the auditor had in fact uncovered what he categorized as 
“unauthorized loans” in the amount of $5,000 - $7,000. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Ann Davey confessed to defrauding the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan by altering cheques. Does the minister 
consider these to simply be unauthorized loans? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat the facts. The 
facts are these: that when the information was received that 
there was the possibility of misappropriation, that information 
was given to the Regina city police immediately. The fact of the 
matter is the Regina city police recommended an audit to 
determine the actual facts. That was done. And it was that copy 
of that special audit was provided to the Regina city police who 
subsequently, Mr. Speaker, who subsequently chose to not lay 
charges, considered that not the appropriate course of action. 
That’s a decision of the Regina city police, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask the hon. member one more time, if he has 
information, if he has information which he believes that points 
to wrongdoing, has he taken it to the police? If not, why not? 
How long has he hung on to it if he’s not taken it to the police? 
And will he come clean, in fact, that this is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister told reporters that the police had decided 
not to lay charges. The Carla Douglas memo appears to 
contradict that claim. It says, and I quote: 
 

When I asked why the auditors report had still not been 
shared with me, I was told that in respect of the political 
sensitivity of the issue that as few people as possible 
should be involved, and that furthermore the office had 
decided not to press charges in light of the small sum in 
comparison to the large sum Ann was being indicted for in 
the United States. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this memo suggests that it was the NDP caucus 
office that had decided not to proceed with charges. Is this 
correct? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member’s 
question arises from watching too much American television. In 
Canada, the decision about whether charges are laid is made by 
the police services. Whatever an author of a memo might think, 
whatever the member might think from watching too much 
American television, in Canada the decision as to whether 
charges are made is made by the police. And whether they are 
proceeded with to court is made by independent Crown 

prosecutors. That’s how it works here. We do not want to build 
a house of cards on a misapprehension based on watching too 
much Law & Order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Perry Mason and Law & Order, Mr. Speaker. 
Perry Mason and Law & Order. Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 
minister indicated that the auditor’s report was immediately 
turned over to the police and he confirmed that again today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Carla Douglas memo calls that statement into question. It 
says, and I quote: 
 

. . . interestingly enough [Jim] asked why I thought the 
police had the report. When I told him that he had told me 
the police had the report he rapidly back pedalled and tried 
to say that I had misunderstood him. 

 
Mr. Speaker, exactly when was the auditor’s report first turned 
over to the police? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try this one more 
time. The difference between Perry Mason and Law & Order 
just may reflect the difference in age between the member from 
Canora-Pelly and myself. 
 
The issue is the same, Mr. Speaker. The reality is that in this 
country, whatever the author — a layperson, a non-lawyer, the 
author of a memo — might think, the fact is that in this country 
the decision as to whether charges are proceeded with — laid 
with and proceeded with — are the decisions of independent 
police services and the decisions of independent prosecutors, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we can’t build . . . And if the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast has a comment to make in this regard, I wish he 
would take the courage to rise to his feet and comment directly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Support for Adult Basic Education 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week the Justice minister attended a business leaders’ literacy 
breakfast. In his remarks the minister talked about his 
government’s commitment to literacy. He talked about how 
literacy provides the essential tools that ensure people can be 
successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are glowing words. And given all of those 
fine words, why is this government making cuts to the adult 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

basic education in Estevan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite has got us mixed up with the federal government in 
Ottawa. I don’t know how she’s done that. 
 
This government established the Literacy Commission. Two 
and a half million dollars goes to the commission to promote 
community projects, to promote family literacy right across the 
province. The Literacy Commission does a great job. There is 
requests for proposals out, some that have been recognized. The 
plans are proceeding and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve actually 
increased funding to the Literary Commission this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the adult basic education program 
at the Southeast Regional College has been in operation for 25 
years. The students are mostly women, with some single 
mothers. These vulnerable students are doing everything they 
can to improve their lives. These students are struggling to get 
the skills they need to get better jobs and earn a better standard 
of living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government pulling the rug out from 
under them? Why is this government making it harder for these 
people to get a better education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the budget 
of ’07-08, which the members voted against a few weeks ago, 
we launched seats for about 5,890 citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan which would have access to adult basic 
education. And in fact last fall, Mr. Speaker, when the federal 
government did not honour its agreement with the province — 
the labour market agreement — we agreed that community 
colleges as well as SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies] and DTI [Dumont Technical Institute] could start 
providing adult basic education services on-reserve. 
 
This was a total difference in what had been happening in the 
past, where federal government had jurisdiction on the reserve 
and they were to provide funding. Mr. Speaker, we have made 
great strides when it comes to adult basic education because we 
know that people need a basic grade 12 in order to go on to 
further education and skills training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, this government says it’s 
committed to literacy and committed to giving people the skills 
they need to be successful. However this government’s actions 
speak louder than its words. Adult basic education students in 
Estevan now face another hurdle; they won’t be able to take the 
classes in their community. Mr. Speaker, the man who made 
this decision was Graham Mickleborough, who ran for the NDP 
and lost in the Weyburn by-election. Mr. Mickleborough claims 
interest in basic education in Estevan is waning and, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not true. Mr. Speaker, will this government 
commit today to reviewing this decision with an eye to 
restoring adult basic education in Estevan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the members will know, Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction 
in Canada that has regional colleges all across Saskatchewan. 
We are able to provide adult basic education and skills training 
and university classes outside of the major centres of 
Saskatoon, Regina, P.A. [Prince Albert], and Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker. No other province in Canada has this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we brought community colleges to Saskatchewan 
in the late 1970s. That was what a New Democratic government 
did in the ’70s. Mr. Speaker, we have over 5,880 individuals 
that will have access to adult basic education, including First 
Nations on-reserve, thanks to the ’07-08 budget which those 
members opposite did not bother supporting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Assistance to Cattle Producers in Humboldt Area 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, flooding in the RM [rural 
municipality] of Humboldt has reached disastrous proportions. 
The Waldsea Lake Regional Park is completely lost, including 
67 cabins. There are over 30 washed out roads and more than 
60 miles of roads closed due to flooding. The flooded waters 
have joined two lakes together which is creating an even bigger 
problem. Many cattle farmers in the area have water supplies 
for their cattle that are now contaminated. Mr. Speaker, what is 
this government going to do to assist the ranchers in keeping 
their cattle alive? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been maintaining contact with the local authorities in 
Waldsea Lake area on a daily basis. We’re well aware of the 
situation. 
 
And I guess what we’re trying to do as the provincial 
government is work in support of the local authorities that have 
the primary call, the best read on the situation on the ground, 
and we’re trying to back them up in the work that they’re doing, 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

Mr. Speaker. We’re also working through instruments like the 
provincial disaster assistance program, which in the past two 
years has put forward, has worked with $26 million worth of 
claims compared to the 30 million over the previous 30 years of 
experience with the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be working very closely with the 
local authorities to make the appropriate response to the 
emergency situation as it presents in Waldsea Lake and 
throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the local authorities that 
are contacting me. So further to the immediate problem, when 
the water recedes the saline soil will ruin the land forever. As a 
result, these ranchers have no option but to find some other 
source of pasture and drinking water because it will be 
contaminated. 
 
According to the RM office the municipality has already 
applied for the provincial disaster assistance fund, but the 
program does not offer any assistance toward pasture land, nor 
does Crop Insurance or any other government agency. What is 
the NDP government going to do to help these ranchers, both 
short term and long term? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of water, I think the members opposite are aware that 
we put $1 million of new money into work with the PFRA 
[Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration]. Primarily the 
focus was on the drought area in the Southwest, but it does 
provide for those who want to dig dugouts, who want to put in 
wells, and it’s a fairly substantial piece of the program. So if 
there are those who need to develop alternate water supply, 
there is opportunity there. 
 
Secondly, in terms of feed we do have a registry that talks about 
feed availability. And in the past we have also provided support 
and information for those who need to move cattle to a pasture 
that is available. And we’ll continue to provide those services. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister doesn’t 
understand. Waldsea Lake is a saltwater lake, so the water is 
contaminated now with saline water. 
 
I provided the RM with the community pasture numbers to see 
if the producers could relocate their cattle to community pasture 
for the short-term solution, and to date there has been no 

community pasture that’s available to help them out. The main 
source of income for many of these people in this area is cattle, 
and their livelihood is in jeopardy. The RM says in a letter, and 
I quote: “Our ratepayers are desperate for some type of 
assistance.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP government going to do for these 
desperate people? What financial and physical assistance is 
available for these ranchers to relocate their cattle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 
previously, we have provided the lists of where pasture and feed 
are available. We can do so again. And there will certainly be, 
as these requests roll forward, there will be people in our 
department who will be working with them to find solutions 
and find them very quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recognize the importance of looking after cattle in this 
province. We have a really good, strong industry, and we want 
to make sure that these people who are facing difficulties get 
the necessary supports. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
further to the member for Humboldt’s questions, this is also on 
disaster programs in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re still 
getting calls from all over the province, Mr. Speaker. From the 
Southwest, there’s still pockets that are very dry. And from 
central and northeast Saskatchewan, many acres are under water 
out there and probably won’t be able to be seeded. 
 
These farmers are calling, wanting to know what is the 
government’s intentions with aid this year. Last year, as we all 
know, the federal government put an additional $15 an acre in. 
The province matched that up to a point of $10 an acre. 
 
What farmers are asking now — and they’ve heard of a disaster 
program in the works — what help will be there for them this 
year? Because they’re planning seeding intentions right now 
and need to know, Mr. Speaker, very quickly, what’s about to 
happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. These are certainly 
timely issues. We’ve got, as he indicates, a program that is 
needed in the country, not just in this province, but across the 
country. And there is unity amongst all the provinces and 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

provincial ministers that we want a formula for disaster, for 
funding disasters. We want the federal government to be in 
there. The member himself is on record noting that 60/40’s not 
on for disaster. That is the position of the provincial ministers. 
 
We ourselves have offered, to kind of try and get things to 
move ahead, 10 per cent of whatever disaster funding there 
would be coming in. The federal government to date is not 
responding positively to that or to any of the initiatives from the 
other provinces. But in the meantime, as I say, we’ve put $1 
million into drought in the Southwest. We’re closely monitoring 
what’s happening in the Northeast. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve seen in the last number of weeks, for one 
example, the comparison between Manitoba and Saskatchewan 
crop insurance. And Saskatchewan crop insurance falls far short 
of what our neighbours on both sides, Mr. Speaker. Whether 
they farm in Manitoba or they farm in Alberta, the 
Saskatchewan farmers have far less of a program than their 
neighbours. Mr. Speaker, when you come to the education tax 
on farm land, this government seems fit to tax farmers far 
higher than anywhere else in the Dominion of Canada. So once 
again our farmers fall behind and have a hard time competing. 
 
What we’re asking the minister today I think is fair, Mr. 
Speaker. Seeding intentions are being put together right now in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Our farmers need to know now 
— not in August, not in September — they need to know now. 
Will there be help coming from this provincial government and 
the federal government? They aren’t worried about the formula 
the minister talks about. They’re worried about how they get 
enough money to put this crop in. Will the minister give them 
some direction today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re in touch 
with the producers around this province. They know what we’re 
engaging in today. It’s the member opposite I think that needs 
the information, Mr. Speaker. He has certainly made clear to the 
public that he doesn’t understand crop insurance. He’s made 
that clear on a couple of occasions. And I would say the last 
time he started on that tack, he should have pulled in his horns 
then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made clear that this crop insurance program in 
this province has provided millions more dollars than any other 
program in the country, Mr. Speaker. Millions more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And I could tell you this as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are differences in the risk between this 
province and other provinces. The people of this province know 

this because they read it in the newspapers, because they 
understand it. The member opposite doesn’t get it yet, Mr. 
Speaker. The fact is that this crop insurance program is 
improving all the time and is providing support for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll tell 
the minister, Mr. Speaker, a few of the things I do understand. I 
understand that if I plant spring wheat in Saskatchewan and I 
want the 80 per cent coverage, I pay $8.48 per acre. I also know 
that if I was over the border in Manitoba, I’d pay 4.50 an acre 
for that same coverage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I also know that if I plant 
canola in Saskatchewan and want that 80 per cent coverage, I 
pay 12.50 an acre. I also know that if I was in Manitoba, I’d pay 
$11. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, I have almost double the 
coverage on the Manitoba side. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the minister may say I don’t understand, but 
I’ll tell him one thing. The farmers of Saskatchewan 
understand, and should they ever screw up the courage to call 
an election, there will be no support the way that minister’s 
dealing with the agriculture portfolio. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank goodness the 
farmers of this province generally understand the program a lot 
better than the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — He may have some ideas, Mr. 
Speaker, about the Manitoba program, but he certainly does not 
understand crop insurance program in Canada. Or if he does 
understand it, then he’s engaged in some kind of a game, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people of this province will understand and 
he’ll get the effects of that down the road, as will his party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has provided significant millions 
of dollars of support. When we look at what we’re doing 
compared to every other province, five times the provincial per 
capita average in terms of our support for farmers. Mr. Speaker, 
that record is solid, that record stands, and the farmers of this 
province know it and, Mr. Speaker, they’re thankful for the 
levels of support that we’ve given. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of the 
Assembly to make a statement of importance to Saskatchewan 
workers. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Minister of Labour has 
requested leave to make a statement of importance to 
Saskatchewan workers. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Labour. 
 

National Day of Mourning for Workers 
Killed or Injured on the Job 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saturday, April 28 is the National Day of Mourning for workers 
killed or injured on the job. In Canada an average of five people 
are killed on the job every working day of the year and many 
thousands more Canadian workers are injured each year, many 
of them permanently. These deaths and injuries exact a toll and 
suffering, grief, and shattered lives that cannot be measured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we mourn all those who’ve lost their lives 
or suffered injury as part of the effort to build our province and 
our country, and our thoughts and prayers are with those left 
behind struggling to recover from this irreplaceable loss. Every 
worker killed was someone’s son or daughter, someone’s 
mother or father, someone’s brother or sister. 
 
We cannot change the past to undo the terrible damage done, 
nor can we make the grieving families whole again. But we can 
spare other families that same anguish by doing everything in 
our power to prevent such workplace tragedies. 
 
April 28 is indeed a day of mourning and I hope we can all 
make April 28 a day of renewed commitment — a renewed 
commitment to health and safety in the workplace, a renewed 
commitment to further reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, 
and fatalities. 
 
Since the last Day of Mourning, the Workers’ Compensation 
Board has recognized the deaths of 44 people in our province 
from illnesses or injuries sustained on the job. Almost 14,000 
more were injured. Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to rise 
as I read into the record the names of those 44 men and women 
who have died over the last 12 months from work-related 
injuries and illnesses. And I also ask that we observe a moment 
of silence to honour their memory when I have finished. 
 
Scott Bangsund Denis Beaulieu 
James Bodnarek Roy Clark 
Christopher Cuthand Ronald Deglau 
Tim Eberts Rick Ganje 
Sidney Gordon Amil Hlushak 
Douglas Howie William Hynds 
Ed Kaban Gilles Litalien 
Donald Marsh Bryson McFarling 

Bruce Moore Kerry Oscar 
John Parbst Becki Pilgrim 
Victor Poborsa Monty Schrader 
Richard Wolsey Ernest Osatchuk 
Stan Herperger Louis Chartier 
Roland Fenwick Ralph Johnson 
Clarence McDowell Valerie Samatte 
Ray Smith Robert Storey 
Charles West Edward McGovern 
Cyril Daniel Quayle Paul Horishney 
Edward Usselman Lawrence Pyle 
Herbert Parenteau Rose Belfour 
Thomas Dunlap Bernice Drinkle 
Peter Gayowski Robert Gould 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the Minister of Labour in honouring those men 
and women who have lost their lives in workplace deaths or as 
a result of workplace injuries or illnesses that have been 
contracted in the workplace. 
 
There are some of our men and women who have died as a 
result of dealing with asbestos in the workplace and other 
toxins, Mr. Speaker. These are issues that we must deal with, 
that we must work hard to prevent so that the families of these 
men and women who are no longer here with us and future 
families do not have to incur these type of tragedies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s incumbent upon all members in this Assembly 
that we work together to ensure that the men and women that 
work across this province can have confidence that everything 
is being done to make their workplace safe, Mr. Speaker. And 
so I would encourage all members to work to that goal, Mr. 
Speaker, so that we can prevent those type of deaths and 
injuries, Mr. Speaker, so that one day our list may be very short 
if not eliminated, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Cumberland on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Cumberland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to introduce 
eight grade 9 students from Churchill Community High School 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

and they’re from the most beautiful part of the province — I’m 
a little biased — they’re from La Ronge. But I’m very happy to 
see them here, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Christine Ravenis. 
 
And I would ask all members to help me in welcoming them to 
their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before we proceed to orders of the day, I wish 
to welcome a special guest in the Assembly, if you would just 
wait for a moment. Earlier today I had the pleasure of tabling 
the 2006 report of the Provincial Ombudsman. I see our 
Ombudsman is here today, accompanied by another person. I 
would like to welcome Mr. Kevin Fenwick to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with you in welcoming Mr. Kevin Fenwick. He’s a 
constituent of mine. We have had brief conversations, not 
specifically dealing with his work but with things relating to the 
area of Balcarres, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. And I’ve always enjoyed exchanging 
views with Mr. Fenwick. And I certainly would like to join with 
you, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
House to move, before the 75-minute debate, to deal with 
private Bill No. 302. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to move directly to Bill 302 under 
private Bills. And I assume after that to revert back to 
75-minute debate? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 
Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go to Committee of the Whole. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

Bill No. 302 — The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, the item 
before the Assembly is Bill No. 302, An Act to amend An Act 
to incorporate Hotels Association of Saskatchewan. I would 
invite the sponsoring member of this Bill, the hon. member for 
Regina Wascana Plains, to outline the purpose of the private 
Bill. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Last year, the Hotels 
Association of Saskatchewan celebrated their 75th anniversary. 
They now have expanded their membership to include brew pub 
operators, licensed lounges, licensed nightclubs, and licensed 
restaurants . So the name change that is presented here with this 
Bill reflects the broadening and strengthening of their 
membership. And I know all members would want to wish them 
best wishes in their expanding membership and their continuing 
professional development. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I thank the hon. member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. Are members ready to proceed with the Bill 
clause by clause? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The preamble, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Clause no. 1, short title. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: An Act to amend An Act to 
incorporate Hotels Association of Saskatchewan. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. So I would invite the 
hon. member for Regina Wascana Plains to move that the 
committee report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I would move that the committee report this 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It’s been moved by the hon. member for 
Regina Wascana Plains that Bill No. 302, The Hotels 
Association of Saskatchewan Amendment Act be reported 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

without amendment. Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt 
this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Hon. 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — So you’ve heard the motion from the 
hon. government house member. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[11:15] 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Deputy Chair of 
committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 302, 
The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan Amendment Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains that Bill No. 302, The Hotels Association of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Now before we proceed to the 75-minute 
debate, I wish to advise members that His Honour will be here 
for Royal Assent in approximately 15 minutes, at which time I 
will interrupt the proceedings for Royal Assent. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Occupational Health and Safety for Workers 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 
my remarks, I will be moving a motion seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Centre. Although I’m quite ill today, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter into this debate on a topic of 
great concern to myself personally and this NDP government. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the safety and health of workers has long 
been a field in which Saskatchewan governments, specifically 
those CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] and NDP, 
have been part of the avant-garde. Thirty-five years ago an NDP 
government, much like the one that continues to improve on the 
rights of workers today, introduced North America’s first 
occupational health and safety legislation. In April 1972 
Saskatchewan introduced the most comprehensive health and 
safety provisions enshrined by legislation of any jurisdiction on 
the continent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Occupational Health Act for the first time 
established definitions for occupational health. It prescribed 
duties and responsibilities for the health and safety division, 
occupational health officers, and the chief medical officer. Mr. 
Speaker, the Act also established parameters for the operations 
and responsibility of the Occupational Health and Safety 
Council and formalized parameters for offences, penalties, and 
an appeal process. 
 
Before 1972, health and safety regulations were scattered, 
disparate, and narrow in scope. Some industries were governed 
by certain safety regulations, and other guidelines were codified 
in various health policies. Mr. Speaker, the NDP Government 
of Saskatchewan became the first in North America to produce 
a comprehensive Act concerning occupational health and safety. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was entrenched in labour standards. Few 
seem to realize the significance of the relationship between 
health and safety in the workplace and labour standards. The 
distinction, Mr. Speaker, is certainly lost on the Sask Party 
opposite. 
 
These provisions could have been appended to a piece of health 
legislation or left to regulation within specific industries. 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, the government wisely decided that 
occupational health and safety was to be entrenched within 
labour standards. The Government of Saskatchewan decided 
that it was to be the right of workers — all workers — to go to 
their respective workplaces protected by specific and effective 
legislation. Workers in Saskatchewan were to be protected from 
harm while at work, no matter where and without equivocation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1993 after a decade of stagnation and 
regression of both policy and ethic at the hands of another 
administration — of which some of the members opposite were 
either members of the legislature for the Devine Conservatives 
or staff — this NDP government introduced The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act. Saskatchewan became the first 
jurisdiction to ever recognize harassment as a health and safety 
issue within the workplace. Today only three other jurisdictions 
in Canada even require employers to protect workers from 
workplace harassment. 
 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

It was in the spirit of innovation that this NDP government 
acted in 1993 when it added harassment provisions to The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act which, Mr. Speaker, 
members of that Sask Party opposition voted against. This is 
just another example of the foresight that this government has 
used to identify necessary changes to protect workers from 
suffering harm at work. 
 
Of course the progress of this province’s labour legislation 
didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. The Balancing Work and Family 
initiative was established and spanned over 1997 and ’98. It 
included a public task force and primary research on the 
employees in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it had become clear that work and family balance 
had become an urgent issue for the people of Saskatchewan. 
The research of Saskatchewan’s Balancing Work and Family 
initiative showed that the majority of employees reported a 
significant amount of fatigue and stress in trying to balance 
work and family. Employees had too many responsibilities 
between their work and their family lives to the detriment of 
employees, employers, and to the economy of Saskatchewan as 
a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, stress contributes greatly to a person’s physical 
health. Unhealthy workers are more likely to be injured at work, 
more likely to be absent from their jobs, and less likely to 
remain in one workplace for any length of time. 
 
This government has been a leader of those jurisdictions, 
attempting to address this issue as it has with so many issues 
affecting workers in recent history. As in the legacy of this 
government, we identified a need of working people and acted 
to address that need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1993 harassment has largely been limited to 
such prohibitive grounds as have been specified in the Human 
Rights Code. In today’s world, such a narrow definition is not 
enough. The proposed changes to The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act include a more encompassing definition of 
harassment. The new definition will now state that: 
 

‘harassment’ means any inappropriate conduct, comment, 
display, action or gesture by a person: 
 

that either: 
 

is based on race, creed, religion, colour, sex, sexual 
orientation, marital status, family status, disability, 
physical size or weight, age, nationality, ancestry or 
place or origin; or [that] 
 
. . . adversely affects the worker’s psychological or 
physical well-being, and that the person knows or 
ought reasonably to know would cause a worker to be 
humiliated or intimidated; and 
 
that constitutes a threat to the health or safety of the 
worker”. . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the changes to the definition of harassment reflect 
the manner in which harassment in the workplace has changed 
over the years. Since anti-harassment legislation was introduced 

by The Occupational Health and Safety Act in 1993, 
developments in the effective use of workplace occupational 
health and safety committees and in public awareness and 
education have done much to limit the possibilities of 
harassment. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, legislating is a process. Workplace 
harassment has become much less overt, and thus defining 
harassment as potentially psychological under the Act is 
absolutely necessary. This is a bona fide form of harassment. 
Mr. Speaker, psychological harassment does not only adversely 
affect a worker’s emotional well-being. The stress of these 
situations can affect a worker’s physical well-being and 
personal relationships with family and friends as well as 
causing absenteeism, lack of productivity, and potentially a 
poisonous workplace environment. 
 
The creation of a special adjudicator position will ensure that 
there is a high level of expertise provided when an appeal of the 
decision of an occupational health officer is launched. It also 
ensures that the decision rendered from a hearing by the special 
adjudicator will be dealt with in a timely manner. The 
amendment clearly prescribes a one-year timeline. Mr. Speaker, 
this allows workplaces to begin the healing process that usually 
takes place after a sensitive matter such as workplace 
harassment has occurred. Third party assistance is crucial to any 
sense of closure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition Sask Party could not possibly be 
expected to recognize issues of occupational health or 
workplace safety. After all, doing so would require them to see 
past their failed ideological obstinacy. No, Mr. Speaker, those 
members, like the member for Indian Head-Milestone, are too 
busy desperately clinging to the belief that quote, “fair labour 
policy is letting the market take care of itself.” Apparently to 
that party, some intangible, invisible force of magic will protect 
workers. 
 
Unlike the member for Kelvington-Wadena, this NDP 
government does not believe that enshrining protections for 
workers in law is simply quote, “telling businesses what to do.” 
We believe that it is crucial for workers to have legal recourse 
when their safety is for any reason compromised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government believes in progress. We 
believe that legislating is a continuing process of renewal. 
Labour legislation must continually be revisited. If not, it 
becomes irrelevant and ineffective. Workers then become 
vulnerable. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the Sask Party 
rhetoric, you might become convinced that legislating is simple. 
To that party, a legislator’s only responsibility is to abolish as 
much regulation as possible without any consideration of the 
consequences, and then to dole out arbitrary decisions to 
problems on a case-by-case basis. To that party, labour 
legislation protections for vulnerable workers is simply an 
impediment to business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s own members have made these 
sort of claims continually. The member for Kelvington-Wadena 
once said that, quote: 
 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

You don’t have to put forward every rule and regulation, 
because employers know that if you don’t look after your 
employees, they’re not going to be there. They won’t want 
to come to work. They like their employees. You don’t 
have to trust government to tell them what to do. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that member suggested that labour legislation is 
unnecessary because things will magically take care of 
themselves. The Leader of the Opposition himself, presumable 
as part of his war on labour, has even said, quote: 
 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto 
business community by this government, be it through 
Workers’ Comp or occupational health and safety or 
various pieces of labour legislation, too often has driven 
businesses and the jobs they create and the taxes they pay 
out of the province . . . 

 
Occupational health and safety, red tape and regulation, Mr. 
Speaker — the Sask Party cannot see the bigger picture. Labour 
legislation is vital to meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 
people. This NDP government believes that the health and 
safety of the people of Saskatchewan must not be left to the 
regulation of magical, unseen forces. 
 
For the Sask Party, governing is simple. You simply tear down 
regulations and do nothing, at least until it’s politically 
advantageous to sensationalize specific issues. The Sask Party 
may not believe in regulations protecting workers, but that 
hasn’t stopped them from focusing one specific instance of 
workplace harassment for the entire session. 
 
Because the Sask Party cannot develop policy of its own — a 
result of an ideological opposition to progress — its members 
have been forced to beleaguer a single issue for the entire 
session. The Murdoch Carriere case is certainly tragic for the 
victims, Mr. Speaker, but the Sask Party has only criticism of 
this single issue as their contribution to this legislature — no 
policy alternatives, no recommendations, no progress. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, that party has only to champion abused workers, 
the same workers that they believe should not be protected by 
harassment legislation, as a means of getting its hands on the 
public purse. The Sask Party has even called for an inquiry, 
which is potentially undesirable for some of the complainants in 
the Carriere case and will do nothing to provide assurance to the 
women involved that they will be protected from workplace 
harassment through intimidation or humiliation in the future. 
 
However, recognition and the facilitation of protections through 
substantive legislative changes as this NDP government has 
done shows true compassion, understanding, and leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will clearly define what is not to be considered 
tolerable behaviour in the workplace. Harassment is a complex 
issue. Consequently personal reactions to harassment and the 
potential resolve of any individual worker can be extremely 
diverse in nature. The nuances of each individual situation, as 
well as the individual’s own personal life experiences, 
contribute greatly to how harassment affects a worker. There is 
no one-size-fits-all solution, Mr. Speaker, therefore future 

amendments will no doubt be necessary as the mindset of 
society changes. 
 
To illustrate this I would like to use the example of smoking. 
Smoking was once common practice in any restaurant, bar, 
home, or office. It was once tolerated universally, but after 
years of research and study, people began to realize that 
smoking is harmful. Jurisdictions began to regulate smoking. 
Those regulations have gotten progressively more stringent as 
society has progressed towards an intolerance of the once 
popular pastime. Effective administrations adapted legislation. 
They progressed as with the will of society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government believes in progress. It 
believes in maintaining strong labour legislation to protect the 
people of Saskatchewan. And for this reason I will proudly 
move a motion, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Centre, 
that reads: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s plan to 
strengthen protection in the area of occupational health 
and safety for workers both in government and in the 
private sector. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask that the clocks be stopped at this 
time, that we’ll proceed with this debate after we receive Royal 
Assent. His Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 11:35 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 3 - The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
Bill No. 15 - The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 14 - The Environmental Management and Protection 

Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 6 - The Youth Drug Detoxification and 

Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 39 - The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs 

Recovery Act 
Bill No. 54 - The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 302 - The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 67 - The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 2) 
 
to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
His Honour: — In her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:38.] 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Occupational Health and Safety for Workers 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. Order. Order. It has been 
moved by the member for Regina Walsh Acres and seconded 
by the member for Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That this Assembly support the government’s plan to 
strengthen protection in the area of occupational health 
and safety for workers both in government and in the 
private sector. 
 

We will continue with the debate. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to enter into this debate today in support of this 
motion because I believe that this motion speaks to some very 
fundamental differences between this NDP government and the 
conservative beliefs of the opposition. But before I get there, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about some of the very positive 
work that is happening in Saskatchewan today to reduce 
workplace injuries. 
 
As I think all members of this Assembly know, and my 
colleague said, Saskatchewan led North America when the NDP 
government of the day introduced the first comprehensive 
occupational health and safety legislation some 35 years ago. 
 
Now what are some concrete examples of this? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I am very proud to talk about one that we think all of 
us can remember — just over a year ago, the fire at Esterhazy at 
the Mosaic mine, one of our moments where our occupational 
health and safety regulations really proved their worth — where 
72 potash miners were trapped underground. And thanks to our 
progressive and aggressive approach to mine safety and the 
strong regulations which we implemented in 2003 and thanks to 
the dedication and skill of the mine rescue workers, lives were 
saved, families remained whole, and no one was left mourning 
for a loved one. This was very important. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking a lot recently in this 
Assembly about the anti-harassment provisions that the NDP 
government introduced into the occupational health and safety 
legislation in 1993. And as recently as Monday, this NDP 
government introduced amendments that would strengthen the 
protections of that part of the OHS [occupational health and 

safety] legislation. We have been a leader in developing 
occupational health and safety legislation that protects workers, 
and that’s something this government is very proud of. 
 
Of course to have healthy and safe workplaces in the province it 
takes more than legislation. Employers and employees must 
work together with government to make sure that people 
understand the legislation and that it’s enforced. In 2003 this 
government developed and implemented the action plan for 
healthy and safe workplaces. The plan was designed to do five 
things: help workplaces take responsibility for workplace health 
and safety, provide education and enforcement of workplace 
standards, provide technical support and applied research on 
health and safety issues, protect new and young workers, and 
increase public awareness of the need for workplace health and 
safety. 
 
Together with the work of Saskatchewan WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] and the WorkSafe program, the action 
plan for healthy and safe workplaces has reduced the provincial 
injury rate by some 18 per cent. Now, Mr. Speaker, that 18 per 
cent is a huge number when you think of the hardship, not only 
financial but emotional, that injuries place on working people. It 
means less stress on Saskatchewan families, and it means less 
cost to the employers. 
 
Well phase 2 of the action plan aims to reduce the time loss 
injury rate by an additional 13.5 per cent. And I can’t 
emphasize enough how important that is to the working people 
of this province. 
 
Now part of this reduction in injury rates can be accomplished 
through education. The WorkSafe Saskatchewan program run 
by WCB has developed educational materials and partnered 
with private and public groups to improve knowledge of safe 
and healthy practices. The ready for work program has supplied 
curriculum to educate middle-year students, both on- and 
off-reserve, on the importance of workplace safety. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, the occupational health and safety 
division of the Department of Labour continues their 
educational programs and awareness work. This includes 
support for the 4,800 existing workplace occupational health 
and safety committees and training for 4,500 employers and 
worker representatives on the responsibilities of occupational 
health committees, occupational health and safety 
representatives, and supervisors. 
 
Now these are important parts of the action plan, but it would 
be a wasted effort without enforcement. That’s why the 
occupational health and safety division will conduct this year 
approximately 4,500 workplace inspections. Mr. Speaker, this is 
important. They will also issue more notices of contravention to 
ensure that standards are met and will prosecute serious 
offenders and repeat offenders for non-compliance with health 
and safety standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this increased enforcement of The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act will be conducted by the new, dedicated 
prosecutors at the department. Since the dedicated prosecutor 
was assigned to OHS and WCB cases in 2004, over 40 
prosecutions for occupational health and safety and workers’ 
comp offences have been undertaken. 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these measures are very important to ensure 
that labour standards such as occupational health and safety 
regulations and laws are followed. These standards are law. 
And this government believes that it’s not okay to gamble with 
the lives of workers by relying on voluntary compliance or 
other laissez-faire, ad hoc measures. 
 
Another crucial part of making workplaces in this province 
safer is to regularly review the standards, regulations, and best 
practices that we have established to ensure that they are 
adequately meeting the needs of the modern workplace. 
 
Now because occupational health and safety legislation covers 
many diverse industries, understanding the technical nature of 
the regulations and the implications changes may have is a 
difficult task. We have at the Department of Labour a group of 
extremely talented individuals who have a specific knowledge 
of extremely broad range of technical information. Their 
expertise covers everything from ergonomics to mining 
engineering, and they are essential to the application of 
occupational health and safety and to the review process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province also has an Occupational Health and 
Safety Council made up of equal representatives from the 
business and labour communities. They too review our 
occupational health and safety legislation and make 
recommendations to the government on how to make our 
regulations more appropriate and effective for our current 
economy. 
 
[11:45] 
 
In their most recent report they identified specific sectors such 
as health and construction with higher injury rates that could be 
reduced with improvements to the current occupational health 
and safety regulations. To that end, Mr. Speaker, we are 
working to address overexertion and lifting-related injuries, 
which continue to be a major cause of time-loss injuries in the 
provincial health care sector. We are creating new regulations to 
improve lifting requirements and to require regular maintenance 
to the lifting equipment. As well, Mr. Speaker, we will require 
supervisors to be trained in sector-specific OHS best practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also addressing the high number of 
fall-related injuries in the construction sector, again through a 
combination of improved regulations and education. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, fall-related injuries account for a disproportionate 
number of injuries in this construction sector. New methods 
such as fall protection plans, control zones, and the required use 
of anchor points and anchor plates will reduce the number and 
severity of fall-related injuries — and particularly of fatalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the average in the last five years, we’ve had 
three deaths each year. This past year it was two deaths. Mr. 
Speaker, what I have outlined so far is just some of the many 
things that this government is doing to make workplaces safer 
in this province. But at the beginning of my remarks I stated 
that this motion speaks to the heart of the differences between 
this NDP government and the members opposite. And I’m 
going to endeavour to explain what that means. 
 
All working people deserve to have healthy and safe 
workplaces. Mr. Speaker, that’s a statement that I think few 

people could disagree with. The question is, as a province, how 
do you make that happen? Well I contend that the 
Saskatchewan Party feels it’s enough just to make the 
statement. But to do anything beyond making the statement 
would be, as the Leader of the Opposition has stated, red tape 
that “. . . too often has driven businesses . . . out of the province 
of Saskatchewan.” He said that on June 20, 2000. 
 
In fact when the Leader of the Opposition made that statement, 
he was specifically talking about workers’ compensation and 
occupational health and safety, two things he believes are 
nothing more than “red tape . . . [that’s] foisted onto business 
community.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government feels different. We believe that 
it’s not enough to make the statement that working people in 
Saskatchewan deserve safe workplaces. We feel strongly that 
you have to back those words up with action, with legislation 
and regulation that gives workers the right to refuse unsafe 
work, the right to challenge a policy or practice they feel to be 
dangerous, and with a way for these kind of disputes to be 
adjudicated fairly for both the employer and employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why I will be supporting the motion put 
forward by my colleague . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to enter into this debate and speak 
to the motion put forward by the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres, Mr. Speaker. This is certainly an important issue that 
needs to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker, and we certainly take these 
issues very seriously even though we’ve listened to the two 
speakers on the government side who try to play politics with 
this important issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I listened carefully to the member from Walsh Acres, Mr. 
Speaker, and she said that this is an important issue, and that it 
is. I would certainly agree with that. And then she went on to 
play cheap political politics, Mr. Speaker, referring over and 
over again to all the great things that this NDP government has 
done and previous NDP governments have done and made a 
number of unfounded statements about the Saskatchewan 
Party’s position on issues like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question I would ask, if it’s such an important issue, let’s 
debate the issue, Mr. Speaker, and let’s keep the politics out of 
it as much as possible, Mr. Speaker. I certainly didn’t hear that, 
particularly from the first speaker, and I think we need to do 
that. 
 
Now I listened carefully to what the Minister of Labour said. 
He certainly had some very good points that we don’t find fault 
with, but he also presented some facts, Mr. Speaker, that 
perhaps need some expanding as to where Saskatchewan is as 
far as workplace safety. 
 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

Certainly there has been improvements, Mr. Speaker, but there 
needs to be improvements. Saskatchewan in 2002 had time-loss 
injuries of 4.9 injuries per 100 workers, the second highest — 
that was back in 2002 — and that was the second highest in 
Canada. Certainly there’s been improvements as the minister 
said, an 18 per cent decrease, but how do we stack up with other 
provinces? 
 
Well we’re down to 4.05 workplace injuries per 100 workers, 
but we’re still the second highest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. So 
other jurisdictions — and they’re not all governed by NDP 
governments, Mr. Speaker — are making significant progress 
on this very important issue. And we need to do better, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s one thing to talk the talk as this government often 
does — and particularly on this issue and other issues like the 
environment — but the true test is, are they willing to walk the 
walk? And I think, Mr. Speaker, by any fair analysis in some of 
these cases, and even on this case, Mr. Speaker, I think they 
come up short, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another issue which is maybe not directly related to 
occupational health and safety, but I’m sure it does lead to 
stress in the workplace, and that’s this whole issue of the way 
workers working side by side are paid, in northern 
Saskatchewan. We have this situation that’s been in place for 
many, many years where people living in the North are 
exempted from overtime. They are not entitled to overtime. Yet 
if workers living in the South are working in the North, working 
side by side with a northern person, doing exactly the same job, 
one worker is paid overtime; the other worker is not paid 
overtime, Mr. Speaker. Do you think that may cause a little bit 
of stress in the workplace? I would think it does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier asked the member from Regina Northeast to do a 
study on this issue and submit a report. That was done. The 
member submitted his report to the Premier back in February. 
We have heard nothing. I asked the Minister of Labour, what’s 
happening with this report? He basically says that he doesn’t 
know. I suspect that that report is on the Premier’s desk, and 
obviously there’s an issue in that report that these people have 
some difficulty with. So rather than actually addressing the 
issue, they choose not to deal with it, Mr. Speaker. Yet they 
stand in the legislature and they purport to be the protectors of 
the working men and women of this province. And in many 
cases, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply all talk and not much action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They vilify the employers as those terrible people who create 
these unsafe working conditions in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there may be the odd exception to unsafe workplaces, 
but the majority of employers — many, the vast majority of 
employers — have said the most valuable asset that they have 
in their businesses are their employees, and they are very 
concerned about the well-being of their employees. And they 
are very concerned about safety and safe working and 
harassment-free workplaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the actions that the Minister of Labour 
mentioned are certainly, as I’d said earlier, laudable goals. We 
certainly fully support a number of these measures, including 
educating both the employers and the employees about safety in 
the workplace. And that I think, Mr. Speaker, is certainly key. 
Because you can have the strongest regulations, you can have 

the best practices as far as safety in the workplace, but if people 
fully don’t understand them, are not engaged — whether it’s the 
employer or the employee — accidents do happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I have had a number of people, both employees and 
employers, talk to me about things that happen in the 
workplace, as far as safety and practices that could be put in 
place to prevent them. And from my observation, understanding 
and compliance and education is very important on this issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We must make sure that the individual understands that they are 
responsible for their safety, and if they see shortcomings in the 
workplace, they have a responsibility to bring that to the 
attention of those people responsible for safe working 
conditions. We must also not create an environment, Mr. 
Speaker, where people feel that they are invincible and that no 
matter what happens they will not be injured, because that 
creates an unsafe mindset, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think back to an example that was related to me where the 
employer and the safety committee had all the measures in 
place to make sure that individuals, when they were required as 
part of their duties to climb ladders and work at higher distances 
above the ground, the safety harnesses were in place. 
Everything was there that was needed, except that the 
individuals and in one particular case, the individual worker, 
would consistently not comply with the established safety rules 
of the safety committee. And the employer was at his wits’ end 
as to what to do with this individual. He brought him into the 
office and explained that all these things are for their 
well-being. And yet that individual would not comply. So the 
employer had no alternative but to release that individual. 
 
Now this is certainly an exception, I’m sure, because I would 
think that most employees are very conscious of their safety and 
avail themselves of measures that are put in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that goes back to my comments about education. We need 
to make sure that both the employees and the employers 
understand why regulations and rules are put in place. And I 
think if we take that approach, Mr. Speaker, rather than the 
heavy-handedness of having regulations in place and saying, 
this is the way it’s going to be done, without ever explaining 
why it needs to be done this way, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
would be much more successful. And we would be much more 
successful in lowering the injury rates that we have in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the other things, one of the reasons our injury workplace 
is as high as it is, is because of the large amount of injuries in 
the health care sector. And that’s a result, Mr. Speaker, of a 
shortage of health care workers, who are workers working 
overtime, they’re tired, and yet they need to be there because 
they’re very dedicated to provide the services that are required. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when people are working long hours and are 
fatigued, Mr. Speaker, it’s a recipe for injuries. And we’ve seen 
that happen. 
 
We’ve had the union of nurses talk to this government and ask 
them to increase training spots so that we have an adequate 
supply of health care workers. And what has this government 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

done? They’ve made some feeble attempts in the last few years 
to address this issue, Mr. Speaker, and to date we don’t have the 
people we need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the time of year 
when we consider the health and safety of workers across the 
province. And personal and psychological harassment remains a 
serious issue in workplaces across the country and indeed 
across the globe. Bullying and abuse of authority can seriously 
impact workers’ well-being and health as well as their general 
productivity. 
 
Personal and psychological harassment in the workplace has 
been studied by the World Health Organization — and that’s 
the World Health Organization, Mr. Speaker. Issues of anxiety, 
depression, and stress are fundamentally issues of health, which 
is why it’s important to protect workers through stronger OH&S 
[occupational health and safety] legislation. 
 
It is not just important in terms of the health of the individual, 
but the social and economic costs are also significant. From the 
perspective of business, personal and psychological harassment 
can lead to increased staff turnover, the loss of skilled and 
qualified staff; increased costs concerning absenteeism, sick 
leave, and insurance premiums; as well as costs associated with 
litigation and damage to the firm’s image and reputation. 
 
Both the WHO [World Health Organization] and other 
organizations recognize that there are also significant 
macroeconomic costs. And the costs associated with stress and 
depression in terms of decreases in productivity and the gross 
domestic product are alarming. We must as legislators respond 
to these trends. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Preventing and responding to psychological harassment in the 
workplace has recently become the focus of parliamentarians in 
the EU [European Union] and in other Canadian jurisdictions. 
The issue is also before several US [United States] states. And 
it’s clear that this is an issue of increasing importance to 
workers and employers in our province. 
 
As my colleague, the Minister of Labour, has noted, the current 
OH&S legislation does not capture many of the complaints and 
issues put forth by workers in our province. In today’s changing 
work environments, the current prohibitive grounds in the 
OH&S legislation do not go far enough and this is why we’re 
expanding the definition of harassment to better protect the 
workplaces and the workers of our province. 
 
In order to better address their concerns and to improve 
working conditions for Saskatchewan people, both in the 
private and public sector, changes to the legislation are 
necessary. We’re focusing our approach to improving 
workplace health and safety across Saskatchewan. And one of 
these measures is the item before us today — an expanded 
definition of harassment and the OH&S legislation that will 
address personal harassment in the workplace, such as abuse of 
power and bullying. 

We will also be making changes to the Public Service 
anti-harassment policy and we will be developing a new model 
for delivering HR [human resources] services across 
government to ensure that all complaints of occupational health 
and safety complaints, including workplace harassment, are 
addressed seriously and appropriately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the Saskatchewan Party has not 
historically supported occupational health and safety legislation 
in our province. We know that they’ve not seen it as a way to 
protect business, but they have seen it as an impediment to 
business. 
 
The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party called OH&S legislation 
red tape and regulations that have been hoisted upon the 
business community, and it has too often driven businesses and 
the jobs they create and the taxes they pay out of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our government simply disagrees. We 
understand that when workers are protected from workplace 
harassment they are healthier and more productive. We’ve 
structured the legislation so that managers and supervisors 
remain well equipped to manage their workplaces and that 
businesses are not unduly restricted. We’re committed to 
continuing our tradition of progressive legislation to ensure that 
workers and workplaces across Saskatchewan are protected and 
safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of the OH&S amendment Bill is 
only one part of our strategy in providing safe, healthy and 
respectful workplaces. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the 
government is a larger employer and we believe that we need to 
ensure that we work diligently to provide healthy workplaces in 
our province across the public service. The announcement that 
my colleague, the Minister of Labour, and I made earlier this 
week addresses that goal. However in order to provide context 
it is necessary to highlight the changes that arose during the 
2003 review of the Public Service’s anti-harassment policy. 
And in response to that review the Public Service Commission 
changed the harassment policy in several significant ways — 
including, it clarified, that zero tolerance to harassment meant 
that no incident of harassment would go unaddressed. 
 
Second, it said that in serious cases of harassment there is a 
presumption that the appropriate penalty is dismissal. Absent 
specific factors, the harasser will be dismissed. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, the final decision is still made by the 
permanent head, but the discretion is checked by the 
implementation of the panel of deputies which will provide 
support in serious cases of confirmed harassment. 
 
And fourth, it improved the process for complainants. The 
permanent head would discuss the impact of the discipline with 
the complainant and provide them with, on a confidential basis, 
the results of his or her decision. Because as we know in the 
Mr. Carriere case, the complainants were not advised by the 
deputy minister of the day the outcome of the discipline, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And fifth, it called for further education on the policy so that all 
employees and management were aware of its contents. It 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

clarified that managers who ignore complaints would be subject 
to discipline. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are other improvements that were 
made, but we recognize that we can do even better. And that is 
why I, on behalf of our government, instructed the Public 
Service Commission to make further improvements to our 
anti-harassment document, Mr. Speaker, which people can find 
on the Public Service Commission website. 
 
I instructed the Public Service Commission to simplify the 
language of the policy because, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that 
people who are looking at the policy can understand the policy. 
And one of the ways to understand policy is to have simple and 
clear language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also said that the format of the policy needed 
to be laid out in a clear manner so that people could go through 
the steps that were required, which would obviously increase 
accessibility to launching a complaint under the policy. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also sought on behalf of the 
government to increase accountability and we believe that this 
can be achieved by designating a senior manager in each 
government department as the individual responsible for the 
anti-harassment policy. A manager in each department will 
ensure that the policy is being followed, Mr. Speaker, and this 
will be done while maintaining the flexibility and options 
available to complainants. Because as you know, at the 
moment, complainants have a number of avenues to pursue if 
they wish to launch a complaint of harassment. 
 
They have the option to speak directly to their supervisor. If 
they’re not comfortable with that, they can speak directly to the 
manager in charge of the supervisor. They can go to the Public 
Service Commission. They certainly, if they’re an in-scope 
employee, can go to the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union which has . . . in the Mr. Carriere case was involved in 
the complainants’ issues. As well, they have the opportunity to 
go to the OH&S branch in the Department of Labour which is, 
in law, struck with the investigation of occupational health and 
safety complaints including complaints under the present 
definition of harassment. As well, people can go to the Human 
Rights Commission if they believe that they have been harassed 
on the prohibited grounds. And in the most serious of cases, Mr. 
Speaker, people can go to the police. 
 
As well, I announced that there would be a consolidation of HR 
services and that certainly we want to ensure that managers and 
staff have access to sufficient HR support. At present, Mr. 
Speaker, various government departments have their own HR 
staff. We have the Public Service Commission which is a 
central agency and we believe that we need to ensure that all 
HR policies are being followed throughout the Public Service. 
And in order for us to do that, we want to look at how we can 
consolidate HR support and services in such a way that policies 
are certainly implemented in our various workplaces across the 
province and that those policies are applied consistently and 
effectively, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we believe that we have responded in a 
responsible way to issues around workplace harassment in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have introduced legislation to 

amend the present definition which is based on prohibitive 
grounds that are found in the Human Rights Code. We are 
looking at consolidating all HR resources across the Public 
Service. And we are renewing our present anti-harassment 
policy in order to ensure that it’s streamlined, it’s simple to 
read, and that we have certainly put a person in charge in each 
department to ensure that there is accountability and 
responsibility. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to begin my 
remarks today by saying that the official opposition agrees with 
the NDP that we should all be working to protect workers in 
Saskatchewan. I would hope at the end of the debate today that 
the NDP will take the words of their motion to heart, and that it 
will translate into action. 
 
We have seen, through the evidence in the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal, that this NDP government does not have a great track 
record in regard to protecting workers. And the NDP have 
alluded to it again today that they are all done talking about 
Murdoch Carriere, and I don’t blame them. I wouldn’t want to 
be talking about him anymore either if I had their track record. 
 
There are many ways that we can be protecting workers — 
from the requirement for basic personal safety equipment like 
hard hats on job sites, to safe buildings and work environments. 
But safety for workers must also include a harassment-free 
workplace. And for Carriere’s nine victims, this NDP 
government failed miserably on that front. So as I have said, we 
should all be working to guarantee a safe workplace. But this 
NDP government has to do more than introduce legislation and 
have debates in this Chamber. 
 
And the member for Regina Walsh Acres alluded earlier to the 
fact that workers might magically be protected. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t believe in magic to protect workers. What we 
believe in is a government taking their responsibility, stepping 
up and defending workers in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — That same member said that we have offered 
no alternatives in this debate, and our suggestion has been, 
continues to be, and will be in the future, that this NDP 
government should have defended and protected Murdoch 
Carriere’s victims. The NDP must translate their words and 
rhetoric into action, and that’s not something that we’ve seen 
from them. I’m sure that Carriere’s victims would have loved to 
have been able to go to work in a safe environment, but sadly 
that was not the reality for those nine women. 
 
The Public Service Commission’s 2007-08 performance report 
on the PSC [Public Service Commission] website is introduced 
with this statement, and I quote: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
ensuring that we have a capable, diverse, and talented 
public service working in a healthy, supportive, and 
challenging work environment. 

 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

And, Mr. Speaker, we applaud these words and hope that they 
are true for the many capable men and women who are working 
in our public service today. The government says in that 
statement that they are hoping to offer a challenging workplace. 
 
That couldn’t have been more true for Carriere’s nine victims, 
Mr. Speaker. For them, work was a challenge. It was a 
challenge for these women to go into an office every day 
knowing that at any time Carriere could corner them and grope 
them and kiss them without any fear of reprisal. It was a 
challenge for them to go home only to have Carriere show up 
on their doorstep unannounced and uninvited. 
 
It was a challenge for these nine women to be heard, even after 
numerous and repeated complaints to supervisors, who should 
have stepped up to protect them, did not. It was a challenge for 
them, Mr. Speaker, to be brushed aside by the Premier of this 
province when they wrote to him to alert him to the danger that 
Carriere posed to women in the workplace. It was a challenge 
for them to see this NDP government cave in even after the 
former NDP Justice minister vowed to defend this vigorously in 
the courts. And it remains a challenge for them, Mr. Speaker, to 
continue to live with the horrible memories of the abuse that 
they suffered at the hands of Murdoch Carriere. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, for Carriere’s nine victims, they did indeed face a 
challenging workplace. 
 
On the Public Service Commission website, information is 
offered to workers about how to achieve a safe workplace and 
the role of supervisors and managers in that workplace. The 
public service has issued a brochure about harassment in the 
workplace. It states, and I quote: 
 

As an employer, the Government of Saskatchewan values 
the dignity of all . . . [workers] and is committed to 
providing a respectful workplace, one that is 
harassment-free and in which all individuals are treated 
with respect. All managers, supervisors, and employees 
are expected to help create and maintain a work 
environment that is respectful of all persons in it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, after the inaction of this NDP government in the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal, I’m not sure that his nine victims 
feel that their dignity was valued, much less defended. 
 
The Department of Labour’s website lists a variety of safety 
issues and safety bulletins on how to address these issues. It 
also talks about harassment in the workplace as a safety issue. 
In a sample harassment policy document it states, and I quote: 
 

Worker right 
 
Every worker is entitled to a working environment that is 
free of harassment. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

Employer obligation 
 
This employer will ensure that no worker is subjected to 
harassment at this place of employment. 
 

And it continues with worker’s obligation: 

No worker shall cause or participate in the harassment of 
another worker. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these statements are correct. No one should be 
subject to the harassment that Murdoch Carriere victims faced. 
And the employer should ensure that a harassment-free 
workplace exists. But these words were not translated into 
action for Carriere’s victims. 
 
We need to commend these nine women, Mr. Speaker. In the 
face of the adversity and after being ignored by those in places 
of power who should have been helping them, they continued to 
be heard . . . They continued to fight to be heard. They did not 
back down and stay quiet. I’m sure that at times they wanted to, 
but they didn’t. These women should be applauded for their 
strength and determination to be heard and to do what they 
could to ensure that what happened to them wouldn’t happen to 
other women. 
 
I only wish that same applause could be given to this NDP 
government, but sadly it cannot. They were not determined to 
stop this. They were not determined to defend these women as 
they promised. They were not determined until all of this came 
to light and it was suddenly politically embarrassing for them. 
Why did it take public humiliation and outrage for this 
government to act? Why could they have not done the right 
thing from the beginning and defend their decision to fire 
Carriere, and in the process defend these women as the former 
Justice minister promised to do? Murdoch Carriere’s victims 
were left ignored and struggling to be heard for almost a 
decade. 
 
And as I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, this government failed to 
take action when Murdoch Carriere was harassing women in the 
workplace, but they want to be seen to be taking action today. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The NDP’s motion today calls for protection of workers to 
ensure the safety in the workplace. Mr. Speaker, legislation, 
rules, policies, and procedures were all in place to ensure the 
safety of those nine women. We have said repeatedly in this 
Assembly that without the will to enforce these rules, they 
won’t be worth the paper that they’re written on. 
 
Men and women deserve to feel safe at work, and for that 
reason sexual harassment is not to be tolerated in the workplace. 
And while we welcome the NDP government’s new-found 
commitment to workplace safety and a harassment-free 
workplace, for Carriere’s nine victims it comes too late. 
 
Had the NDP taken action earlier, we might not be discussing 
this today. Had the Premier taken seriously the letter that was 
sent to him by one of Carrere’s victims, we may not be 
discussing this today. And had supervisors, associate deputy 
ministers, and the deputy minister listened to these women in 
the first place as they are mandated to do through the policies 
already in place, we might not be discussing this today. 
 
Rules already in place state quite clearly that supervisors that 
ignore sexual harassment in the workplace will face 
consequences. The NDP have repeatedly held up the legislation 
that they introduced in 1993 and amendments that they made in 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

years following. And that’s great, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the sad reality is that none of this protected these nine 
women from Murdoch Carriere. Murdoch Carriere’s victims 
were sexually harassed. And I will say again, Mr. Speaker, that 
legislation to stop those actions was in place at the time that the 
offences were being made, but Murdoch Carriere’s victims 
were ignored. He was allowed to continue his harassment of 
these women for years. 
 
And we all agree, Mr. Speaker, that workplaces should be safe 
for workers in Saskatchewan. Today’s debate is actually not a 
debate at all because I think that we all agree on that point. We 
welcome any changes that will indeed make sure that workers 
are safe, free from danger, and harassment. 
 
What we have been debating, Mr. Speaker, remains unresolved 
and that is to send this Murdoch Carriere scandal to a legislative 
committee for an investigation. I have said that without 
knowing what went wrong in the past, we can’t fix it and make 
sure that we do it right going forward. But that is not a debate 
that this NDP government wishes to engage in. We continue to 
be concerned that the NDP refuse to answer direct, legitimate 
questions surrounding the failure to protect Murdoch Carriere’s 
nine victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do support the statement that workplaces 
should be as safe as possible. We support steps being taken to 
ensure that safety. We hope, Mr. Speaker, that workers in 
Saskatchewan don’t face what Carriere’s victims endured. But 
if they do, we also hope that this NDP government would take 
all steps necessary to defend them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
support the motion of our government strengthening the 
protection in the area of occupational health and safety for 
workers in the government and the private sector. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP government has always been a leader in occupational 
health and safety, introducing the first occupational health and 
safety Act in North America some 35 years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was never a more prouder time in recent 
history than with the . . . when it was thanks to our progressive 
approach that — and strong mine and safety regulations — that 
allowed for our miners in the potash mine in Esterhazy to 
emerge safely after having been trapped underground, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is because of things like that and our 
policies that the workers of this province, we have come to gain 
their support and trust over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents come from working 
families. Most, as I go, whether . . . work in the mines. This is 
why this was so important, as I go door-to-door and speak to 
them about this, that they have personal knowledge of this — 
with them and their families. And they are grateful for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key, the key to most of legislation — whether 
that be under labour standards, The Trade Union Act, or 

occupational health and safety — is based upon the equality of 
the worker and the workplace, or the employer at the 
workplace. Occupational health and safety committees, the 
concept where legislation allows workers to gather together — 
and that we have put in occupational health and safety 
committees which are on equal footing with equal numbers of 
members from the employer — and discuss issues of concern of 
safety at the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the cornerstones of all labour 
legislation, the ability of workers who have fought over years 
and years to come and be able to bring, not only bring forward 
their concerns, but bring forward them in a forum where they 
need to be listened to and need to be acted upon. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that is a thing that is not recognized but that we adhere to 
and particularly the people, the working people of this province 
adhere to very strongly and are thankful for that kind of thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also within the same kind of thing that is why our 
government has always been at the forefront of moving and 
working on safety. We recognize the issue of workers’ rights. 
We recognize the workers’ struggles, and we put out our hand 
as policy-makers to achieve better living conditions for them. 
 
I know we hear oftentimes the members from there say that we 
are not concerned with employers. I also, as well as the member 
opposite, agree there are many, many excellent employers; 
excellent employers who understand and support the idea that 
workers are able to sit across from them at tables or in meeting 
rooms on an equal footing. And, Mr. Speaker, that kind of 
approach to, be it labour relations or the area of occupational 
health and safety should be commended, and in no way that 
every time that there is an improvement in, be it the 
occupational health and safety or any other labour legislation, 
that it should be seen as somehow condemning the workplace 
or other things. And I think once people understand that it is 
much easier. 
 
And I think you would find in the workplaces where they do 
have this sort of basis where workers can bring their concerns 
forward and they are accepted and listened to by the employers, 
that those are the workplaces, Mr. Speaker, that move forward 
with not only issues of productivity but also issues of 
innovation and creativity. So I think those are the things that we 
long recognize and are at the basis of most of our labour 
legislation that we are so very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes that we are proposing for here were 
changes that we attempted before and have improved upon and 
always are working — whether it was in the early ’90s to now 
— saying that we must now move ahead and look at areas 
where the workers are . . . whether there be some form of 
harassment, and we had put in sexual harassment, into here. 
And being that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve come to recognize that the 
methods of investigation in these areas also need improvement. 
 
And to that we are addressing these areas with our proposed 
legislation and, Mr. Speaker, we are moving somewhat into 
new ground. But it is important that we recognize, that we 
recognize because of the unique situations that we confront, that 
we have to have unique solutions. And sometimes it challenges 
everyone, be it at the workplace or us as policy-makers to 
address those concerns, because they are the needs of people. 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

And I think as basis in our human rights Act as well that we 
understand that it is here to protect the dignity of the individuals 
in our province. And to that, Mr. Speaker, our government has 
always been at the forefront of that, and we will continue to do 
so and have everyone else in the country look to us for that kind 
of leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke about the basis of people meeting. I think 
one of the things that I would like to re-stress and be that in The 
Trade Union Act where . . . parts of The Trade Union Act where 
employers are required, or be they employees, are required to 
meet a basic, sort of tenet of that we have put into any number 
of Acts that we have passed. 
 
And I think as we look at that that I have found in my years, 
former years, where I was a negotiator with the Canadian Union 
of Public Employees that one of the biggest . . . The things that 
I took away from there prior to coming and being elected here 
was that the concept that employees upon request or employers 
could meet with each other and bring that together. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, historically that has not been the case and has 
created, I believe, problems. And so understanding that, that 
when you put in legislation to have the right to meet and to 
express your concerns is at, Mr. Speaker, the very base of what 
we are doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the protection of workers be that on a day-to-day 
basis is important. And not only with that but we need 
education of workers whereby they can come to understand . . . 
Because many of the things . . . For example, Mr. Speaker, in 
water treatment plants many of the chemicals that we use now 
or many of the things in terms of that we have found, whether it 
be water or whatever, are new. 
 
And we are always evolving and doing that. And I also think 
that our department . . . occupational health and safety has been 
at the forefront in those areas in terms of investigations and 
leading the charge in there. 
 
And I would then say that it was because of those kind of 
efforts by our departments and by this government that we are 
addressing today an issue of harassment. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
takes a certain amount of understanding — an understanding 
that is gained over a number of years — to deal with these 
issues. 
 
But I for one am very glad that we’re moving in this area. I 
believe it is time, and we are ready. And I believe the people of 
Saskatchewan are ready and waiting to hear from us on what we 
will do. And I think at the end of the day as always, we will be 
. . . And history will judge us that we did the right thing. Mr. 
Speaker, we did the right thing in this area. And we will be 
again followed by many jurisdictions across this country. 
 
In my final comments, Mr. Speaker, I would just simply say 
that whether it be this . . . and maybe I should just mention that, 
I think, as I discussed it within my constituency, the comments I 
did hear back were very encouraging that we are moving here, 
that they had, that the folks had said for a long time this is long 
overdue and they had been waiting for it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, legislation, I have found, you should be 
careful and considering all of the things, but we do have, I 

believe, we do have the knowledge now. I think we are moving 
in the right direction. 
 
And I would hope that the party across would support this and 
that we could go forward together. Because too many times, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is probably lack of understanding — 
because I would not like to say that they are not concerned 
about safety — but a lack of understanding and just a reaction 
to anything that might be, you know, progressive or, I guess in 
some words, a union or something involved in that. I get that 
kind of a feeling after being here a while, Mr. Speaker, but I 
would hope that they would be able to rise above that sort of 
thing and move on. And I thank you, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate — even though just for a few 
moments — but to acknowledge the fact, Mr. Speaker, that for 
a number of months now Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition has 
been raising some real issues regarding harassment in the 
workplace and this government’s failure to address a number of 
the issues. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what’s really interesting is to note the 
motion before us today and the fact that the government appears 
. . . or would be making it appear that they’ve been now coming 
forward with some new ideas. But we know, Mr. Speaker, that 
there have been some very legitimate processes to follow, and 
it’s unfortunate that the government over the past number of 
years hasn’t taken the appropriate process of dealing with the 
issues. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to advise members that 65 minutes of 
the 75-minute debate is now elapsed. We will now proceed to 
the question period — one minute for question, max; one 
minute for a response, max. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to Minister of Labour, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Labour earlier this week moved first reading of Bill 66, and we 
dealt with that yesterday in the House, Mr. Speaker. I have two 
questions actually for that minister, but I’ll ask my first question 
and then we’ll see if I get in for the second go-round. 
 
But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments proposed 
by the minister may have been struck in haste in reaction to the 
Murdoch Carriere case. And the question that I would have for 
the minister is, how much consultation did he do prior, with 
both employees and employer groups, before moving that Bill 
forward? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
has been before the Occupational Health and Safety Council. 
They have spent time talking about this. This whole issue 
around workplace bullying, intimidation, is one that’s been 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

talked about across Canada, around the world. 
 
We’ve looked at the work that’s being done in Quebec. Other 
provinces such as Manitoba, Ontario are looking at this. So we 
have a good sense of what people are talking about. And we are 
going to talk to labour and business through the council in the 
next few weeks. We’ve already got a meeting set up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I have a question? Yes. Okay. Thank you. 
Well this is for the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
And I just want to check to make sure I have this right. The 
Leader of the Opposition is very clear being on record about his 
feelings about labour. And he said: 
 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto the 
business community by this government, be it through 
Workers’ Compensation or occupational health and safety 
or various pieces of labour legislation, too often has driven 
businesses and the jobs they create and the taxes they pay 
out of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Now I would like to know, is this the official position of the 
opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, or is it just one of their 100 
bright ideas? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at least we 
have ideas on this side of the House, and this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — . . . and that government has adopted many of 
them, and the people of this province are much better off, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need in this province — and as exists in 
other provinces who are doing quite well and whose people 
have job opportunities and career opportunities, Mr. Speaker — 
is balance. And that’s what this party is talking about is balance. 
We certainly support safe workplaces, harassment-free 
workplaces, Mr. Speaker, but what we need to do is have 
balance. And the position of that party, Mr. Speaker, is 
regulation and the heavy hand of government rather than 
consulting both with employees and employers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — It looks like it’s a two-member show this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would have a follow-up 
question to the Minister of Labour. Yesterday when I spoke to 
Bill 66, I recommended that we move the Bill to committee so 
that the committee could call witnesses so that we would hear 
from both employees and employers — the impact of the 
changes. We felt no need to impede the movement of this piece 
of legislation, but we feel it’s of utmost importance that the 
public has an opportunity to make their opinions known. And so 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Minister of Labour, will he 
ask the Economy Committee to hold public hearings on Bill 66? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have talked to the 
Chair of the Committee on the Economy about this discussion, 
so they’ll follow up with that. 
 
But I have a question here. And the member opposite likes to 
talk about balance. But when it comes to occupational health 
and safety, you are talking about peoples’ lives. You are talking 
about injuries. This is a huge thing, and we know what the right 
things are to do. But when they’re talking about balance, I have 
this quote from the member from Kelvington-Wadena who 
said: 
 

You don’t have to put forward every rule and regulation, 
because employers know . . . you don’t [have to] look after 
your employees, they’re not going to be there. They won’t 
want to come to work. They like their employees. You 
don’t have to trust government to tell them what to do. 

 
Now is this their definition of balance when it comes to 
occupational health and safety regulations? I ask the member 
opposite from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It’s getting to be difficult here 
to distinguish between the response and the question. I’ve taken 
that as the member’s response. The member has used his time, 
and I recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard a number of different distortions on the issue of the 
Carriere situation, and this question is for the member from 
Martensville. 
 
I’m wondering will the members opposite apologize for 
claiming in this House that there was a gag order placed on 
these women when there was not and for claiming that the 
government was engaged in obstruction of justice for erasing a 
hard drive that was not erased. Or will they stand by those 
outrageous, factually incorrect, drive-by smear jobs? And how 
can we take anything seriously if they won’t apologize? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ll stand by, we’ll stand 
by these nine women who were completely ignored by this 
NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — They were harassed for years, and their 
complaints went completely unheard by this government. And 
considering that the NDP ignored them for all of those years 
and they fought for almost a decade to be heard, we will 
continue to stand by them, and we will defend them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moosomin. 
 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, given the 
debate over harassment in the workplace and the government’s 
response over the past number of weeks and the most recent 
changes to the occupational health and safety, I would ask the 
member from Regina Walsh Acres how those changes, if they 
were implemented, would actually have made the lives of the 
nine women who raised complaints of harassment over the past 
number of years, how it would have made their lives better 
today versus what their lives would have been had the 
government acted with the authority they already had under the 
original occupational health and safety arguments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the new wording in the legislation 
clearly outlines the issue of psychological harassment. 
Psychological harassment is outlined as well as the fact that 
anything that leads to intimidation or humiliation. 
 
The opposition has been pointing out that apparently there was 
some sort of abuse of power in terms of the relationship 
between the people that they’ve gone to complain to and the 
minister responsible for that file at that time. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
am very convinced that the changes that we have now 
implemented in terms of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act would have gone a long way to have addressed the situation 
that the Sask Party has brought forward in this Chamber. But 
clearly, they’re double-speaking and won’t support legislation 
that will effect that change to happen. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the member from Last Mountain, and the question is 
this . . . Touchwood lost mountain or whatever. My question is, 
my question is: does your caucus have an anti-harassment 
policy for the people that work in your caucus, or do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask that the question be 
directed through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. I ask the member, does he as an 
individual MLA have an anti-harassment policy in his 
constituency office? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing what members 
opposite will do to deflect the attention to the harassment case 
of the Murdoch Carriere, Mr. Speaker. They had harassment in 
the workplace, and they knew about it for 10 years, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. Order. 
Member for . . . Order. Order now. Order please. Member for 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
recognize that the name of my constituency is quite long, and I 
certainly am pleased that some people in this House can get it 

right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But getting back to the member’s question, Mr. Speaker, they 
use every tactic they can think of to deflect attention from the 
real issue, the issue of a high-placed employee harassing nine 
women in the workplace that we know of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Final question, the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
light of the huge human resources issue that we have, shortage 
in Saskatchewan in health care, how can they stand and talk 
about workplace safety when they’ve put nurses and doctors in 
the working situations that they’ve put them in? They’re 
literally breaking the backs of nurses because of shortage of 
health care professionals. 
 
When are they going to address the real issue of workplace 
safety, and that’s employing the correct number of health care 
workers in order to not have the highest workers’ compensation 
rates for health care workers injury rates, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this clearly shows where the 
members opposite are at. We have regulations in front of us 
right now that will deal with this issue, but they want to talk 
about staffing and one place here — when we talk about nurses. 
What about other situations when we talk about firefighters? 
You can’t have it both ways. We’re talking about specific 
regulations that will meet the challenges that nurses and health 
care workers deal with in their workplace. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate has 
elapsed. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Undertaking an Inquiry into Management 
of Harassment Complaints 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Heppner.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition has asked questions about the issue of harassment in 
the workplace, specifically in government workplaces since the 
first day of this session. We’ve been trying to ascertain answers 
as to the why the Carriere case was allowed to happen in a 
government workplace. We have many questions, and we’ve 
had very few answers. 
 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

Questions like why won’t the NDP table a legal opinion of the 
$275,000 payout to Murdoch Carriere? Why the NDP says they 
consulted with the women who were harassed when they knew 
that was not the case? Why did harassment complaints that 
were brought forward to their supervisors, to the assistant 
deputy ministers, and the deputy ministers, why were they 
never taken seriously? Why was Murdoch Carriere given a 
top-up to his pension even though the people of Saskatchewan 
were told that he was fired? What happened prior to 2002 when 
the complaints were made public by the Gillies report? 
 
The people of this province, the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to know the answers, and they deserve much better than 
what this tired, old NDP government has given them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember my very first job as an aide in the 
local hospital, listening to women talk about the incidents that 
they had faced in their life. I was absolutely amazed to hear so 
many of them tell stories of abuse in the workplace and how so 
many of them had never said a word. They were educated, 
professional women — intelligent and strong. Yet during our 
late-night shifts when occasionally things quietened down, 
they’d share their stories. They talked of fear, and they talked of 
intimidation, and they talked of frustration. And mostly they 
talked about anger. They were angry at themselves because they 
didn’t stand up for what they knew was right. That was four 
decades ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A lot has changed in the last four decades. The women in our 
health care centres today are not just nurses or secretaries or 
cooks. They are the doctors and the radiologists and the 
specialists of all kinds. 
 
Yet today, 40 years later, the stats still tell us that four women 
out of ten are still abused — mentally, physically, sexually, or 
emotionally. There are not too many women in this Assembly 
who would put up with that type of abuse or assault. We are 
seen as a strong group of people — strong-willed and 
independent and, kind of, butt-kicking women. But there are a 
lot of women who are not that way. 
 
But still, deep down, I know that all of us have memories, Mr. 
Speaker. And that is why it is the responsibility of every woman 
in this Assembly, and just as importantly every man in this 
Assembly, to send the message that there is zero tolerance for 
abuse — ever — anywhere in this province and especially in a 
government workplace where each and every one of us are 
responsible for the employees. Every employee in our province, 
whether they work in the private sector or in government, has 
the right to feel safe in their workplace. And if they don’t, if the 
system breaks down, there must never be a time when people 
are left with the feeling of betrayal, like the women that are 
involved in this Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes for the OHS regulations are 
very personal. They’re personal for every one of the members 
in this Assembly. And I think we should call it exactly what the 
Murdoch Carriere was — sexual harassment. By the very nature 
of their gender, these women were exposed to a systematic 
course of behaviour that was abusive and harmful. They were 
targeted because of the very fact that they were women. And 
their male supervisor, Murdoch Carriere, had the ability — or 
should I say the abuse of power — to control and intimidate 

women in the workplace. 
 
The women in our lives deserve to work in a place that is safe. 
They deserve to be treated with common decency and respect. 
These people are not nameless. They are our daughters and our 
granddaughters and our sisters and our nieces and our nephews, 
and we should never forget that fact. 
 
Now this government has introduced changes to the OHS 
legislation that sees an expanded definition of harassment to 
include protection against personal harassment, but what would 
these changes to the OHS regulations have done to prevent the 
Murdoch Carriere case from occurring? There was nothing 
vague or obscure about the Carriere case. It was a blatant 
example of sexual harassment. Jumping out from behind the 
door and grabbing a woman from behind in order to kiss them 
on the lips is not acceptable or usual in a workplace. It is not 
something that women should have to identify as unacceptable 
and advise the person to stop. An average person, any average 
person would know that this form of behaviour is not welcome. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is clear that the proposed changes to the 
legislation would’ve done nothing to prevent the Carriere 
situation. The problem was not with the grounds on which the 
women were able to make their claims; these women knew full 
well what they were experiencing was sexual harassment. They 
knew it was wrong, and they knew they had grounds on which 
to complain and which to bring it forward to their superiors, and 
they did that. 
 
There was no limitation in the legislation in terms of defining 
Carriere’s behaviour, and yet we are now making amendments 
to the legislation that will redefine what constitutes harassment. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not the problem; the problem is that 
this issue was not taken seriously by senior people in this 
government. Senior officials were not held accountable to deal 
with their complaints, and they were not held accountable to 
make difficult decisions, and they were not held accountable to 
take action. Rather they were encouraged to sweep it under the 
rug. 
 
The changes to the legislation are a feeble attempt by a tired, 
old NDP government to redirect attention away from the 
incompetency they displayed while handling the Carriere case. 
Instead of admitting that they mishandled a situation, that 
women deserve better, and that they needed to strengthen 
internal processes to deal with the harassment complaints, what 
does the government do? They started the long and painful 
process to cover up their actions, to propose amendments to 
legislation that will only give false hope to working people in 
the province unless there is actually determination to make 
some real changes. 
 
Addressing harassment is really a question of changing 
workplace attitudes. In the case of sexual harassment, it’s about 
addressing some of the fundamental cornerstones that define the 
way in which men and women work together. Some of the 
workplace culture is set by the way in which your most senior 
people communicate with others and how they demonstrate 
their commitment to ensuring a safe and respectful workplace. 
Senior managers need to be held accountable for their actions 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

and for ensuring that issues of harassment are taken seriously. 
 
You will never eliminate harassment from the workplace. This 
is an unrealistic goal. But what we can do is ensure that there 
are mechanisms in place to prevent situations from arising and 
to deal with them efficiently and quickly when concerns are 
raised. 
 
So while we still struggle to properly enact legislation that 
already exists to deal with harassment in the workplace, this 
government now brings in yet more legislation to broaden and 
widen the definition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this government has not yet demonstrated 
that it is able to enforce the existing harassment legislation, 
including within its own workplace, we now see it had made 
further changes to legislations. 
 
My sincere concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this will result 
in yet more workers looking for avenues to deal with their 
situation of harassment and discovering that the processes and 
procedures really don’t offer them anything very tangible at all. 
There will be yet more people whose optimism and hope will be 
turned into cynicism and despair when they discover the options 
they have had to deal with harassments are really nothing more 
than a crumbling facade. 
 
The proposed legislation is also being presented without any 
consultation to stakeholders who would have important 
contributions to make. Of these, the very women who were 
involved in the Carriere case would have essential information 
to share that would help us ensure the legislation and the 
accompanying process and procedures were designed to serve 
the interests of the complainants. 
 
But who is this government consulting with? They’re 
consulting with themselves. They’re consulting within a 
bureaucracy and a select group of people who sit on the OH&S 
council. I would be hard pressed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
suggest this is a comprehensive consultation process that would 
meet the critical information necessary with which to design 
legislation that would clearly meet the needs of employees in 
this province. 
 
Public policy is not constructed overnight in an attempt to 
throw opposition off track. When this is the case, such as what 
we are seeing now with the current amendments being proposed 
to OHS, we see legislation poorly thought out that could cause 
eventual grave concerns for citizens. But apparently that’s not 
the concern of this government at all. 
 
Their greatest concern is about scoring political points. It’s not 
about developing sound, effective public policy that’s a result 
of legitimate stakeholder consultation. It’s about having a good 
media day finally in this legislature. 
 
We have government publications that say, that talk about this 
issue. In reviewing information on the issue of harassment, I’ve 
had the opportunity to consider what is included on the 
occupational health and safety website. There it is stated that 
Saskatchewan’s Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 and 
regulations address violence in the workplace and specifically 
require employers to protect workers from workplace 

harassment insofar as it’s reasonably practical. 
 
The Act requires that employers develop and implement their 
harassment and violence policies in consultation with 
workplace occupational health committees. Each year the 
occupational health and safety division provides training to 
occupational health and committee members on their roles and 
their responsibilities. 
 
The OHSD [occupational health and safety division] released 
two publications to assist employers in developing a violence 
policy entitled A Guide to Developing a Violence Policy 
Statement and A Sample Policy on Workplace Violence. This 
was produced by this government. These publications are 
targeted at high-risk workplace such as health care facilities or 
places where workers work alone or in isolation. 
 
The Occupational Health and Safety Council is currently 
reviewing the occupational health and safety legislation, 
including the adequacy of these sections related to harassment 
and violence. And since this was last updated, the OHS council 
with whom the government will be consulting on changes . . . is 
at best a questionable consultation process. 
 
In addition there are also several documents that include 
information about the issues of harassment. For example, the 
Status of Women office profiles that issues as part of its action 
plan for Saskatchewan women, and I quote, “The Government 
of Saskatchewan will increase efforts to publicize and monitor 
employers’ responsibility for providing violence and 
harassment-free workplace.” 

 
It doesn’t say that doesn’t include the government. They should 
be following their own legislation. Must I remind the 
government that they were the ones who first established the 
sexual harassment prevention program within the then 
Women’s Secretariat? The materials that they developed were 
widely distributed and utilized by various people inside and 
outside of government. However this government also saw fit to 
discontinue this program. And now we see that the issue has 
again resurfaced, and I am again referring to these documents 
that spoke to the issue of sexual harassment and provided much 
needed information to help workers and employees deal with 
the issues. 
 
In one of the documents, A Guide for Complainants, the various 
options for dealing with harassment are outlined. First you: 
 

Talk to someone in authority — your manager or your 
supervisor — and discuss what actions can be taken to 
resolve the situation, including provisions in your 
workplace harassment policy. If the harasser is your boss, 
it may be necessary to talk . . . [to someone] more senior 
. . . or with someone in human resources. 

 
It’s obvious from what we do know about the Carriere case that 
that is exactly what the women did. It was their boss who was 
their harasser, and they went to the senior officials in the 
department — their ADM [assistant deputy minister] and their 
DM [deputy minister] — who did nothing. They went to the 
Premier and he did nothing. 
 
Second, it says: 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2007 

Consult your Union — if you are employed in a Unionized 
workplace, obtain . . . [some] information about the 
possibility of using grievance procedures. 

 
Again, where was the help for these women? 
 

Contact the . . . Occupational Health and Safety Division 
— . . . determine if . . . [it is] a violation of The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act. 

 
Again, where was the OH division when it came to protecting 
the rights of these workers? 
 
The document goes on to outline the possible outcomes of 
pursuing various options. The truthful reality of the information 
can probably ring true for many women who have attempted to 
address the situation of sexual harassment. For example, some 
possible outcomes of a workplace harassment policy might 
include you get a letter from your employer acknowledging the 
harassment and apologizing. You might receive a letter of 
apology from your harasser. You might be offered some money 
as compensation for being harassed. The harasser might be 
transferred, demoted, suspended, or dismissed. The last two 
points are sadly ironic. 
 
Yes — you might say — some got money. Yes, the nine 
women did — $15,000 each. But it doesn’t say that the harasser 
should receive $275,000 and actually be rewarded for having 
entered into a systematic pattern of harassment and assault over 
a number of years. Nor does it say anything about the harasser 
actually being promoted for their behaviour. 
 
Another document I’ve had the opportunity to review was also 
produced by the previous Women’s Secretariat. A Guide for 
Employers often offers some useful information to help employers 
understand harassment and to recognize what the role is in 
managing the situation. 
 
This causes me to speculate if anyone in Saskatchewan 
Environment had the opportunity to review this information, in 
fact if it was ever brought to their attention in the first place. For 
that matter, would those in Executive Council ever stoop to 
actually read something that was produced by the public service to 
address the situation? I’m indeed skeptical about that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly suspect that there has been much to be 
learned from these statements, and I would also strongly suggest 
that the Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
pay particular attention. These are the very messages that are so 
desperately needed to be communicated to the managers to the 
civil service: 
 

The first myth, the myth that no one’s complained, so it’s not 
a problem in our workplace. Fact, a lack of complaint should 
not be confused with the absence of a problem. Individuals 
are more likely to come forward with a complaint of 
harassment when the issue is taken seriously and if there’s an 
effective process for resolution. In contrast when the issue of 
harassment is dismissed, an environment is created that 
actually prevents people from coming forward, and in effect 
fosters harassment by failing to discourage it. 

 
Second myth, unless someone complains, I’m not going to 

make waves by interfering. Fact, this reflects a reactive 
approach in which the supervisor or manager assumes there 
is no basis to intervene until there’s a real, formal complaint. 
As a result, management will be forced to deal with the 
situation when it becomes a lot more complex and the work 
environment has deteriorated even further. 

 
The third myth, we’ve addressed the issue. We’ve posted our 
policy and done some education. Fact, when these two 
activities in isolation constitute an organization’s strategy for 
dealing with harassment, very limited success and further 
complications can be expected. 

 
The fourth myth, it’s impossible to monitor the actions of 
every employee. I can’t be held responsible if someone does 
something wrong. Fact, employers, including government, 
are legally responsible for the actions of their employees. 
Therefore it is in the best interest of employers to implement 
and monitor respectful workplace practices and effective 
mechanisms for dealing with harassment. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, a point that the government needs to pay 
attention to: 
 

The fifth myth, we have a zero tolerance policy. That takes 
care of the harassment in our workplace. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the most interesting and relevant 
points I wish to emphasize to my colleagues, and I quote: 
 

Unfortunately a zero tolerance policy tends to replace a 
comprehensive strategy and process to prevent and address 
harassment. 
 
Such a statement implies that strict disciplinary action will 
be taken in all instances of harassment regardless of the 
severity. Such an absolute and uncompromising response 
contributes to a sense of fear and skepticism. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would strongly suggest to this 
government that instead of producing posters and pamphlets 
that talk about respectful workplaces, that boast about a 
government that has zero tolerance or being a harassment-free 
zone, they should be focusing on doing something substantive 
to ensure that legislation that is already in place is being put 
into effect, that managers and the most senior people in 
government departments are being held accountable to ensure 
the health and safety of their workers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s sadly ironic that the same NDP 
government was ordering civil servants to develop this 
document. It was simultaneously using managerial and 
bureaucratic powers to suppress the legit grievances of 
government employees. Nine women, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
nine women employed by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan were 
actually subject to precisely the type of harassment as the court 
has found . . . as this court has found violence in the workplace 
and this NDP government reported to be concerned about. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, it is now 1 o’clock, the time for adjournment. I 
declare this Assembly to be adjourned, and I wish all members 
a very good weekend. We will reassemble at 1:30 p.m. on 
Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1399 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant ........................................................................................................................................................................1401 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1401 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1412 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Member’s Statement 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1402 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1405 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
 100 Years of Building Strong Kids and Strong Families in Regina 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
 Public Response 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1403 
 Crime Victims Awareness Week 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1404 
 Caucus Audit Report 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1404 
 North Central Regional Recreation Association Volunteer Awards 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1404 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Misappropriation of Funds by Former Caucus Worker 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1406 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1406 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1407 
 Support for Adult Basic Education 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1407 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1408 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1408 



 

 Assistance to Cattle Producers in Humboldt Area 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1408 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1408 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1409 
 Support for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1409 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1409 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
PRIVATE BILLS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 302 — The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan Amendment Act 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 302 — The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan Amendment Act 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Occupational Health and Safety for Workers 
  Morin .............................................................................................................................................................................1413, 1424 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................1416, 1423 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................1417, 1423 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1419 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................1420, 1424 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1422 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................1423, 1425 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1415 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 5 — Undertaking an Inquiry into Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




