


















































Hansard: April 30, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 53A  MONDAY, APRIL 30, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1431 
 April 30, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege again to present petitions on behalf of the number of 
residents in the Broadview and surrounding areas and 
communities in regards to the need for a dialysis unit at the 
Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks of the community of Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. 
This petition addresses the lake levels of Echo and Pasqua 
Lake. I so present: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to work with and to lobby the federal 
governments to put in place a long-term agreement that 
deals with the issue of the water structure at Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Lebret, 
Dysart, and Fort Qu’Appelle. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I 
present petitions of citizens concerned with the safety when 
driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Annaheim and 
Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from the citizens of Biggar concerning 
health care cuts. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Perdue and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at 
the Lafleche and District Health Centre would cause undue 
hardship to residents, particularly senior citizens. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Fir Mountain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency that are concerned with the 
potentially dangerous situation in our health care system that’s 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2007 

arising in that area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures of this petition are from the community 
of Shellbrook and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from 
citizens concerned about the underfunding to school divisions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petitions are signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis, Strasbourg, Lockwood, and Drake, Raymore and 
Quinton and also Regina. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling for mandatory drug and alcohol testing in certain 
conditions where motor vehicle accidents are involved. The 
prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug- and alcohol-level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Watson and 
Englefeld. I am pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise a 
petition regarding highway signage. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to increase highway signage at the 
junctions of Highways 6 and 39. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Radville, 
Saskatoon, and Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: who is the insurance 
carrier for the Lanigan, Dellwood watershed authority? 
 

In addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: was the contract to manage the 
entrepreneurial fund put to tender and if not, why not? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: was the contract to manage the 
First Nations and Métis Fund put to tender and if not, why 
not? 
 

In addition: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: was the administration for the 
Gradworks internship program initially put to tender in 
2002? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: why was the administration of the 
Gradworks internship program transferred from McNair 
Business Development to CIC? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: has the department assessed 
all the damages been done to Highway 15 and if so, when 
will the highway be reopened and what will be the 
projected cost of repair? 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 



April 30, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

To the Minister of Justice: in the 2007-2008 budget, how 
much money is allocated to fighting Internet crimes 
involving children and to cracking down on child 
pornography? Of the total allotment, where is the money 
being targeted and in what amounts? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 58 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations: what was the 
total amount of money spent on staff travelling with the 
minister during the fiscal year 2006-07? 
 
To the Minister of Government Relations: what was the 
total amount of money spent on ministerial travel in the 
fiscal year ’06-07? How many staff were employed by the 
minister’s office during the fiscal year ’06-07? How much 
money was paid out in severance, and to whom during the 
fiscal year of ’06-07? What was the total payroll for the 
minister’s office during the fiscal year ’06-07? How many 
legal actions are pending against the department? How 
many legal actions were taken against the department in 
the fiscal year ’06-07, and what cost was attached to the 
settlements? How much money was spent on specific 
advertising campaign the department undertook in the 
fiscal year ’06-07, and which agency received the 
contract? And how much money did the department spend 
on advertising and communications in the fiscal year 
’06-07? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have the same questions that I will be 
asking to several other departments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of this Assembly 
a potential future member of this Assembly who is sitting in the 
east gallery today. It’s the Saskatchewan Party candidate for 
Saskatoon Greystone, Rob Norris, someone involved 
extensively in a senior capacity at the University of 
Saskatchewan, committed to growing the economic potential 
not only of the university of Saskatoon, but the entire province. 
And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming him here to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly I’d like to 
introduce a young lady that is seated in your gallery. Tracy 
Tytlandsvik is a grade 12 student from Oungre high school and 
Tracy is shadowing me as a school project this week. She will 
be entering the University of Regina this fall taking human 
justice. I ask all members to join me in welcoming Tracy to her 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: —The member for Moose Jaw North, why is the 
member for Moose Jaw North on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to make a statement of clarification of a previous statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw North has 
requested leave of the House to make a statement. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Clarification of Previous Statement 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to clarify the 
public record. On Thursday, April 26, 2007, in my response to 
questions raised by the member for Canora-Pelly regarding the 
misappropriation of funds by a former NDP [New Democratic 
Party] caucus staff member who was hired under a false identity 
in 1992, I made statements that were incomplete, and therefore 
misleading to this legislature. 
 
For the record, I have provided information to the legislature 
last Thursday that at that time I believed to be accurate. This 
information was provided to me by the NDP caucus chief of 
staff, who based his briefing to me on his memory of events 
surrounding a caucus personnel matter that occurred in 1992 
and presented to me without related files or notes available to 
him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stated on the public record that, and I quote from 
Hansard: 
 

. . . that when the information was received that there was 
the possibility of misappropriation, that information was 
given to the Regina city police immediately. The fact of 
the matter is the Regina city police recommended an audit 
to determine the actual facts. That was done. And it was 
that copy of that special audit [that] was provided to the 
Regina city police who subsequently, Mr. Speaker, who 
subsequently chose to not lay charges, considered that not 
the appropriate course of action. That’s a decision of the 
Regina city police, Mr. Speaker. 

 
It has become apparent that this statement is not congruent with 
the public record as described by Cal Johnston, the chief of 
police for the Regina Police Service, who has stated on the 
public record that the audit was not made available to the 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2007 

investigators at the time in 1992. Chief Johnston did confirm 
that the information was available to the investigators in 1994. 
 
My statements, Mr. Speaker, were made with the best 
information I had at the time and, as I stated previously, my 
statements were informed by the recollection of the NDP 
caucus chief of staff. As this legislature is aware, Mr. Fodey has 
resigned. 
 
It is clear that the statements I made in the legislature do not 
correspond to the Regina city police’s public record and 
accordingly I wish to correct the statements. As the Chair of 
caucus in 1992, I was informed by Mr. Fodey that he had 
received a letter from Ann Lord confessing that she has taken 
money from the NDP caucus. It was decided that Ms. Lord 
would have to be fired and that Jim Fodey, as the administrative 
head of the NDP caucus, would bring the matter to the attention 
of the Regina city police. 
 
As the political Chair of caucus, I relied on the caucus chief of 
staff for informations about his dealings with the matter. In 
September 1994, as a result of further internal investigations by 
a staff member of the NDP caucus, the file regarding those 
funds that were taken from the caucus in 1992 was turned over 
to the police. Investigators recommended a forensic audit take 
place. 
 
The NDP caucus administrative committee chose to conduct a 
complete audit of caucus financial records. Further to this, I am 
tabling today the financial statements that accompany the audit 
of 1994 that were made available to me today. These financial 
statements were confirmed today with KPMG. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate this opportunity to correct the 
statement by myself in this House with the best information 
available to me today. Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the Premier today 
has requested that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
conduct a review of this entire matter, and I welcome that. I 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Telus Cup 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was an exciting 
weekend for hockey fans for the city of Prince Albert and the 
surrounding area, Mr. Speaker, as the P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Mintos made history on Sunday afternoon by becoming the first 
team to win the Telus Cup midget hockey championship two 
years in a row. Last year’s final went into triple overtime, and 
this year’s final in Red Deer, Alberta went into double overtime 
with Mintos’ Ryan Fox scoring the tie-breaking goal just 48 
seconds into the second overtime period. 
 
The Mintos defeated the Red Deer Optimist Rebels by a score 
of 3-2, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately many avid hockey fans from 
across the province and certainly in the P.A. area were deprived 
of the chance to watch that victory as the Toronto Sports 

Network, otherwise known as TSN, decided to cut from the 
overtime play to an NBA [National Basketball Association] 
game, Mr. Speaker. That notwithstanding, this is the Mintos’ 
second Telus Cup title in as many years. It follows on two 
regular seasons in which the team entered the playoffs with an 
undefeated record. As this year’s Telus Cup, the Mintos went 
from a seven and oh record in the regular season to 14 and oh 
by the end of the championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition Saskatchewan 
Party, I’d like to congratulate the P.A. Mintos hockey team on a 
well-fought championship and a well-deserved victory. We also 
want to acknowledge the head coach, Tim Leonard, the other 
coaching staff, the rest of the staff of the Mintos, the volunteers, 
all the family members that are involved in the Mintos 
organization. They’re all part of a winning team that 
Saskatchewan is very proud of today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to join with the Leader of the Opposition 
in offering my congratulations and the NDP caucus’s 
congratulations to the Prince Albert Mintos who, as has been 
said, defeated the host Red Deer Chiefs in the final Midget 
AAA Telus Cup to defend their national title. And they indeed 
are truly national champions. 
 
Last year the Mintos needed a third overtime period to secure 
the title. This year cheers went up all over Prince Albert, for 
those who were listening on the radio, as Ryan Fox scored the 
game winner just 48 seconds into the second overtime. Ryan 
Fox is one of six members of last year’s championship team. 
The other five members that contributed to both Mintos’ Telus 
Cup wins are Tommy Brown, Jadon Potter, Curtis Kulchar, 
Lewis Laczko, and Owen Roschuk. 
 
This victory marks the first time any team has won 
back-to-back national championships in the 29-year history of 
the Telus Cup. Once again the Mintos completed the 
tournament with a perfect seven and zero on their way to the 
title. 
 
I want to say that many of the Mintos also received individual 
awards for their play at the Telus Cup. Carsen Chubak was 
awarded the top goaltender, Tyler Fiddler was awarded the top 
forward, and Lewis Laczko was named the top defenceman. 
 
I would like to, Mr. Speaker, ask all members to join with me in 
giving a great round of applause for a great hockey team from 
Prince Albert. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

100th Anniversary of Early’s Farm & Garden Centre 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of businesses 



April 30, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

in Saskatoon celebrating their 100th anniversary in 2007 and I 
would like to take the opportunity to recognize one of them 
today. 
 
Early’s Farm & Garden Centre got its start in 1907 when 
Spencer A. Early started the S.A. Early & Company Limited 
Hay Grain and Feed Store on 20th Street East in Saskatoon. The 
business grew and prospered at several locations in Saskatoon. 
The company’s first spring catalogue was published in 1942, 
and to this day people in Saskatoon and across the province 
look forward to receiving their catalogue and seeing what new 
and interesting items the company has to offer. 
 
In 1948 the company became Early Seed & Feed to more 
accurately reflect its business. In 1982 following a major 
restructuring, the company became Early’s Farm & Garden 
Centre and relocated to 2615 Lorne Avenue. A branch store was 
subsequently opened in 1995 at 502 51st Street also in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the secret to success in this case is a 
strong commitment to customer service, hard work, and 
dedication as well as the ability to embrace change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of this Assembly 
to join me in congratulating owner and president Spencer Early, 
who is the grandson of the founder, and everyone else who has 
had a hand in developing Early’s Farm & Garden Centre and 
will help it continue to remain a viable business and an 
important community institution in Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
New Democratic Party Candidate Chosen in Lloydminster 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
Saturday I had the great pleasure of attending the NDP 
nomination meeting for the constituency of Lloydminster. It 
was a great event, Mr. Speaker, and I’m extremely pleased to 
share with this Assembly that Grant Whitstone is the new NDP 
candidate for the constituency of Lloydminster. And, Mr. 
Speaker, he will be the next MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] to represent that constituency in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Grant Whitstone was just 
one of the excellent candidates standing for nomination and I 
want to take this opportunity to congratulate and thank Shawn 
McKee for the enthusiasm, the energy, and the ideas that both 
he and Grant Whitstone brought to this nomination contest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Grant Whitstone is a member of the Onion Lake 
First Nation. He is a man of intelligence, energy, and drive, 
actively involved in sports and in his community. He is focused 
on youth, Mr. Speaker. He is currently the recreational director 
of the Onion Lake First Nation, he is a member of the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] sports and 
recreational board, and participated with team Saskatchewan at 
the North American Indigenous Games in 1995. Mr. Speaker, 
Grant has a firm belief in his culture and is the founding 

member and singer of the Pipestone Cree drum group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Grant Whitstone on his nomination 
win, and I have every confidence that he will prove to be an 
outstanding representative for the constituency of Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Maple Creek Wins Women’s Bantam B Championship 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, southwest Saskatchewan is proud 
to add another team to its list of provincial champions. Mr. 
Speaker, the Maple Creek Female Hawks recently captured the 
Bantam B championship with a victory against the Kindersley 
Klippers in Kindersley. Mr. Speaker, the first game against the 
Klippers ended in a tie, and the Maple Creek Female Hawks 
showed great team effort and determination to score a win on 
the road to bring home the provincial banner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, women’s hockey continues to grow across the 
province and I would argue they are following in the footsteps 
of Shaunavon’s Hayley Wickenheiser. And now the Maple 
Creek female bantams have proven that our southwest female 
athletes can still place among the top in the province. 
 
Based on their performance at the Bantam B division hockey 
championships, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that we will hear 
more and more of this team’s success in years to come. I am 
also hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that we will see some of these young 
women on the ice at higher levels in the future, perhaps even at 
the Olympics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate all 
of the Maple Creek Female Hawks on their recent victory and 
to thank head coach, Murray Bertram, assistant coach, Don 
Parsonage, and all the parents and fans for their efforts in 
helping the girls secure a provincial title. And I would ask all 
members in this Assembly to join me in congratulating the 
Maple Creek Female Hawks. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Attitudes Toward Labour Policies in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saturday 
being the Day of Mourning for workers killed and injured on 
the job, and tomorrow being May Day, I’ve been thinking all 
that Saskatchewan working people have achieved. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is a province of innovation and co-operation. It’s 
no accident that among Saskatchewan’s many firsts can be 
counted Canada’s first trade union Act, the first minimum 
wage, the first 40-hour work week, and the first occupational 
health and safety Act. 
 
Over the years these and other forward-looking Saskatchewan 
labour policies have been met with resistance and outright 
hostility from anti-labour groups. The Saskatchewan Party is 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2007 

the current leader when it comes to speaking out against labour 
and enlightened labour policy here in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. People are willing to work for less than minimum 
wage, says one. Unions are job killers, says another. And of 
course there’s the opposition leader’s famous pronouncement 
about, quote: 
 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto 
business community by this government, be it through 
Workers’ Comp or occupational health and safety or 
various pieces of labour legislation . . . 
 

The opposition leader also talks about going to war and going 
on the offensive to roll back this province’s labour legislation. 
To the working men and women of Saskatchewan, there is 
nothing more offensive than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Citizens’ Response to Mailer 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
responses to the Saskatchewan Party’s mailout on the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal continue to come into our office, and I would 
like to again share some of those responses with members 
opposite. From Regina, and I quote: 
 

As a female working in the province of Saskatchewan, I 
was out outraged to learn that Carriere received a 
settlement for inappropriate behaviour in the workplace. 
Under Calvert’s government, intimidation and harassment 
appears to be acceptable in the workplace and is 
handsomely rewarded. Calvert, it’s time for YOU and 
your out of touch policies to GO! 
 

Again from Regina, and I quote: 
 

With the NDP keeping this harassment a secret, it makes a 
person wonder if Carriere had some information that 
Premier Calvert and the NDP party are hiding from the 
public. What a waste of taxpayers’ money! 
 

Again from Regina, and I quote: 
 

As a female employee of a provincial crown, I have seen 
first hand how harassment is rewarded under Premier 
Calvert’s ‘responsible government’. It is not responsible 
government — no matter how many times you do it Mr. 
Calvert. 
 

Mr. Speaker, another from Regina, and I quote: 
 

As a taxpayer I’m angry. As a woman, I’m outraged. As a 
person, I’m offended. Making a secret deal with this 
person was irresponsible. Supporting a premier who would 
do the same again is impossible. Hiding the details of this 
agreement is a betrayal of the public trust and totally 
indefensible. 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, also from the Queen City, and I 

quote: 
 

I cannot support a government that rewards this kind of 
behaviour. UNFORGIVABLE. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Misappropriation of Funds 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, once again we only get the real story from the NDP 
after they get caught. But the problem is, they’re still not telling 
the whole story. 
 
Minister of Culture and Recreation still has not answered the 
fundamental question. When the NDP found out that taxpayers’ 
money had been stolen from their office in 1992, why didn’t 
they immediately go to the police? Why was this information 
withheld from the police? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister admits he read Ann Davey’s 
confession letter. It was addressed to him. Who made the 
decision to conceal this confession letter from the police? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I do want to bring to the 
member’s attention that this matter that has been dealing with 
here is not really the responsibility of executive government. I 
do rule it out of order, but I will allow member to respond if he 
wishes. The Chair recognizes the Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As House Leader I’ll voluntarily take that question. Mr. 
Speaker, in 1992 under false identity, Ann Lord was hired to the 
staff of the NDP caucus. In the summer of 1992 in late August 
upon return from a brief holiday, the chief of staff received a 
letter that she had left indicating that she had misappropriately 
received funds from the caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that letter then was shared between the chief of 
staff and the caucus Chair, myself, and as a result of that, the 
decision was made that Ms. Lord would need to be fired and 
that the matter should be brought to the attention of the Regina 
city police. The chief of staff was instructed to do that, and, Mr. 
Speaker, to the best of my knowledge at that time, that’s exactly 
what was done. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the minister said when they learned about the missing 
taxpayers’ money, the proper course of action was to 
immediately notify police and turn the confession letter over to 
police. But that didn’t happen. 
 



April 30, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

The NDP did not contact the police. They did not turn the 
confession letter over to the police. In fact when they were 
questioned about Ann Davey’s disappearance, they never even 
mentioned the confession letter. They deliberately concealed it 
from police. So the question is, who decided to conceal the 
confession letter from the police? Did Jim Fodey do this on his 
own, or was he taking direction from the minister? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on reflection of the facts, the 
House would be aware, as I said earlier today, that when I made 
my statement last week, both following question period on 
Wednesday and then in the House on Thursday, it was based on 
the best information provided to me by the chief of staff who 
was basing his advice, without access to be able to refer to file 
or notes, based on a 15-year-old memory. Mr. Speaker, the 
advice was given to me regarding the procedures at that time, 
which I then stated publicly, and as I’ve referred to earlier today 
here in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clearly the case that there is a discrepancy 
between the information that was provided to me and to the 
public comment made by the chief of staff, Mr. Speaker, and 
we will be recognizing the chief of staff . . . and to the chief of 
police, I should say, and we’ll recognize the chief of staff has 
offered his resignation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, did 
the minister recall whether he told Jim Fodey to take the 
confession letter to the police? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the matter 
was brought to my attention late August by the chief of staff. 
And the chief of staff and I discussed the matter, confirmed, 
agreed that Ms. Lord would need to be fired and that the matter 
should be taken to the police. Subsequent to that time, the 
handling of matters related to the police was in the hands of the 
administration and, Mr. Speaker, I had at that time no reason to 
believe that anything different from what was appropriate was 
taking place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is incongruent with the comments of the chief 
of police, stated on Friday of last week. And, Mr. Speaker, 
subsequent to that time, the chief of staff of the NDP caucus has 
resigned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pretty simple question. In 1992 the minister received a 
confession letter in which Ann Davey admits to defrauding 
nearly 6,000 taxpayers’ dollars and asks the minister to please 
keep this quiet. And I quote from the letter, Mr. Speaker: 
 

It is a serious situation and one that I would hope you 
could keep confidential so that these other complications 
that some day may arise from the states, will not be 
cloudied and I could remain free. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister had two options. He could take this 
information immediately to the police. He could take this 
information immediately to the police, or he could follow Ann 
Davey’s request and keep it quiet. Which one did he do? Did 
the minister direct that the confession letter should immediately 
be turned over to the police, or did he decide to conceal this 
letter from the police? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I did not make a decision or 
direction to keep this letter from the chief of police. Mr. 
Speaker, as I said earlier, the direction was given to the chief 
administrator, the caucus chief of staff, to take the matter to the 
police. And to the best of my knowledge at that time, matters 
were proceeding. 
 
There were investigations that took place because of the 
police’s checking of another incident unrelated to this that 
brought them to the building and during which there were 
interviews with staff members from the caucus at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we have today, Mr. Speaker, is an incongruity between 
the advice given to me and the statement of the Regina chief of 
police. And, Mr. Speaker, there was an announcement made 
today that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner would be 
reviewing the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wants us to believe 
that to the best of his knowledge he can’t remember whether 
that order was given. Mr. Speaker, in the memo the woman says 
“fraud is fraud”. That simply defies belief that this . . . There 
was a bizarre series of events. First a caucus employee suddenly 
disappears. She leaves behind a confession letter admitting to 
stealing $6,000 and asks, asks the minister to keep it quiet. A 
few days later her car bursts into flames here at the Legislative 
Building. And a few days after that, police show up and say 
she’s been arrested for 85 counts of fraud committed in the 
United States. And her real name isn’t Ann Lord; it’s Ann 
Davey. And now the minister wants us and the people of the 
province to believe he doesn’t really remember any of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the minister remembers everything. He’s 
just not telling us. Who made the decision to conceal the 
confession letter from the police? 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the advice that I was given at 
the time was that this was information that was made available 
to the Regina city police. That’s different from the public record 
as stated by Chief Johnston on Friday. Mr. Speaker, the matter 
is currently under review, as we know, by the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner and I welcome that review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is normal, and in cases that when there is 
suspected misappropriation of funds to confirm, to confirm the 
facts. And I do point out that, as after receiving advice, that 
there was a special audit that was being done by the New 
Democratic caucus in 1992, and that special audit, Mr. Speaker, 
was tabled in this House last week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if Jim 
Fodey was acting on his own when he concealed information 
from the police, why doesn’t the minister just say so? If the 
minister directed Jim Fodey to turn all the information over to 
the police and Fodey defied that order, why doesn’t the minister 
just say so? The fact that the minister won’t answer this simple 
question seems to suggest that he was part of the cover-up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was Jim Fodey acting on his own when he 
concealed the confession letter and the audit from the police, or 
was the minister aware that he was concealing information from 
the police? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has a bit of 
a track record in the House of asking questions by innuendo, 
and that’s clearly what’s happening here. Mr. Speaker, I repeat, 
that after meeting with the chief of staff, the decision was made 
to fire Ann Lord and to bring the matter to the attention of the 
Regina city police. Mr. Speaker, I was never given reason to 
believe that information was being withheld from the police in 
terms of the comments and reports that I had from the chief of 
staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also point out that this complete matter was 
reviewed in 1994. And as a matter of confirmed public record, 
that information was considered by the police in 1994, which 
included the letter from Ann Lord as well as the audited 
statement tabled in the House here last week, Mr. Speaker. And 
that was then considered by the police in its entirety again in 
1994, and no charges were laid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister said that 
members of the NDP’s administration committee also knew 

about the confession letter. Those same members would have 
also known about the audit. Any one of those members could 
have stepped forward and said this is wrong; we are taking this 
to the police. But that never happened. The article in November 
of 1992 says that that had not happened. Instead it must have 
been concealed information that was kept back from the police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, which NDP MLAs were on the administration 
committee in 1992? Which other NDP MLAs knew about the 
confession letter and the audit and did nothing? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to state the obvious, a special 
audit was requested by the New Democratic Party caucus from 
the auditor of record of caucus at that time. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that this was information that was well known by 
members of the admin committee. It was understood by 
members of the admin committee, and the reason for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I point out that there was . . . this entire 
matter was reviewed in 1994. And all of the files were turned 
over to the police, Mr. Speaker, at that time which did include 
as the chief has concerned . . . has confirmed, did include the 
letter from Ann Lord as well as the special audit and that 
subsequent to that time, Mr. Speaker, there were no charges laid 
and the matter was dealt with as a personnel matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, which other NDP MLAs knew 
about the confession letter? Which other NDP MLAs knew 
about the audit? And why did none of them take that 
information to the police? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, at this point I’m sorry I don’t 
have the list of members of the admin committee of caucus in 
my memory bank at the moment, Mr. Speaker. But again I point 
out, I point out that the sequence of events was the awareness of 
the letter from Ms. Lord, the direction that she be fired, that the 
matter be brought to the attention of the police. 
 
The belief of the caucus was that the advice of the police was to 
confirm the facts, and therefore a special audit was required, 
Mr. Speaker. And that in the course of the interviewing with 
caucus staff by the police on another matter, that the 
information of the circumstances with . . . related to the 
investigation to Ms. Lord’s conduct were communicated to the 
police at that time. That’s the best information that I have 
available to me, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



April 30, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has obtained a letter from NDP lawyer Wil 
Olive to NDP MLA Pat Lorjé, dated August 17, 1994. Olive 
was reporting on the events of 1992 after Ann Davey’s sudden 
disappearance. He says that on August 31, 1992, Jim Fodey 
found Ann Davey’s confession letter. Fodey, and I’m quoting 
now from this letter: “. . . reviewed this material, spoke to Glen 
Hagel and then called the writer” — the writer being of course 
Mr. Olive. At that point, the minister could have said we should 
call the police, but he didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did the minister do when he was advised of 
the confession letter dated August 31, 1992? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker — again to state the obvious 
— it’s not an unusual thing for the chief of staff to contact, to 
have contact with the counsel to the caucus when dealing with 
this sort of matter. Mr. Speaker, that is nothing different from 
what has been said before. 
 
I point out again that after meeting with the chief of staff at the 
end of August when he received the letter, the decision was 
made between the two of us that Ms. Lord would need to be 
fired and that the matter should be brought to the attention of 
the police. Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, the matter 
was communicated to the police, and there was a 
recommendation to proceed in the special audit in order to 
confirm the facts of the matter. That was done. All of that 
information was turned over to the police without doubt in 
1994, and again reviewed by the city police in 1994. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in his statement prior to 
question period, the minister said it was decided that Jim Fodey 
would bring the matter to the attention of the Regina city police. 
Mr. Speaker, there is no indication of this in Wil Olive’s letter. 
Why did the minister say that Fodey was directed to take it to 
the police, then that does not appear to be the case in this letter? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again I can only repeat the 
facts as I know them. And as I’ve already said, that the matter 
was brought to my attention by the chief of staff at the end of 
August. As a result of that discussion, the decision was made to 
fire Ann Lord and for the matter to be referred to the Regina 
city police. 
 
It is clear that in addition to that, the chief of staff consulted 
with the counsel to the caucus at the time. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there was an audit that was done subsequent to that. That audit 

was completed. And, Mr. Speaker, although . . . and it was my 
understanding at the time that the information related to the 
letter and to the audit was communicated to the Regina city 
police. That’s why I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, to hear Chief 
Johnston on Friday say that that was not the public record. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d point out again it was all reviewed in 1994. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in his letter of August 17, 1994, 
Wil Olive goes on to outline the NDP’s course of action. The 
course of action was to get an audit done, try to locate Ann 
Davey, and try to seize some of her assets. Nowhere in the 
course of action does it say, call the police. Nowhere does it 
say, turn the confession letter and the audit over to the police. It 
does say this, and I quote, “Jim Fodey would report the plan of 
action to his superiors.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, they all knew. They all knew about the cover-up. 
The minister knew. Other NDP MLAs knew. Maybe even the 
Premier knew. Mr. Speaker, who were Mr. Fodey’s superiors 
and why didn’t they go to the police? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, if this was a cover-up, it’s 
one of the strangest cover-ups in the history of law 
enforcement, Mr. Speaker. I point out again that in 1994 the 
entire file was turned over to the police — crystal clear. And 
subsequent to that time, after review, the police advised that 
charges were not pending. 
 
I point out as well, Mr. Speaker, that the counsel to the caucus, 
subsequent to the time that the member is referring to, 
attempted to get restitution, attempted to make contact with a 
lawyer for Ann Lord and to determine if restitution was 
available to the caucus, both of which were unsuccessful in 
their ability to be realized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Wil 
Olive’s letter says, and I quote, “Jim Fodey would report the 
plan of action to his superiors.” 
 
That plan of action did not include turning the confession letter 
over to the police. That plan of action did not include turning 
over the altered cheques to the police. And it did not include 
turning the audit over to the police. The minister wonders what 
the definition of cover-up is. That’s a pretty good definition, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — This was a plan to cover up. And Jim Fodey 
reported the action plan to his superiors. Who were Jim Fodey’s 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2007 

superiors? Which NDP MLA knew about this cover-up? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again, there was no cover-up. 
If there was a cover-up, it was the oddest cover-up I’ve ever 
seen because, as I point out, that the whole matter was referred 
once again in its entirety, with the assurance of . . . And this is 
publicly verified, Mr. Speaker, with the information that the 
member talks about — the letter from Ann Lord as well as the 
audit. Mr. Speaker, no charges came of that. 
 
And it should be known here, it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, 
that the victim, the victim in this case was the NDP caucus — 
the NDP caucus. And the plan of action involved a taking of a 
review of the financial statements, and with the special audit, 
Mr. Speaker, that was done. And to the best of my knowledge, 
that was information that was also shared with the police at that 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that for two 
years that member realized — should have realized — that that 
information was not passed on to police. He should have 
realized that. And he asked no questions. He did not do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they remember everything that went on in 1992 
very well. They just don’t want to talk about it. Any one of 
those members on the committee could have taken the 
confession letter to the police. Any one of those members could 
have taken the audit to the police. But not one of them did. 
 
On Friday night, Chief Cal Johnston said our investigators were 
asking the right questions; they just were not getting any 
answers. Any one of the NDP MLAs could have provided these 
answers. Instead they covered it up. And now they blame it all 
on their chief of staff — what a cowardly act from a 
government that has completely lost its way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: who knew about this fraud and 
why did they conceal it from the police? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — You know, Mr. Speaker, what’s rather odd 
is that the member addressed the question to the Premier when 
everyone can see . . . is not here in the Assembly, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member’s an 
experienced member; he ought to know he should not be 
referring to whether a member’s presence or absence in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The Leader of the Opposition says, where 
is he? Mr. Speaker, the Premier is on his way to a Premier’s 
meeting is where he is. And so I think that is rather obvious, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, here is that when the information 
became available, that the decision was made to fire Ann Lord, 
take the matter to the police. To the best of my knowledge, 
appropriate sharing of information with the police took place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this matter was crystal clear, in 
1994 the entire materials were made available to the police. 
That has been on the public record. No charges were 
subsequently laid, and the matter was dealt with as a personnel 
matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. Order. Order. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table a 
report to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 
financial statements of the Crown agencies for years ending in 
the 2006 calendar year, April. And it’s dated April 2007. It’s 
from the Office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,296 and 1,297. 
And I would ask leave to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order please. 
Once again I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, I also ask leave to table a 
correction, written question 1,278. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,296 and 1,297 have 
been submitted, and a correction to question to 1,278 has been 
submitted. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
request leave of the House to present a motion granting absence 
to two members. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to present a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 



April 30, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence to be granted to the members for 
Saskatoon Eastview and Martensville for Tuesday, May 1 
to Thursday, May 4, 2007, inclusive to attend the 
Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians outreach 
program in Yellowknife, Northwest Territories on behalf 
of this Assembly. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the member for Melfort: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 
Saskatoon Eastview and Martensville for Tuesday, May 1 
to Thursday, May 4, 2007, inclusive to attend the 
Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians outreach 
program in Yellowknife, Northwest Territories on behalf 
of this Assembly. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the Standing Committees on Human Services, as 
well as Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:28.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1432 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Clarification of Previous Statement 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Mintos Win Telus Cup 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1434 
 100th Anniversary of Early’s Farm & Garden Centre 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
 New Democratic Party Candidate Chosen in Lloydminster 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Maple Creek Wins Women’s Bantam B Championship 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Attitudes Toward Labour Policies in Saskatchewan 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Citizens’ Response to Mailer 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1436 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Misappropriation of Funds 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1440 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1441 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


