


















































Hansard: March 13, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 29A  TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 801 
 March 13, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two additional 
pages of petitions to present today on behalf of constituents 
from the community of Shaunavon. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office open in 
Shaunavon to provide full service to the community and 
surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages are part of a continuum of pages 
including 619 signatures. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m very pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about the lack of 
cell coverage in the Porcupine-Weekes area and the 
implications it has on their life. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
ensure that SaskTel provides cell coverage in 
Porcupine-Weekes area. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Weekes, from 
Saint-Front, and from Naicam. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to maintain full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is concerned that the Rosetown 
SaskPower office currently supplies personal service for 
SaskEnergy and SaskTel customers, making it a one-stop office 
for payments of all three Crown utilities. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition come from the community of 

Rosetown. And I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today to do with highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and Livelong access road. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Livelong . . . [inaudible] . . . and Turtleford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine who 
are very concerned about the condition of Highway No. 18. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary action to invest the needed money to 
repair and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a 
safe and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Gladmar and 
Minton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens who are opposed to possible 
reduction of health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
once again rise in this House and present a petition on behalf of 
frustrated parents from across Saskatchewan who for the past 
eight years have been lobbying the government for a dedicated 
children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures come from the constituencies of Saskatoon 
Fairview, Saskatoon Greystone, and Saskatoon Silver Springs. I 
so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again with a petition from citizens of rural Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned about the potential loss of lab services 
at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. As we know, this 
would present an undue hardship on residents and particularly 
seniors. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Lafleche. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with our highways 
in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Livelong 
and Loon Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition that is concerned with the condition of Highway 
368 starting 4 miles south of Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of 
St. Brieux that has seriously declined over the last number of 
years. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

immediate action and make the necessary repairs to 
Highway 368 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by the good people from Jansen, Lanigan, 
Humboldt, St. Brieux, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present yet another petition requesting an allocation of funding 
for a dedicated provincial children’s hospital within a hospital 
in Saskatchewan. I will read the prayer for relief, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the 
constituencies of Martensville, Saskatoon Eastview, and of 
course Saskatoon Southeast. I so present on their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number 
of questions that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

What was the total number of patient days spent in acute 
care beds by patients waiting for placement in a long-term 
care facility in Cypress Hills health region for the fiscal 
year 2002-2003? 
 

And instead of reading every one of these questions, it’s the 
same question for many different years. It’s for the years 
2002-2003, ’03-04, ’04-05, ’05-06, and ’06-07. And not only 
that, Mr. Speaker, it’s for every health district in the province. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have quite a 
number of questions but I will try to summarize them into 
groups. My first question, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

34 I’ll ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many violations 
under The Environmental Management and Protection 
Act, 2002 were there in the fiscal year 2002-03? And of 
these violations how many were made by Crown 
corporations, government departments, or government 
agencies? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have that same question for all the fiscal years 
from 2003 to the current fiscal year. 
 
My second set of questions, Mr. Speaker, are . . . that I’ll be 
asking on day 34, again: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what was the nature 
of the violations under The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, 2002 in the fiscal year 2002-03? 
 

And I have that same question for all the other fiscal years up to 
the current fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third question that I have and that I will ask on day 34 once 
again: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many 
prosecutions and penalties were made under The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 in 
the fiscal year of 2002-03? What were the offences and the 
penalties assessed for each offence? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for each of the succeeding 
fiscal years up to the current fiscal year. 
 
And my fourth series of questions, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll ask on 
day 34 once again: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what was the total 
amount of financial penalties paid under The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 in 
the fiscal year ’02-03? 
 

And I have similar questions for all the succeeding fiscal years 
up to the present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

How many new foster families were recruited in the year 
2006-2007 fiscal year? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

How many foster families were lost during the period 
2006-2007 fiscal year? 

 
I give notice that I shall ask the question: 
 

What is the net number of foster families for the year 
2006-2007 fiscal year? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day 34 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

What is the cost of the recently announced foster families 
recruitment program? 
 

I also have one other question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following questions: 
 

When will the Oyate Safe House be receiving new 
residents? 
 

[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: how much of the payment to Murdoch 
Carriere was for general damages? 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of these questions are for the same date and to 
the same minister, so I’ll just read the question: 
 

How much of the payment to Murdoch Carriere was 
regarded as taxable income? How much of the payment to 
Murdoch Carriere was regarded as taxable costs? In the 
settlement with Murdoch Carriere, which party asked for 
non-disclosure to be included in this settlement? Was the 
Carriere settlement made ex gratia or was it made with an 
admission of liability or guilt on behalf of the 
government? How much of the payment to Murdoch 
Carriere was characterized as pay in lieu of notice? 
 
What date was this settlement signed personally by 
Murdoch Carriere? What was the negotiated amount and 
the date of the cheque that was sent to Murdoch Carriere’s 
solicitor? What date were the minutes of settlement and 
settlement releases for the Murdoch Carriere settlement 
actually signed? What date were the funds forwarded to 
Carriere’s solicitor? What date was the settlement agreed 
to? What date was the settlement signed by the 
government? And what was the date recorded on the 
cheque that was given to Murdoch Carriere in settlement 
for this government? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly today I’d 
like to introduce my daughter, Jodi, my soon-to-be son-in-law, 
Guy Hodgins, my granddaughter, Lauren, and my grandson, 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

Austin. My grandson is in today. He’s doing a school project, 
and the subject that he’s decided to do his school project on is 
the legislature and of course me being a big part of that in his 
life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the time to thank you for 
having your picture taken with him this morning and the 
Sergeant-at-Arms. And going to be approaching the Premier 
later on to see if he would do the same. I would ask all members 
. . . and just remind them that he’s taking shorthand up there, so 
your behaviour later on in question period will be recorded in 
the Eston archives for perpetuity. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Annual Dinner 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday 
night TCU Place in Saskatoon was abuzz with excitement. 
More than 900 community leaders, business people, 
entrepreneurs, labour representatives, and student leaders and 
others turned out for the Sask Party’s annual Saskatoon leader’s 
dinner to hear our leader deliver an inspiring and dynamic 
speech about our province and the future of this province. He 
spoke about everything from the need to be part of the energy 
council — maybe the Industry minister was listening — to 
adopting a complete growth agenda. 
 
The dinner was the largest ever hosted by the Saskatchewan 
Party in Saskatoon, and it was attended by numerous dignitaries 
including many, many First Nations chiefs and the chief of the 
FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], Lawrence 
Joseph. Mr. Speaker, Ed Carleton, the defensive coordinator of 
the University of Saskatchewan Huskie football team 
introduced our leader, offering his own perspectives as only a 
former college roommate can. I would like to thank Barry 
Ghiglione and Judy Harwood and their organizing committees 
for doing a tremendous job. 
 
I should note, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] held a similar dinner in Saskatoon last November, but, 
Mr. Speaker, they would have had to take all of the political 
staff in this building and then some to even come close to 
having the same number of people in the audience. Less than 
500 turned out at the NDP dinner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader will again address a large crowd next 
month at the annual leader’s dinner here in Regina. Last year 
1,000 people came to listen to the Premier , more than double 
that came out to hear the NDP at their dinner. Mr. Speaker, we 
hope that this trend continues when the NDP get the courage to 
call the next election and the Saskatchewan Party will . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 

Wascana Plains. 
 

Rural Women’s Month 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every March in 
Saskatchewan we recognize Rural Women’s Month and for 
good reason. Women from rural areas of our province — just 
like my grandmothers, aunts, and cousins — have made and 
continue to make major contributions to Saskatchewan’s 
development, both economically and socially. In addition to 
running farms and businesses, rural women have always played 
an integral role in the development of health care, education, 
and social services. It’s important that we recognize their 
achievements, Mr. Speaker, and their continued efforts toward 
building strong futures for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rural Women’s Month is observed in conjunction 
with a variety of women’s groups in communities across the 
province. These events are organized in association with the 
United Nations’ International Women’s Day. Mr. Speaker, 
observing Rural Women’s Month might not be a reality if not 
for the diligence of groups like the Saskatchewan Women’s 
Institutes, the Partners for Rural Family Support of Humboldt, 
rural women’s issues committee of Saskatchewan, and the 
Saskatchewan representative to the women’s advisory 
committee of the National Farmers Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join with me in thanking 
these groups and in thanking rural women for their invaluable 
contributions to the Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Community Hero Award 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a long 
time supporter of conservation in Saskatchewan was recently 
recognized for his dedication to wildlife. Frank Mosley of 
Estevan was presented with a Community Hero Award by 
Alliance Pipeline for 2005-2006. This award is presented to one 
person in each province and state in which Alliance Pipeline is 
involved. Of course Frank didn’t believe he was worthy of this 
award, and he just wished his wife, Maggie, was here to share 
his joy. Unfortunately Maggie passed away last fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Frank is one of the original members of the 
Estevan Wildlife Federation which was established in 1945. 
And Frank’s still going strong. Time will not permit me to 
mention all his accomplishments, but this award does include a 
$2,500 cheque which Frank, in his generosity, donated to the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating and 
thanking Frank for his contributions to our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

Accomplished Prince Albert Resident 
Receives Prestigious Awards 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased today to congratulate one of my constituents on two 
outstanding accomplishments. In March 2005, Dr. Lalita 
Malhotra became the second inductee into the Prince Albert 
Women’s Hall of Fame. And in April ’06, Mr. Speaker, 
Governor General Michaëlle Jean granted her one of the most 
prestigious awards in our country, an appointment to the Order 
of Canada. 
 
At the age of 16, Lalita’s father had told her that she would 
some day be a doctor. And just eight short years later she 
received a degree in medicine from her native New Delhi. In 
1975 Dr. Malhotra’s husband, with whom she had attended 
school in London, was offered a job in Prince Albert, where the 
two relocated along with a young daughter. In 1976 Lalita 
became Prince Albert’s first female obstetrician. 
 
Three decades have passed since she moved to Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and she has made great contribution to the lives of 
people in this province. Dr. Malhotra has delivered more babies 
than anyone else in the province, including two daughters and a 
son of her own — all of which have now received medical 
degrees. She has also assisted in establishing a women’s 
wellness centre. And if this wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, Lalita 
also frequently talks at local schools about the importance of 
education. Mr. Speaker, I want all of the members to join with 
me in congratulating a great citizen of our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Autism Research Breakthrough 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on February 19 the front page of 
The Globe and Mail contained an article regarding a 
breakthrough in autism research. A DNA [deoxyribonucleic 
acid] test has been developed that will identify autistic children 
as soon as they are born or possibly even before they are born. 
Currently autism is diagnosed by psychological tests performed 
on children as they age and after they have exhibited symptoms 
of autism spectrum disorder. 
 
This valuable research was done by Peter Szatmari and Steve 
Scherer at the McMaster Children’s Hospital in Hamilton. 
While this research does not provide a cure for autism spectrum 
disorder, it does allow families to be able to identify whether 
they are likely to have autistic children and, more importantly, 
to be able to start intervention and treatment at the earliest 
possible time. It is well known that children with autism 
spectrum disorder benefit the most from early diagnosis and 
early treatment — the earlier the treatment, the greater benefit 
for the child and the more likelihood that the child will grow 
into a functional adult. 
 
Autism affects more than 1 in 165 children. It is important that 
we as a province ensure that adequate resources are provided so 
that treatment can be initiated early. As a society, we owe it to 
these children to provide them with resources so that schools, 

families, and other support agencies can provide full and 
appropriate treatment. 
 
I call on all members to provide continuing and increased 
support for autism research and autism treatment and support 
for the families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Plans for the Province 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you may 
recall that the Saskatchewan Party members claimed to have a 
plan when it comes to running the economy of this province. 
They call it Enterprise Saskatchewan. This plan is basically an 
acknowledgement that they can’t run an economy. Instead 
they’ll have to hire a bunch of smart people to do it for them. 
Those are the basics of Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
But why stop there? 
 
We know that they have a plan when it comes to Crown 
corporations. They call it privatize Saskatchewan. They also 
have a plan for denying their histories with the Devine 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s called alibi Saskatchewan. What 
about our province’s most important issue, health care? Well of 
course they have a plan for that too, Mr. Speaker. They find 
isolated, however tragic, cases and use them to discredit the 
entire system. That one is called sensationalize Saskatchewan. 
 
The Sask Party members always promise to spend, spend, and 
spend if they ever form government, and that is also part of a 
plan, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to suggest the name capsize 
Saskatchewan. Of course, the Leader of the Opposition even 
has a policy development plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s called 
improvise Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Public Reaction to Government’s Settlement 
with Murdoch Carriere 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week our 
office received a letter from Ms. Audrey Tate of Mossbank. 
And I would like to share this letter with the Assembly as I 
think it echoes the general public sentiments on this very 
important issue. To quote Ms. Tate: 

 
I am really upset and angry at our government for paying 
Mr. Murdoch Carriere an out of court settlement of 
$275,000. 
 
What have you taught our young people? In my opinion 
you have taught them that females are not worth much, 
and no does not mean no. You have taught them that 
males can do whatever they want and going to court 
results in a reward. 
 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

This man was awarded two and a half times what the 
women were awarded as a group. The women were the 
victims, then victimized again. There is no excuse for this 
discrimination. This is totally disgusting. 
 
What would you have done if these women had been your 
daughters, sisters, wives, etc.? I really believe the outcome 
would have been totally different. 
 
Yours truly, 
Ms. Audrey Tate 

 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Tate expresses very well the sentiments of 
most people across Saskatchewan. Listen to any talk show on 
the issue, stop and listen to the conversation in any coffee shop 
or mall or any place people are gathering, and people in general 
and women in particular find the NDP government’s action to 
quote Ms. Tate, “totally disgusting.” Mr. Premier, apologize 
and do the right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Population Statistics and Policies 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The proud people of 
Saskatchewan woke up this morning to some disturbing news. 
Since the current Premier took office, 10,776 people have 
disappeared from our great province. This tired, old NDP 
government has driven Saskatchewan’s population down to its 
lowest point since the 1976 census — and this in the middle of 
an unprecedented economic boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why is this tired, old NDP 
government continuing to lose people in the middle of a boom? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s typical 
of the official opposition that they’re quoting outdated numbers. 
Mr. Speaker, the member is referring to a preliminary census 
estimate which is usually off by tens of thousands as in 2001. 
But these are numbers that came out last spring, Mr. Speaker. 
But that member should be aware that a revised population 
figure was already released, Mr. Speaker, by Statistics Canada 
for October 1, 2006 — which showed what? It showed, Mr. 
Speaker, the most current figure as of October 1 was 986,000 
people, not 968 as the figure this morning. It showed, Mr. 
Speaker, the population was rising in the last two quarters. It 
showed, Mr. Speaker, 15,000 people moving to Saskatchewan 
in the first three quarters. That’s what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, there are only two provinces in 
Canada that are not seeing population increases during this 
period, that is Saskatchewan and Newfoundland. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is not the league that we should be playing in. This 
province has so much potential and so many resources. 
Saskatchewan should be doing far better than it is under this 
Premier and this tired, old NDP government. Mr. Speaker, even 
in Manitoba the population is up by 28,000 people over the 
same period. Mr. Speaker, why are there fewer people right 
now in Saskatchewan than at any time in the last 30 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The member refers to tired and old. I 
won’t, I won’t talk about the US [United States] congressman 
that met with the member and I in Washington, and asked the 
member when he was going to retire. I won’t, I shouldn’t 
mention that, Mr. Speaker. But the member’s quoting figures 
from a year ago, Mr. Speaker. The member should be aware 
before he retires that, as I said, 15,000 people moved from other 
provinces to Saskatchewan last year, Mr. Speaker. Immigration 
was up 26 per cent and, Mr. Speaker, 20,000 more people are 
working in Saskatchewan today than a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So that member, before he retires, can 
spread his doom and gloom far and wide as much as he wants. 
But what’s happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell 
you what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I think the member’s time has elapsed. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, let me assure you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The member 
for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me assure you 
and the people of Saskatchewan that that minister will be retired 
many years before I will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I recently heard a story on the 
radio about government employees being asked by this 
government to identify people who have moved back to the 
province so the Premier could name them in the Assembly. 
Well that won’t be a problem for Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
According to Statistics Canada, there is one extra person in the 
city compared to five years ago. And if the Premier, if the 
Premier had really moved to Saskatoon, there would be no new 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why can’t this tired, old NDP government come 
up with a plan that brings even more than one new person to the 
city of Moose Jaw in five years? Why can’t they come up with 
a plan that brings so many it will be impossible for the Premier 
to name them all in the Assembly? 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think members of the 
Legislative Assembly with the maturity of that member should 
be quoting figures from a year ago. I think he should be more 
up to date than that. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that people in Saskatchewan know 
that the economy is on a roll. I was talking to a business person 
from southern Saskatchewan today, and do you know what he 
said to me, Mr. Speaker? He said this, he said his people that he 
was hiring were having trouble finding houses to rent or buy in 
Assiniboia because so many people were moving there. I had a 
member from the Swift Current City Council — who’s very 
well-known to the Leader of the Opposition by the way — tell 
me that there was no more industrial land in Swift Current. I 
had the mayor of Battleford tell me there was very little land 
left in the city of Battleford. 
 
And these people want to convince the people of Saskatchewan 
that our economy isn’t working? People aren’t going to buy it, 
Mr. Speaker. There are 20,000 people more working here than a 
year ago. We’re on a roll and we’re going to keep rolling right 
along with that opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I’m not surprised to hear that population is 
falling in rural Saskatchewan. The roads are a disaster. The 
education portion of property tax is higher than in any other 
jurisdiction in the country. Schools are closing and every 
community that still has a hospital . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. It seems that I am 
able to hear almost everybody else except the person who’s 
been designated to speak. And I would ask members . . . I 
would ask members to . . . Thank you. Now the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — And every community that still has a hospital 
has to keep a garbage bag handy to put over the sign on the 
highway when there’s no doctor in town to treat people. Mr. 
Speaker, this government is sitting on record revenues — a pile 
of money. Why isn’t this Premier and this tired, old NDP 
government sharing some of that revenue with rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out 
to the member that if what he is saying is true that there are 
fewer people in Saskatchewan, notwithstanding what the latest 
report from Statistics Canada says, I’d like to know why it is 
that they report in the Leader-Post in February that 
Saskatchewan will lead the nation in housing sales in 2007 
whereas the rest of the country is declining. 

If we’re building these houses, Mr. Speaker, and we’re leading 
the nation in building these houses, who’s going to live in the 
houses, Mr. Speaker? I think it’s going to be people. It’s going 
to be people that are working in Saskatchewan, people that are 
moving to Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think that member should 
stop scaring people away with his doom and gloom because this 
province, Mr. Speaker, has a great future and the people know 
it. And those people should get on board with this government’s 
building the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Complainants’ Right to Speak About Carriere Case 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister said that 
there was no gag order on Murdoch Carriere’s victims. She said 
there was nothing to prevent them from talking about the 
harassment incidents and how this government has treated 
them. So I want to give her one more chance to clarify this 
issue. Were these women ever told by anyone in their 
department or in government that they were not to talk about 
the harassment they suffered at the hands of Murdoch Carriere 
or the settlement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday we heard the members of the opposition tell 
us that there was a hard drive that had been erased. Turns out 
not to be true. Then they said that the complainants had been 
given a gag order and it turns out not to be true. Then they had 
their House Leader stand up and say that as a result of 
comments I had made, this has impeded their ability to be 
members of the opposition. Turns out not to be true, Mr. 
Speaker. Every allegation that they’ve made in the last couple 
of days has turned out not to be true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on February 12, 2003, on the 
same day that he sent out a memo transferring and praising 
Murdoch Carriere, Deputy Minister Terry Scott sent another 
memo to Carriere’s victims, and I quote: 
 

I want to specifically caution you to treat this decision and 
any information related to this matter with strict and 
absolute confidentiality. As a complainant you will have 
been provided with a copy of the investigator’s report and 
the information it contains must remain confidential. You 
have a very significant personal responsibility to ensure 
that this requirement is satisfied. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it sounds a lot like a gag order to me. How can the 
minister say that there was no gag order on these women? 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, the 
settlement with the women occurred in the spring of 2004. 
There was no gag order around the settlement and that was the 
question that that member was clearly asking in the legislature, 
was there a gag order with the settlement? And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have said very clearly that there was absolutely no gag 
order. 
 
Now I wanted to also make this point, that when allegations of 
harassment come to the attention of officials in department, 
there are privacy issues around harassment allegations, Mr. 
Speaker. And as we all know, the report that was drawn up by 
the investigator, Mr. Gillies, did become a public document in 
the spring of 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, these women all received this 
memo from their deputy minister. He told them to keep their 
mouths shut. They are working under the assumption that they 
are not to speak about this, that their harassment complaints 
were to be treated with strict and absolute confidentiality. Has 
the NDP government ever told these women specifically that 
they are free to talk about this and, if so, when were they told? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have clearly indicated 
that people who have settled with the Government of 
Saskatchewan regarding the Murdoch Carriere case are free to 
speak about their settlement. We have clearly said that. The 
members opposite have asked in this House on several 
occasions, was there a gag order around the settlement? And we 
have clearly said, yesterday and today, that there was absolutely 
no gag order regarding their settlement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, in today’s paper, the minister is 
quoted as saying, and I quote: 
 

. . . the women “are free to comment on the events that 
have taken place in the last several days,” . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, these women weren’t harassed in the last several 
days. These incidents took place over the past decade. And as 
far as they know, they are still bound by the order imposed by 
Terry Scott in 2003. They have never been told otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister guarantee that these women will 
not be fired or reprimanded in any way if they choose to speak 
now? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can guarantee to the women if they 
choose to speak, they will not be fired. I have said that in the 
past, I said it yesterday, and I will say it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Disciplinary Action Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
know, to deflect from the NDP’s bungling of the Murdoch 
Carriere case, they chose to make Terry Scott the scapegoat and 
give him nearly $200,000 as a severance package. 
 
But Terry Scott didn’t make this decision on his own. Who else 
approved the original decision to keep Murdoch Carriere on the 
payroll, move him to Regina for three days a week, and impose 
the gag order at that time on his victims? Who approved that 
decision? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The opposition continues to imply, 
continues to imply that members of the elected had something 
to do with the Murdoch Carriere case and what took place. I 
want to say to the opposition very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is a differentiation between the elected and the public 
service. 
 
The elected do not involve themselves in hiring and firing and 
discipline. I have sat with the members opposite where they 
have said on many occasions that the elected are the political 
masters, that we master all of the public service. And I want to 
say again to the members opposite, who really do want to be 
government — and I clearly remember the 1980s when Grant 
Devine was around — there is a clear distinction between the 
elected and the public service, and we do not involve ourselves 
in the day-to-day discipline, hiring, and firing of a professional 
public service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s obvious the NDP don’t want to answer this question. Well 
that’s quite okay because Justice Laing answered that question 
in a ruling he made on November 22, 2005. Justice Laing said 
this, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Scott testified that he had decided on the discipline to 
be imposed on Mr. Carriere . . . before doing so he had 
discussions with a lawyer in the Civil Branch of Justice, 
the head of the Public Service Commission, and with his 
boss, the Deputy Minister to the Premier. 
 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

[14:15] 
 
He said, “. . . everyone he consulted approved of the discipline 
. . .” from this document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister to the Premier was one of the 
people who approved the original decision not to fire Murdoch 
Carriere. Did he ever discuss this decision with the Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have clearly 
said on numerous occasions that we need to understand . . . I 
know the members opposite don’t understand this — clearly 
they don’t — because they come from a background, a history 
of Grant Devine, where ministers in the Devine government 
regularly gave the order, fire so-and-so, get rid of so-and-so. 
And in fact the former leader of the opposition had his hit list 
going into the 2003 election campaign where literally hundreds 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. Order 
please. The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And in fact, Mr. Speaker, prior to the 
last election campaign, the leader of opposition had a hit list 
where literally hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of people 
were on a hit list that they were somehow going to fire. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we came to government in 1991 and we said to 
ourselves, never again, never again would we have to witness 
what happened to the public service in the 1980s. And the way 
the system works now is the professional public service — they 
discipline, they hire, they fire. And the politicians do the public 
policy work, as it should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple question. Did 
the deputy minister to the Premier discuss this decision with the 
Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of the events 
that led up to the Murdoch Carriere dismissal where the then 
minister of the public service recommended to the Premier that 
Mr. Carriere be fired, we have introduced a new 
anti-harassment policy. And what does it do? It says that no 
reported incident of harassment will go unaddressed, and it now 
says that deputy ministers, who are the permanent heads, who 
are the only people that can fire, are required to consult with a 
panel of peers to determine discipline as stated in the human 
resource manual which, Mr. Speaker, I tabled with the 
legislature yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
really hard to believe that the deputy minister would never have 
briefed the Premier about this situation in 2003. 
 
I remember about a year ago the Premier making a big point 
about how the Leader of the Opposition should have been 
aware of everything going on in the previous governments. The 
Premier said, and I quote, “I am [pretty] sure that anybody that 
works in my office . . . ” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said this, and I 
quote — and I daresay that the member from Moose Jaw won’t 
argue with the quote from the Premier — it says, “I am [pretty] 
sure that anybody that works in my office has a pretty good idea 
what goes on in my office.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, was the Premier, the Environment minister, or any 
member of the cabinet made aware of the initial disciplinary 
action on Murdoch Carriere prior to the story becoming public 
on April 1, 2003? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly 
understand how the members of the opposition don’t 
understand the notion of separation between the elected and a 
professional public service because they come from a history, 
they come from a history where the ministers and the premier of 
the day were directing certain civil servants to be hired — hired, 
Mr. Speaker, and fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we made a decision when we came to office in 1991 that 
we were going to go back to the days where we had a 
professional public service, where the ministers sitting on the 
front bench did not instruct their deputy ministers to fire 
so-and-so and hire so-and-so. And what do we have now today, 
Mr. Speaker? We have a professional public service. And if 
those folks were in charge, we know where they’d go. They 
would be directing who should be hired and who should be 
fired. And we think the public of Saskatchewan needs to know 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, all of this just 
doesn’t pass the smell test. Let’s take a look at this. Murdoch 
Carriere was the director of fire management and forest 
protection for the province. In February 2003, just as the 
province was heading into a forest fire season, he was suddenly 
moved out of his job, suspended for three months, and 
transferred to Regina. Didn’t someone in cabinet ask why? 
Didn’t the minister of the Environment at that time ask why? 
Mr. Speaker, what did the deputy minister tell the Premier? 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

What did the deputy minister tell the Environment minister 
about why Murdoch Carriere was being transferred? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite just 
don’t get it, and that member in particular doesn’t get it. And 
he’s the former Labour critic, Mr. Speaker. He’s the former 
Labour critic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the way the system works, we have this thing 
called The Public Service Act, which is a piece of legislation 
passed by this legislature. The Public Service Act clearly 
distinguishes between the elected and their role, and a 
professional public service. The professional public service, 
they discipline, they evaluate, they hire, they fire. That’s their 
job, Mr. Speaker. Now I know the micromanagers over there, 
because that’s certainly what they did in the 1980s, they would 
be involved in the discipline, the hiring, the firing, because 
that’s what Grant Devine’s government did in the 1980s. 
 
And I know that they’ll probably say, oh, we’re not 
Conservatives, but when a member of the public was introduced 
as a former Progressive Conservative candidate, what do the 
members of the opposition do yesterday? They applauded 
loudly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well Mr. Speaker, it’s evident by the 
comments of individuals in the papers, on radio, and in 
television that the people of Saskatchewan get it about this 
government. Mr. Speaker, Justice Laing goes on to say the 
following, and I quote: 
 

In the period which followed Mr. Scott had brief telephone 
conversations with the Premier, the Premier’s Deputy 
Minister, and the Minister in charge of the Public Service 
Commission. Minister Crofford determined the discipline 
which had been administered [to be] insufficient, and the 
Deputy Minister to the Premier communicated that to Mr. 
Scott. 
 

Isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker? It wasn’t the Premier who 
stepped in to fire Murdoch Carriere. It was the former minister 
for the Public Service Commission. Why didn’t the Premier 
take any action? Was it because he had been aware of the 
original decision regarding Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Why is it that the members opposite 
clearly don’t understand the process of what I’ve been trying to 
say in the House? In The Public Service Act the only person 
that can fire an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan 
is the permanent head. Mr. Scott was the permanent head. Mr. 

Scott had meted out his discipline which I’ve said in a letter to 
that member opposite but obviously he doesn’t understand it. 
 
And when the minister of the Public Service Commission 
became aware of the seriousness of the situation, she made a 
decision to recommend to the Premier that Mr. Carriere be 
fired. The Premier gave that instruction, Mr. Speaker. It was 
highly unusual. And, Mr. Speaker, guess what? That’s why we 
have had to settle with Mr. Carriere because we did not follow 
the process or due process, Mr. Speaker. That is obvious. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 45, The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 45, The Agricultural 
Societies Repeal Act be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next sitting of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 46, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 46, The Crown Minerals 
Amendment Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 47, The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 
2007 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 
Tax Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48, The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 48, The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 24 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 
de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 
boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this particular Act makes a number of changes dealing with 
both alcohol consumption and with gaming in this province, 
both of which affect a large number of people in their choices of 
entertainment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in making some of these changes though, which 
are in some cases fairly broad especially when you take a look 
at some of the changes and the impact that the changes to 
alcohol consumption will take, Mr. Speaker, they will have a 
significant impact on a good many people in this province. 
 
What this piece of legislation does is it’s a tie-in to what the 
government previously did in banning the consumption of 
alcohol in the provincial parks and provincial-controlled sites 
on long weekends. This extends that particular ban to regional 
parks now when the regional park authorities pass a bylaw 
implementing a ban on long weekends. 
 
I guess one of the questions that need to be asked and that I 
have been contacted by interested groups that they want asked 
is, what kind of consultation took place with those people that 
operate either in the provincial parks or surrounding the 
provincial parks and the regional parks with the implementation 
of this particular piece of legislation? 
 
While we support the concept of banning the alcohol on 
individual long weekends, Mr. Speaker, I think the government 
needed to consult with and talk to the people who operate both 
in the provincial parks such as White Bear, Duck Mountain, and 
there’s a number of other provincial parks, Mr. Speaker, that 
have commercial interests operating within them. These are 
simply not wilderness parks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
In particular in the case of Moose Mountain, there’s a village 
which is not a part of the provincial park itself that resides 
within the provincial park which is excluded from the operation 
of the provincial park. And a ban on liquor on a long weekend 
in the provincial park side can have a very serious impact on the 
commercial interests operating in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

Now Moose Mountain Provincial Park was one of the areas 
where there was problems in the past, but the park officials, the 
second year, took steps to mitigate the occurrences of disorderly 
behaviour and destruction within the park by making changes. 
And those changes that they implemented were significant and 
had a major impact. Unfortunately other parts of the province at 
the same time that year, the second year, had difficulties as 
well, and that’s when the government decided to implement a 
complete ban, particularly on the Victoria Day weekend, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But if you remember the news reports that came out last year 
after the long weekend, a good many of the provincial parks 
and the regional parks that implemented the alcohol bans had 
very few people actually visiting them. One can certainly 
understand that when a family goes to a provincial park for a 
recreational visit on a weekend . . . and people have more of an 
opportunity to do that during a long weekend because they have 
three days away from work. They can travel the distances that 
are necessary to visit the beautiful provincial parks or regional 
parks that we have in this province. They’re more apt to be 
there on the weekends. They don’t want their recreation 
disrupted. They don’t want to deal with some of the issues that 
have arisen when they have their families there with them at the 
provincial park. 
 
So I think there is a benefit to doing this, but there also needed 
to be and continues to be a need to consult with the operators, 
the commercial operators, in and around the parks on how this 
can be dealt with in a manner that provides the protection and 
safety both for the individuals visiting the park and park 
facilities as well as providing the entertainment opportunities 
that the people of Saskatchewan want to be able to exercise in 
the provincial parks. 
 
So with this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it gives the 
regional parks the authority to issue an alcohol ban. So I guess 
the question has to arise, under what authority then did those 
regional parks ban alcohol last year? Did they have the legal 
authority to do so at that particular point in time? Because it’s 
my belief, Mr. Speaker, that there were a number of regional 
parks that did implement alcohol bans, and yet the government 
is now bringing forward legislation to allow them to do so 
which would seem to indicate that the legal authority to 
implement that kind of a ban was not in place at that particular 
point in time. So I think the minister needs to be prepared to 
answer that question: under what authority did the regional park 
authorities have in banning alcohol last year? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the issues, is the issue of banning 
alcohol in the regional parks that will be taking place on 
specified long weekends, determinations to be made by the 
provincial park authorities and/or by the regional park 
authorities as they see fit. My suspicion is, Mr. Speaker, that 
you’re going to see this happen in the main on the long 
weekend in May. And that will be part of the reason why this 
Bill is brought forward — to give those regional parks the 
authority to make those kind of implementations. 
 
The second part of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, deals with the gaming 
side of liquor and gaming. And it allows for gaming authorities 
to give grants to entities that are licensed by either Liquor and 
Gaming, the Saskatchewan gaming . . . Liquor and Gaming 

and/or by First Nations gaming authorities, Mr. Speaker, as 
licensing authorities under the Criminal Code. 
 
I guess the question is, is what are these grants for? Why are 
these grants being transferred from Liquor and Gaming to these 
licensed authorities? And some of them are listed here: 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation, Royal University Hospital, St. 
Paul’s Hospital, and the Saskatoon City Hospital. 
 
But it also allows for others. Now in the minister’s comments 
on this particular issue, she talked about, you know, 4-H clubs, 
the local rink, the swimming pool committee, and all of those 
kind. But, Mr. Speaker, it talks about licensed authorities that 
have the ability to receive these grants. So does that mean that 
the local 4-H club has to be licensed by Liquor and Gaming 
before they could receive some of these grants? And the 
government is talking about providing 25-cent dollars, so for 
every dollar that the local swim club would raise, the 
government would give them a matching grant of 25 per cent. 
 
Now that’s a story that I’ve heard a number of times from this 
government going back to their initial implementation of VLTs 
[video lottery terminal] in this province and the licensing of 
casinos — the more Las Vegas-style casinos that we have seen 
rather than the agricultural society casinos that were in place 
previous to this. We had the initial promise of $10 million. 
Then it was going to be some money for the communities and 
money going to the 911 implementation, and finally those 
promises all disappeared with no money actually being 
transferred to the communities. Now we’re seeing the 
government come forward just before an election with a 
promise of 25 cents on the dollar to those that are approved by 
Liquor and Gaming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, so these are promises that are being made, but you 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, in light of the history on this just how 
well those promises will be kept. So, Mr. Speaker, I think 
there’s a number of questions here on this particular piece of 
legislation that needs to be answered by the minister when they 
come forward. 
 
One of the issues though that is interesting about this particular 
piece of legislation is it’s one of the Acts that have been 
translated, Mr. Speaker, and this is Francophone Week. It’s one 
of the Acts that have been translated into French as well as 
English and presented to this House in that manner. So if you 
look on the left-hand page of a Bill, you see the English 
version. If you look on the right-hand side of the page, you see 
the French version. 
 
And that works very well, Mr. Speaker, except in this particular 
Bill. It seems that when you get down to section 7 in this Bill 
and you look at the translation . . . and I’ll read it on the English 
side, and then I’ll read it on the French side, Mr. Speaker. And 
it says, “Regional park authority may make park . . . [laws].” 
and it goes on to list it. If you look on the French side, it says, 
“Regional park authority may make park bylaws.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no translation there. The rest of the 
Bill is in English. There is no French. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s department clearly is in error here. They have failed 
to do the proper translation of this particular piece of 
legislation. And there are two clauses, basically a full page part 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

of this Act, that they have failed to meet the requirements of the 
translation, Mr. Speaker, that has been presented wrong. And 
the minister is either going to have to go back to the drawing 
board and redo this properly or come into the House with a 
House amendment to correct this particular piece of legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is some need to continue to 
look at this and to look at what the government is doing on this 
particular piece of legislation, and that the stakeholders and my 
colleagues both need the opportunity to consider this a bit 
further, so I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on second reading of Bill No. 24 do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 15 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to speak to Bill No. 15, The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2006. This Bill allows the corporation to lend 
monies as part of an agreement or an exchange for securities. It 
is attempting to provide for, in legislation, the provision to lend 
monies and not have to utilize debentures as was done in the 
past. This really is legislation that is following the present 
practice to legislatively allow the practice of the day. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, at this point we do not anticipate 
problems with this legislation, and to facilitate the process, I 
would move that this Bill be moved to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 15, The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that Bill No. 15 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 15 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 15 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 13 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the Assembly today to speak on Bill 13, An Act to amend The 
SaskEnergy Act. Mr. Speaker, and at the outset I will say that 
I’ve had a look at the Bill. I find no errors with it as far as I can 
see. I’m not sure if the member for Cannington has anything to 
add at a later time, but perhaps he’ll have comments later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act as I read it does several things. By 
amending The SaskEnergy Act, it will allow for the number of 
board members on the SaskEnergy Board to increase from 10 to 
12. It will permit the Crown corporation, SaskEnergy, to enter 
into business of transporting energy-related products and 
by-products other than natural gas. And it provides the 
corporation with the ability to, in certain situations, to reroute 
pipelines where there’s encroachments or essentially gives the 
corporation additional options to deal with landowners if there’s 
an encroachment with a building that’s been built on a line or 
running over top of the line. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll try to deal 
with each one of these at a time, beginning with the board 
members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment to The SaskEnergy Act included 
in Bill 13 increases the board members, the maximum number 
of board members, to 12. And I understand that this Bill will or 
this change will bring SaskEnergy in line with SaskTel and 
SaskPower which have somewhere in the neighbourhood of 11 
or 12 board members each. And certainly there’s a great deal of 
responsibility to being a board member. There’s legal 
obligations to oversee the operations of the corporation. 
 
I, myself, Mr. Speaker, am a member of a board back home, 
and it’s a great opportunity for me to serve on a board in my 
community. And we’re nowhere near the size of a company like 
SaskEnergy. It’s a community-based organization, and in our 
board meetings we deal with thousands of dollars of decisions, 
not millions like SaskEnergy. And so certainly there’s a fair 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

amount of work and obligation to be a board member of a 
Crown corporation. And certainly the latest annual report of 
SaskEnergy outlines the work that the board does and also 
includes, I found quite interesting, the attendance of board 
members. And it’s very good to see that nearly all the board 
members attended all the board meetings in that calendar year. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But there are questions of why there is a need to increase the 
number of board members. Perhaps there’s increased workload 
on the board and other responsibilities that I think members of 
the Assembly and members of the committee will need to be 
made aware of. Perhaps it was just an attempt to keep up with 
SaskTel or SaskPower as they have 11 and 12 board members 
on their boards. So I’m curious to see if it was a 
recommendation from Crown Investments Corporation or 
perhaps from the board themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t say very much about the new section 36 
because I believe there’s probably some positive changes in that 
part of the amendment that deal with safety measures and 
providing options to the corporation for situations that might 
warrant moving buildings or moving pipeline. While these 
amendments allow the corporation options of removing private 
buildings at the owner’s expense, I trust that the corporation 
will put in place or has already put in place policies that ensure 
there’s fair consultation before there are any modifications to 
buildings or to pipelines that will result in a bill for that private 
individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move to my final comments on clause 4 
of Bill 13. These are probably the most contentious parts of this 
Bill. It allows SaskEnergy to get into the business of 
transporting energy-related products and by-products other than 
gas through their pipeline facilities. And also allows the 
corporation the ability to construct and operate, I imagine, I 
suppose, new pipeline facilities for this purpose. I think that 
would have to be clarified. The minister in his comments, in his 
second reading comments, and in the information provided to 
the members of this legislature suggests that new products 
could include carbon dioxide, hydrogen, ethanol, and other 
products. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have some questions and some concerns 
that this would mean that SaskEnergy will now be moving into 
business that is already conducted by private business. And I’m 
not sure that that sends the right signals to the business 
community and others that are looking to invest in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Perhaps I can understand that SaskEnergy is looking to recoup 
some lost revenue by the fact that people of Saskatchewan are 
becoming more conscious with their energy decisions. And I’m 
not sure if this is the right way of giving the corporation the 
avenue to recoup some lost revenue. Quite frankly it’s a good 
thing that people are becoming more conscious with how they 
use energy, and I don’t really think the people of this province 
should be penalized with the increasing rates just to make up for 
being conscious citizens. 
 
And so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I know other members of this 
Assembly will have comments on this before we move it to 

committee. So I’d now move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy that debate of Bill No. 13, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006, second reading be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 7 — The Public 
Health Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
rise today on the second reading of Bill No. 7, The Public 
Health Amendment Act. This Bill, certainly it talks about 
adding regulatory powers to public health inspectors and also 
the reporting of public health inspections, allows the public 
disclosure regarding the inspection of eating establishments and 
the related enforcement of actions such as orders or convictions. 
 
This Bill, you know, it’s only one page long. It’s a short Bill but 
it has some significant, it really does talk about some significant 
changes that affect each and every one of us in this province, 
whether you’re an owner of a restaurant or whether you eat in a 
restaurant, which we all do at one point or another. 
 
And so it talks about a huge industry in our province. All you 
have to do is drive up and down pretty much the main street of 
any small town in Saskatchewan and, kind of, the local coffee 
shop is the place to meet, but it’s also a restaurant that will be 
impacted by this piece of legislation. You know, whether it’s in 
the larger cities where there’s a number of establishments where 
people can choose where they’re going to go out for supper or 
lunch, or in the smaller communities where there may only be 
one, it does have an impact. 
 
And what this Bill does, give the health inspectors the ability to 
inspect and gives them a few more powers in the inspection, but 
more importantly . . . And it was interesting because this Bill 
was first read on November 8 and that same day the minister 
put out a news release talking about the Bill and the need for the 
Bill. And I was interested in reading this news release. 
 

Once the legislation is passed, Saskatchewan Health will 
begin consulting with health regions, restaurateurs, 
industry and others with interest in this issue . . . 

 
I’m interested in that and, you know, not having been on the 
government side, but that there would be no consultation prior 
to this Bill being introduced or read. Because the news release 
says that once the Bill is passed then they’ll start consulting 
with restaurateurs as far as the impact. I guess maybe they’re 
leaving it up to us and that’s our job then is to consult with 
restaurateurs, the general public, anybody in the food serving 



March 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

industry as to what the impact of this Bill will have on their 
business. Because most definitely it will have an impact. 
 
I don’t think, and talking to the restaurant association of the 
province and a number of . . . I talked to the association but I’ve 
also talked to a number of restaurant owners as members in the 
opposition representing all of rural Saskatchewan and so many 
of the small towns that have local cafés or that type of thing, a 
restaurant in their community. Most of us I think would know 
the owners of most of those restaurants. And we stop in and 
quite often they have talked about this piece of legislation and 
there is definitely some concern with it. 
 
And the concern comes from what will be reported and how it 
will be reported. And the minister talks about this in his news 
release that after the Bill is passed then they’ll consult with the 
restaurateurs and others in the food industry regarding: 
 

. . . the type of information [that is] to be made available 
and the most appropriate way to share this with the public. 
 

And those are kind of the two most important parts. What 
information is going to be made available and how will that be 
made available? 
 
Now if a restaurant has a couple of, has an inspection and there 
are some things that they need to improve on, does that then go 
out to the public as a black mark on that restaurant when . . . 
and perhaps they didn’t know there was an issue with the way 
they were handling the food and they were going to correct it 
and move on and then the next inspection it is corrected. But I 
think there is some concern that number one, on what the 
information that will be disclosed to the public and also how it 
will be disclosed. 
 
I understand that the health authorities in the Department of 
Health are going to work with the restaurant association 
because I don’t believe . . . And talking to the restaurant 
association they have no problem with disclosing information 
as to how the industry is doing. And I think you’ll find that the 
industry in our province is doing a very good job of handling 
food and their inspections I think for the most part are very 
positive, very clean. And I don’t think the food industry has a 
problem with disclosing information that the public needs — 
and it may be a black mark on a restaurant or two, they have no 
problem with that — but disclosing all the information that an 
inspector takes in on the inspection of a restaurant can be 
disconcerting for a restaurant. 
 
Because for example if, you know, if it’s in the washrooms and 
the faucet is leaking, is that something that will be disclosed? 
And maybe it won’t be disclosed in full information, that it’s 
simply just a faucet leaking in a restroom, but will it be looked 
at as restaurant X has a black mark against it? How is it going 
to be reported? And what is the information going to be 
reported? You know, that’s kind of a, you know, a hypothetical 
example. I don’t if that would even come forward, but that’s a 
concern of the restaurateurs. 
 
They have no problem with disclosing information on 
inspections as long as they have some input as to how it is 
disclosed and what information is disclosed — you know, 
whether it’s in the facility or surrounding the facility, whether 

it’s in the restrooms or whether it’s, you know, in the food 
handling area, all of those issues. The restaurateurs are, as I 
said, concerned, as long as they have input. Now the minister 
has talked about consulting and we certainly would push him on 
that, because they need to have a say and a stake in how this 
information is going to be reported. 
 
I do know, as I’ve said before, in rural Saskatchewan there are 
many, many communities that that’s the only business left open 
in that community, and it is the coffee spot. And people, you 
know, that’s where people meet in the mornings. I think a lot of 
great discussions take place in those coffee shops, in fact, 
attending a few of them myself. There’s certainly very 
interesting conversation and it, you know, it would be a shame 
to see a restaurant in a small town close because of — and not 
saying that they would be — but an overzealous health 
inspector saying, you haven’t fixed this, or this is a problem, 
we’re going to report it, we’re going to make it public and, you 
know, and it affects that establishment’s business. 
 
So as I said, as long as proper . . . the due diligence is done, the 
consultation is conducted with the industry so that they have 
input, Mr. Speaker, I think the Bill is, as far as intent, is going 
in the right direction as far as intent, as everything it’s in the 
regulations and how they disclose the information and what 
information is disclosed is the key area. So at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move this to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 7, The 
Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 7, The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 7 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on his feet? 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2007 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 
the work of the Standing Committee on the Economy and 
Crown and Central Agencies, Mr. Speaker, which will meet for 
some hours yet today, I would move that we do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, Deputy House Leader, that this House do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:56.] 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................801 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................802 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................802 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................803 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................803 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................803 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Annual Dinner 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................804 
 Rural Women’s Month 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................804 
 Community Hero Award 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................804 
 Accomplished Prince Albert Resident Receives Prestigious Awards 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................805 
 Autism Research Breakthrough 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................805 
 Plans for the Province 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................805 
 Public Reaction to Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................805 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Population Statistics and Policies 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................806 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................806 
 Complainants’ Right to Speak about Carriere Case 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................807 
 Disciplinary Action Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................808 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................808 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................810 
 Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................810 
 Bill No. 47 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................811 
 Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................811 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................811 



 

 Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................813 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................813 
 Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................813 
 Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................814 
  Taylor (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................................815 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


