






















































Hansard: March 26, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 36A  MONDAY, MARCH 26, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 957 
 March 26, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present several pages of petitions by constituents of Cypress 
Hills concerned about the impending closure of the SaskPower 
office in the community of Shaunavon. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Shaunavon, Climax, and Frontier, as well as 
Bracken. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to maintain full service of a SaskPower office, this one 
being the SaskPower office in Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, the 
signatures on this petition note that the Rosetown SaskPower 
office currently supplies personal service for SaskEnergy and 
SaskTel customers, making it a one-stop office for payments of 
all three Crown utilities. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and the surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition 
and they come from the communities of Rosetown, Lintlaw, 
Herschel, and Zealandia. And I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the incredible 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yet again today I 
have several pages of a petition of citizens that are concerned of 
the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Middle Lake, Clavet, 
Colonsay, Saskatoon, Humboldt, Tisdale, Quill Lake, and 
Meacham. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present petitions against the closure of Biggar’s rural service 
centre and Environment office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I have, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of signatures from the good 
citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are very, very concerned 
about the lab in Lafleche and District Health Centre and the 
undue hardships it could cause residents if it should close. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from Earl 
Grey, Craven, Regina, Strasbourg, and Bulyea. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition calling on the Government of 
Saskatchewan to maintain the Department of Highways section 
shop in Watrous. The prayer says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain 
open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who would be 
affected by such possible closure. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Watrous, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. I so present on their behalf. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management: in the last fiscal year has the government 
aircraft been chartered out to individuals not employed by 
the government for non-government business? If so, how 
many times and at what cost? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: was a portion of the $5 million 
green initiative announcement from March 21, 2007 
carried forward into the 2007-2008 budget? If so, what 
portion of this initiative is carried forward? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Finance: is the 
government considering taxation on any renewable energy 
production such as geothermal, wind, or hydro energy 
production? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number 
of questions. The first one is, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 41 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: has the department signed a 
contract with Muskeg Lake First Nations for establishing a 
diabetes centre of excellence? And if so what are the terms 
of that contract? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the government 
the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are the outstanding capital 
projects to date? And what is the time frame and cost for 
completion? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the department’s budget 
allocation over the next four years for completing capital 
projects that are currently under way? 
 

And my final question, Mr. Speaker, is I shall give notice on 
day no. 41 to ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: does the department have 
blueprints for an integrated health science building in 
Saskatoon? And if not, when does the department 
anticipate them being ready? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
harassment-related complaints were filed in the year 2000? 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

And I have the same question for the years through to 2006. 
 
In addition I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: of the 
harassment complaints filed in 2000, how many were 
verified? 

 
And again there are the same questions for each year through to 
2006. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
company employees were charged with harassment in the 
year 2000? 

 
And the same question for the years right through to 2006. 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
company employee harassment cases resulted in 
convictions, disciplinary actions, or firings in the year 
2000? 

 
And again the same question for each year through to the year 
2006. 
 
And finally I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how much 
money was paid out as a result of firings related to 
employee harassment in the year 2000? 

 
And the same question for each year through to the year 2006. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in your 
gallery are several members of our caucus’ extended family that 
it’s an honour for me to introduce to you and through you to 
members here today. 
 
I would like to introduce to you Mr. James Chalmers of 
Winnipeg and his wife, Leona. They are the in-laws of our 
director of communications, Ian Hanna, and they are visiting 
here from Manitoba. Ian has wanted for some reason for me to 
state for the public record that he very much loves both his 
mother-in-law and his father-in-law. I’m not sure what issues 
he’s having to deal with, but he wanted me to put that on the 
record. But I do that happily today and ask all members to join 
me in welcoming our guests from Manitoba to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the House, 21 public 
servants that are seated in your gallery. They represent the 
Department of Community Resources, Department of the 
Environment, Government Relations, Health, Highways, and 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these public servants provide important services to 
the people of our province, and they also do important public 
policy work. Mr. Speaker, they are here to look at the 
behind-the-scenes look at the inner workings of the legislature. 
I’d like to ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the 21 public servants to 
the Chamber today. They’re part of the parliamentary program 
for public servants that the legislature sponsors on a number of 
occasions, and I think it’s a very worthwhile and important 
process that goes on. 
 
You know we in this Assembly labour under the false illusion 
that we really are the heart and soul of what makes this 
province work. I’m here to tell you that we’re not, that public 
servants in this province are what makes this province work. 
And I would like to join with the minister in welcoming them. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Assessing the Budget 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t believe what the 
Saskatchewan Party’s Finance critic had to say in his response 
to the budget. Right here in this very Chamber he said that this 
budget was, quote, “the worst budget in 25 years.” There’s been 
some bad budgets in the last 25 years, Mr. Speaker, but this 
budget is not one of them. 
 
Let’s look back at the budgets from when that member was a 
young Tory working to get Grant Devine re-elected, Mr. 
Speaker. The 1985 budget had a deficit of $578 million. The 
1986 budget had a deficit of $1.2 billion. The 1987 budget with 
a deficit of $500 million. The 1991 budget had a deficit of $842 
million. 
 
Those were deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker. Those were budgets 
that drove this province into a state of bankruptcy. Those were 
budgets that drove our credit ratings into the basement. Those 
were the budgets. Those were the legacy of Grant Devine and 
his lackeys across the way. 
 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

What does the Bank of Montreal have to say about this budget, 
Mr. Speaker? The government’s budget, I quote, “‘The 
Province of Saskatchewan is projecting its 14th consecutive 
balanced budget for 2007 . . .’” 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Every year the Sask Party claims that they 
have a deficit, but every year the banks say that we are running 
a surplus. Every year the credit agencies give us credit rating 
upgrades, and every year the debt keeps getting lower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the budget, it’s the 
Saskatchewan Party that has a deficit, a credibility . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Election Excitement 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
you get a two-for-one deal. First I would like to tell you about 
the Saskatoon Eastview supper I attended on the evening of 
March 21. With a crowd of over 250 people there was a buzz in 
the air. People were excited and wanted to work for the next 
election to assure a win for the Saskatchewan Party. Good luck 
and job well done by Terry Alm and his crew in Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second instalment is an item I bring forward in 
the two-for-one deal is that Saturday evening in your home city 
of P.A. [Prince Albert], the Saskatchewan Party held a leader’s 
dinner at the Art Hauser Centre. Mr. Speaker, the place was 
packed. We had to set up extra tables. We will need a bigger 
venue for next year. Well over 400 people attended and the 
mood was electrifying. After a fine meal and outstanding 
speech by the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Sask 
Party, the word was, bring it on; let’s have an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating both these communities on a job well done, and 
let’s call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

A Sustainable Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, is the budget the government 
brought down in this Assembly last week sustainable? The 
simple answer is yes. Sustainability . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. This is members’ 
statements. It’s not the chorus shall sing. Member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — The simple answer is yes, Mr. Speaker. 

Sustainability is predicted on operating costs not outstripping 
revenue growth, Mr. Speaker. It’s all there in the budget 
documents. 
 
The opposition says the budget isn’t sustainable. But I don’t 
think they actually have gone through the whole budget, so I’m 
going to make things easy for them, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
quote a third party that is trusted to understand things like debt, 
financing, accounting, and numbers. I’m going to quote a 
chartered bank, Mr. Speaker. The chartered bank said, 
“Program spending will grow by a lean 1.4%.” That comes 
from the CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce], Mr. 
Speaker. That sounds pretty sustainable to me. 
 
The reason for expenditures being up but program spending 
increases being low is stated in the budget on page 73: 
 

The 2007-08 Budget provides funding for our largest ever 
. . . capital program — $534.8 million — for 
improvements to roads and highways, schools, hospitals 
and other infrastructure. The Government continues to 
commit to supporting and improving community 
infrastructure to improve the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 

That huge capital budget is mostly for one-time projects. That 
means they are not ongoing costs, Mr. Speaker. That means this 
budget is sustainable. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Rosetown Business Awards 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
bring to the attention of this Assembly the fifth annual 
Rosetown and District Chamber of Commerce business awards. 
 
At a March 7 dinner the chamber presented awards in four 
categories highlighting the achievements of business, 
employees, high school employees, and Event of the Year. 
 
The Business of the Year award was presented to Nickells and 
Diamonds, which is owned and operated by Jack and Brenda 
Hamilton. Nickells and Diamonds is dedicated to providing 
first-class customer service. And like so many small businesses 
throughout Saskatchewan, Nickells and Diamonds is also an 
active member in the community. 
 
Rosetown’s Employee of the Year is May Wirth, the manager 
of the local Subway. Wirth is known for the kindness, courtesy, 
and respect she shows towards her customers and for the 
unwavering fairness in which she treats her co-workers. 
 
The High School Employee of the Year — and this is my 
favourite award — it went to grade 12 student Jessica 
Gilkinson. Jessica is described as a front-end superstar who is 
an extremely valuable employee and volunteer. She is being 
recognized for the great effort she makes for her customers at 
the Wheatland Regional Centre. 
 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

New to the awards this year is the event category. This year’s 
winner was the Rosetown Antique Tractor and Engine Club 
International Truck Show. The club is only a year old and is 
still quite small but is already making a big impact on 
Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call upon this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the winners and nominees of the Rosetown 
Chamber of Commerce business awards and thank them for 
doing their part to contribute to this great province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Post-budget Commentaries 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a tactic in the 
right wing political playbook based on the idea that if you say 
something loud and often enough, no matter how untrue it is, 
people will begin to believe it. 
 
The Sask Party has not only adopted this tactic as a cornerstone 
of their political strategy, it’s also the foundation of their 
so-called code of ethics. The Sask Party knows people don’t 
really trust them so they adopted a phony code of ethics in the 
hope of convincing people they actually have some. How ironic 
is that? 
 
The same principle was at play last Thursday when the member 
for Silver Springs misrepresented Saskatchewan’s 14th 
consecutive balanced budget as an unsustainable $700 million 
deficit budget. Compare that with Michael Gregory of BMO 
Capital Markets and he says — according to Mr. Gregory — 
when it comes to financial management, Saskatchewan is at the 
top of its class. He says about Saskatchewan’s NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government budget, quote: 
 

If someone says . . . [they’re] doing a good job? Well . . . 
name me one other jurisdiction anywhere that you can 
think of that can point to fourteen balanced budgets in a 
row? 

 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the Sask Party, the good people at the Bank 
of Montreal have no political agenda in Saskatchewan. They’re 
not trying to get their hands on the public purse. As for the Sask 
Party, all they want is to get their hands on the public purse, so I 
don’t think we can take their word to the bank. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to talk about the document 
released by the Finance minister last week, NDP deficit 2007. 
Spending is up by 9 per cent, but revenues are only forecast to 
grow by 1.8 per cent. When spending outpaces your revenues, 
what do you have? A deficit. 
 

Columnists and others had a lot to say about deficit 2007. 
Randy Burton said, and I quote, “It doesn’t take an auditor to 
tell you [that] this can’t go on for very long without causing a 
train wreck.” 
 
Murray Mandryk wrote an entire column on, quote, 
“Thomsonomics” and said, quote, “. . . it’s hard to see anything 
particularly good emerge from the numbers presented by the 
New Democratic finance minister.” 
 
Les Cannam with Meyers Norris and Penny in Saskatoon said, 
and I quote, “So the net debt in fact increased this year.” 
 
The StarPhoenix editorial board said, and I quote, “Thursday’s 
budget by the Lorne Calvert government was a giant step in the 
wrong direction.” 
 
The Leader-Post editorial board said, and I quote, “Budgets are 
about making hard, but responsible, choices and there’s a real 
question mark over whether this big-spending political budget 
is sustainable.” 
 
Enough said, Mr. Speaker, deficit 2007 by the NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Sesame Street they have a little segment called, one of these 
things is not like the other one; one of these things just isn’t the 
same. I’m going to read you some quotes, Mr. Speaker, and you 
tell me which one is not like the other ones. 
 
Quote one: “The province of Saskatchewan is projecting its 
14th consecutive balanced budget for 2007-2008 with a $75 
million surplus in the General Revenue Fund.” That quote came 
from the Bank of Montreal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Quote number two: “The province’s revenue forecasts for 
Fiscal Year 2008 may prove conservative.” That was a quote 
from Scotiabank, Mr. Speaker. And oh, by the way, they know 
we have a surplus as well. 
 
Quote number three: “Program spending will grow by a lean 
1.4%.” That was the CIBC bank sounding like this budget is 
pretty sustainable to me. Oh, and yes, they know we have a 
surplus as well. 
 
And my last quote in this little game, Mr. Speaker, is quote 
number four: “This budget . . . [that] we heard delivered this 
morning, is a $701 million deficit.” That quote is from the Sask 
Party Finance critic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you figure out which quote just doesn’t 
belong? Mr. Speaker, when it comes to Sesame Street, the Sask 
Party Finance critic needs to act a little more like The Count 
and less like Oscar the Grouch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Consequences of Budgetary Policies 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday, 
Saskatchewan people were in shock to learn just how badly this 
NDP government has mismanaged the finances of the province, 
how badly they have blown the boom, Mr. Speaker. They went 
from a $158 million surplus last year to a $701 million deficit 
this year, Mr. Speaker. They drained 500 million, a half a 
billion dollars, from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And what’s 
worse, Mr. Speaker, is there apparently is no plan in terms of 
how we’re going to turn that around or sustain this deficit 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: how at this 
time, at this juncture in the history of the province, when we 
need fiscal probity and a growth agenda for Saskatchewan, how 
could he have brought in a $700 million deficit budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I know it doesn’t fit into the 
partisan agenda of the member opposite who is of course a 
graduate of the Grant Devine school of economics. But let me 
tell you this, Mr. Speaker. Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. 
The bankers that understand the province’s finances better than 
just about anybody else have given this budget a passing grade, 
and they have said very clearly, very clearly that the money that 
has been outlined is portrayed as a $75 million surplus, that 
we’re handling our budget appropriately, that we are continuing 
to pay down debt. 
 
[14:00] 
 
I found it very interesting that last year the chicken-not-so-little 
party on the opposite side was standing up and saying $288 
million in new debt was going to be built up. Debt actually went 
down. This year the member from Wood River says, debt’s 
going to go up. Debt will go down. Let’s just follow the debt 
line, and you’ll see this NDP government’s paid off a billion 
dollars worth of debt. We’ve cut taxes for ordinary 
Saskatchewan families, and we have made health care even 
better. That’s what an NDP government does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t keep his 
story straight even because he told Don Newman and CBC 
Newsworld that indeed this was a deficit budget. That’s what he 
said last week. 
 
What do other people have to say, Mr. Speaker? The editorial 
board of The StarPhoenix says quote, “. . . a giant step in the 
wrong direction.” The Leader-Post editorial board says quote, 

“. . . there’s a real question mark whether this big-spending 
political budget is sustainable.” 
 
Columnist Randy Burton says quote, “. . . this can’t go on for 
very long without causing a train wreck.” The construction 
association says it’s a poison-pill budget. And the chartered 
accountants of the province of Saskatchewan — who I think 
people are going to believe over that minister — said, “This is a 
deficit budget . . .” The question only is the size of the deficit. 
The chamber of commerce says, it’s not sustainable model for 
the long term. And the taxpayers federation says the budget is 
unsustainable in the long term. 
 
There’s a pattern emerging here. This government has 
introduced a deficit budget that everyone in the province 
understands is unsustainable. Why have they done that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — What the right wing columnists say is 
one thing, but let me tell you what the bankers are saying, Mr. 
Speaker. Let me read to you what they are saying. They’re 
saying: 
 

The province is projecting its 14th consecutive balanced 
budget. On balance, the province continues to earn top 
marks for its commitment to cutting taxes, keeping 
spending in check, but not to the point of ignoring 
important outlays and maintaining a fiscal cushion. 
 

That’s the Bank of Montreal. What is it that the Scotia Bank 
says? They say, “The province’s revenue forecasts may in fact 
prove to be conservative.” 
 
What is it that the CIBC bank says? They say, “Program 
spending is going to grow by a lean 1.4 %.” 
 
Yes, on one side are Canada’s banks that understand finances. 
On the other side are the fiscal experts from the Grant Devine 
school of economics and their political friends on the other side 
predicting doom and gloom, just as they’ve done every year. 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Just like every other year, 
once again, they’re wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again the Minister of Finance 
seems to be accusing the chartered accountants of not telling the 
truth on budget day. The chartered accountants of this province 
said this is a deficit budget. The question is just the level of the 
deficit. Well maybe the Minister of Finance wants to disagree 
with those folks, accountants in Saskatchewan, on this deficit 
budget, but I think the people of the province know who they’ll 
believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has a chance 
to improve his credibility. He was asked on budget day if this is 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

sustainable. Indeed why don’t you just release the projections 
that you have, you’ve used to develop this particular budget? 
That was the question asked by the media. What did the 
Minister of Finance say to that when he had the opportunity to 
say sure, I’ll do that? He said no, he was not going to release 
those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is he hiding? This is the government of SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company]. This is 
the government of the Murdoch Carriere scandal. Again on this 
issue of projections, on the sustainability of this budget, what is 
the minister hiding? Why won’t he release those projections? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP 
government that introduced The Balanced Budget Act. This is 
the NDP government that’s introduced 14 consecutive balanced 
budgets. This is the NDP government that’s paid down billions 
of dollars worth of debt built up by an administration that that 
member was on the payroll for. This is the NDP government 
that has provided for quarterly reporting, mid-year reporting. 
And you know what? We even go so far, unlike what that party 
supported, to table an annual budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is sustainable. We will prove that out 
in the following quarters as we report the finances. And the 
member opposite ought to think very seriously about what it is 
that caused him to flip-flop in terms of his position in terms of 
fiscal credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the 
province would beg to differ with the minister. It was the 
Romanow-MacKinnon government that brought fiscal probity 
to this province. This government has overseen massive 
increases in spending and now a $700 million deficit, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s his record. That’s the Premier’s record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is unbelievable. The Minister of Finance, the Minister of 
Finance in the government that will not provide the details on 
the Murdoch Carriere scandal, that presided over the SPUDCO 
scandal, not telling the truth for six years, is now wanting to say 
to the people of Saskatchewan just trust us — just trust us that 
we’ve actually done our homework, that there are projections to 
sustain the budget of the province of Saskatchewan. Fair 
enough. 
 
If the minister has those projections, if he has those numbers, 
will he simply do the right thing and table them in this 
legislature today? What is he hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, when we started this term 
after this NDP government was re-elected, we presented a 
four-year plan to Saskatchewan people in terms of the finances. 
It will interest the member opposite to know, and particularly 
the member who’s yapping from Wood River, it should interest 
him to know we are a billion and a half dollars ahead on debt 
reduction from what we projected four years ago. 
 
And I will tell you this, Mr. Speaker, when this NDP 
government is re-elected, we will table another four-year plan 
for Saskatchewan people. And we will show again that we will 
continue to pay down the debt. We will continue to manage the 
tax load. And we will continue to improve the services for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s very interesting to see that a party that neither produced a 
quarterly financial report, a mid-year financial report, or in its 
dying days even a budget has the nerve to stand today and 
lecture this NDP government that’s cut taxes, improved 
services, and helped to pay down more than $1 billion of debt 
since our last election. Shame on that opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Advertising Campaigns 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further 
question on deficit 2007, on June 7, 1988, here’s what the 
Premier said about self-serving advertising. And I quote, “It’s 
just, in my judgement, Mr. Speaker, the wrong kind of priority.” 
Well it appears, Mr. Speaker, that priorities have shifted over 
there. 
 
On the weekend we learned that this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker, this NDP government is embarking on yet another 
advertising campaign, Mr. Speaker, spending $350,000 of 
taxpayers’ money on this, another advertising campaign. Mr. 
Speaker, to the Minister of Finance: if this budget is so good, 
why does it need the help of a large, self-serving NDP 
advertising campaign paid for by public dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I find it amazing that the member 
opposite on the weekend was quoted as saying, well I have no 
idea . . . He says, I have no idea what the ads are actually about 
but I’m opposed to them. That’s what he says. That’s what he 
says in the ads that he’s immediately opposed to it. Well I guess 
that that’s what that Saskatchewan Party’s about. 
 
What Saskatchewan people will see as we roll out the 
advertising campaign on radio and on TV is they’ll see ads that 
will promote the two major initiatives in this budget that are 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

going to make life better for Saskatchewan people. They’re 
going to have an opportunity to see how this budget helps 
young people get their future started right here in Saskatchewan 
by being able to earn $20,000 tax free for each of those first five 
years. And they’re going to have an opportunity to see in this 
advertising that we’re making sure Saskatchewan’s seniors 
benefit from the prosperity of this province with a cap of 
prescription drugs at $15. 
 
This is a good-news budget for Saskatchewan people. It builds 
on the strength of Saskatchewan’s finances, and it builds on the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people. I’d encourage the member 
opposite to maybe get in tune with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the minister’s 
information the ads are already running. I haven’t seen the one 
that features him, but I’m sure it’s coming. Mr. Speaker, at least 
this year the Minister of Finance hopefully will spare us, have 
the decency not to include himself in the advertising. Last year, 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister said and I quote: “I’m in . . . 
[the ads because] it’s my budget.” Remember that comment? 
“It’s my budget.” At least this minister has realized now that 
it’s not his budget, but he’s certainly spending the money like 
it’s not his money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to see the ad that says that in fact that this 
is a deficit budget. I want to see the ad that talks about this 
budget being a $700 million deficit. I don’t think we’ll see 
those ads. These ads won’t talk about the minister’s refusal to 
have revenue projections for next year’s budget and the year 
following. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t this, why doesn’t this Finance 
minister try a little truth in advertising? Why are the people 
forced to pay $350,000 to prop up this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, people won’t see ads like 
what those guys want because there’s this little thing called 
truth in advertising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am glad the member opposite was 
digging out some quotes because I dug out some real doozies 
from him from last year. Let me just start here, April 6, he says, 
“Now this government is sitting on a mountain of money.” 
Then he goes and says the minister and the cabinet are sitting 
on a mountain of money. He says there’s a mountain of money 
that they’re sitting on, in November. Again in November he 
says the NDP shouldn’t be building up a mountain of money. 
Then he says we shouldn’t be building up any more money. 
And he says you know what, we should be spending more 
money. 
 

Well I’ve got a . . . [inaudible] . . . here of the Sask Party 
demanding that we spend more money. Now that we’re 
spending some money, they’re saying, oh no, why are you 
spending the money? We’re spending the money because we’re 
going to make life better for Saskatchewan families. That 
member should stand up and support Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday 
Saskatchewan people learned that the NDP government blew 
the boom. Mr. Speaker, they are asking, they are asking the 
same questions, the same questions that members on this side of 
the House are asking. Where is the mountain of money? What 
happened to it? What did members over there do with it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s review the money that this Premier and this 
government has spent on self-serving advertising over the past 
six years. Let’s review the list, Mr. Speaker. And it is quite a 
list: Future is Wide Open, $8 million; 2004 equalization 
campaign, 75,000; Raise a Flag for Fairness, $268,000; last 
year’s raise the flag for the Finance minister, last year’s budget, 
$450,000; the Imagine campaign, 300,000; the exclamation 
mark campaign, 1.5 million, we’re not even sure if that one’s 
finished yet, now another $350,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this Premier spent $10 million of 
taxpayers’ money on wasteful advertising? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. It 
talked about shifting priorities from the member opposite. I 
think we were all very surprised to listen to him on Friday 
morning explain what that party’s first plans would be, God 
forbid, they should ever form a government. 
 
What was the first thing they said they would cut? Health care 
spending. The first budget they would go to is cut to health 
care. Would they talk about hiring more nurses or more 
doctors? No. They thought the prescription for better health 
care is to hire accountants and auditors. Isn’t that a curious 
position? 
 
Then they went on to say that they think we’ve hired too many 
civil servants. There’s too many civil servants in the 
government, says the members opposite. They’re going to fire 
civil servants. They’re going to lay off front-line staff. They’re 
going to cut into the health care budget. 
 
The priorities of that member opposite and of that party 
opposite do not match up with the priorities of Saskatchewan 
people — priorities that say they want lower taxes, better health 
care, and more jobs; priorities that this NDP government is 
addressing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, one of the victims of Murdoch 
Carriere’s harassment has written a statement regarding a 
meeting that took place in 2002. According to the statement, 
and I quote: 
 

We discussed our harassment with supervisors many times 
prior to any investigation taking place in late 2002. Most 
of our supervisors brought our complaints forward to 
higher ups in the department. Nothing was done to stop the 
harassment and make our workplace safe. 
 

Why didn’t the NDP government do anything to investigate the 
harassment complaints when they were first brought forward? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the way the 
anti-harassment policy works is that people lodge a formal 
complaint alleging harassment. That occurred in, I believe, 
September of 2002. Mr. Gillies was appointed to investigate. 
The person who was the alleged harasser was put on leave of 
absence without pay. Then he was suspended without pay, 
moved to Regina, demoted three levels, and red-circled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I have said to the members opposite on 
more than one occasion in this Assembly that, as a result of the 
information that became available on the front page of The 
StarPhoenix, which in essence was the content of Gillies’s 
report, Mr. Carriere was terminated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to carry on 
with the quotes from this letter. The letter also states and I do 
quote: 
 

After repeated attempts to address the harassment, a 
meeting took place in July of 2002 between the Associate 
Deputy Minister [ADM] of . . . Environment and five 
supervisors . . . The supervisors were told in so many 
words by the ADM, “That’s just Murdoch.” 

 
That’s the response the NDP government with the so-called 
zero tolerance harassment policy gave supervisors — that’s just 
Murdoch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did this government continually ignore 
harassment that was taking place in that office? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
the Public Service Commission. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said both inside and outside of the House, people who 
work in our province, whether they are male or female, deserve 
and are entitled to a respectful and harassment-free workplace 
and that we have a zero tolerance for any kind of harassment, 
whether it is sexual or otherwise, in this province, both in the 
private sector and in the public sector. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when we came to government in 
1991, we introduced amendments in this House to the 
occupational health and safety legislation to ensure that 
harassment was a provision of that legislation and that workers 
were protected against harassment, both in the private sector 
and the public sector. 
 
And what did the opposition do of the day? What did the 
member from Cannington and Moosomin do when they were 
sitting in opposition then? They voted to amend to take that out 
of the legislation, and in fact they voted against the legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. That is their record on harassment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP’s 
mishandling of the Murdoch Carriere scandal is unforgivable. 
But by far the most damning statement in the letter is to follow, 
and I want the minister to remember the statement that was just 
made about the policy happening in 1991. 
 
I’m going to quote a statement that says, “Some of us were 
harassed by Murdoch Carriere as early as 1994.” 1994, she goes 
on to say, and I quote, “Some of the women had to go to the 
RCMP before anyone in the upper echelons of government 
would even begin to listen to our complaints.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, why weren’t these complaints taken seriously? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said to the member opposite, I have said that an official 
complaint was lodged in September ’02. An investigator was 
appointed, Bob Gillies from Saskatoon. He issued a report in 
December ’02. Mr. Carriere was immediately removed from the 
workplace and placed on leave of absence with pay . . . or in 
2002, I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he was suspended without pay, and he was 
demoted three levels, and he was sent to Regina, and he had no 
supervision. Mr. Speaker, when it became information that was 
available to the government members, particularly the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission — we read 
about it on the front page of The StarPhoenix — he was 
dismissed, Mr. Speaker. He was dismissed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has repeated again 
that all a woman has to do is to tell her supervisor that 
harassment is taking place, and the complaints will be dealt 
with. Yet these women have told us that they were harassed as 
early as 1994. And when was their harassment complaints 
looked at? 2002, the women waited some eight years and an 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] investigation before 
this NDP government would even start to listen. 
 
Will the minister undertake to investigate who knew of the prior 
complaints about Murdoch Carriere? And who in this NDP 
government swept the complaints under the rug? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this really does speak to 
the credibility of the member opposite and it really does speak 
to the spin that the members opposite are trying to perpetuate in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let us understand. Let us understand because I know that the 
members opposite don’t understand this. The people who are 
elected in this Assembly, the people who are cabinet ministers, 
are not involved in the day-to-day operations of the provincial 
public service. We set general, broad policy directives, but we 
are not in the workplace. 
 
Now I know what’s going on in my office, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know that there are members opposite that worked for the 
government prior to 1991, and there were all kinds of 
allegations that were made about what went on in the days of 
Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. I want to say again to the member 
opposite, a formal complaint was lodged. An investigation took 
place. And, Mr. Speaker, he was turfed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it took a lot of strength and a lot 
of courage for the nine women involved in the Murdoch 
Carriere harassment case to bring the issue forward. They were 
harassed in the workplace, and then with the meagre settlement 
that they were given compared to the money given to their 
harasser, they’re again being abused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government would’ve acted on the 
harassment claims in 1994 when it was first brought to their 
attention, I wonder . . . We want to know how many women 
would’ve been spared the abuse that happened after those years. 
How many women were abused because this government did 
not act on the harassment case when they first learned about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have literally 
hundreds of managers that work in the public service, hundreds 
of managers that work in the day-to-day operations of the 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker. And I can say to the 
member opposite, workers in this province are protected in law 
against harassment. Whether it is ethnic harassment, whether 
it’s racial harassment, whether it’s religious harassment, or 
whether it’s sexual harassment — they are protected in law. 
 
And when a complaint is lodged, they are obligated, Mr. 
Speaker, to investigate, assign an investigator. An investigation 
should take place, and then appropriate action based upon 
whether or not the allegations are confirmed should take place, 
Mr. Speaker. We have no tolerance, absolutely no tolerance for 
harassment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what I and what members on this 
side of the House understand is that women have a right to 
work in a workplace that is free from sexual harassment. That’s 
the type of thing that we believe should be happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we learned that some women waited for over eight 
years. They waited for an RCMP investigation. And they waited 
for the media to talk about this issue before this NDP 
government would even start to listen. So I again ask the 
minister: will the minister undertake to investigate who knew of 
these prior complaints about Murdoch Carriere and who in this 
NDP government swept those complaints under the rug? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say this to 
the member opposite, which really is . . . it does speak to their 
credibility. I think anybody who works in the public service as a 
professional and career public service believes that they worked 
for the Government of Saskatchewan — not an NDP 
government, a Liberal government, or a Saskatchewan Party 
government. That’s where the member opposite simply doesn’t 
get it. People who are professional public servants work for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to again say to the members opposite 
. . . and it really does speak to their credibility because the 
member is leaving us with the impression that these women 
went to the RCMP before they launched their formal complaint. 
And my understanding is that is not at all what happened, which 
then again speaks to the credibility. 
 
They said that the judge made a particular statement in a 
judgment. They table it in the House. There was nothing there. 
They said we erased the hard drive — simply not true, Mr. 
Speaker. And then they said that we put a gag order on the 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

women, and that wasn’t true either. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 

Saskatchewan EnerGuide for Houses Program Extension 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to announce today that our government is enhancing 
and it is extending the Saskatchewan EnerGuide for Houses, a 
very popular program that helps homeowners save energy and 
money. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, the program is helping 
reduce Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas emissions. That’s in 
keeping with our government’s commitment to protecting the 
environment and building a green and a prosperous economy. 
 
The Saskatchewan EnerGuide for Houses program began in 
November 2005 as part of the Saskatchewan Energy Share plan. 
Since then more than 6,000 homeowners have received grants 
for making energy-efficiency upgrades. Those upgrades have 
reduced Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas emissions by about 
22,000 tonnes annually, roughly equally to permanently 
removing 5,500 cars from the roadway. On average, 
homeowners who have made improvements are saving about 
$715 a year on energy costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this program has been so popular and so 
effective in saving people money and helping protect our 
environment, we are extending it for another four years. That 
program will now run until March 31, 2011. We are increasing 
the maximum grant from 2,000 to $5,000 per homeowner. We 
are also adding to the list of improvements that can qualify for 
the grant, things like geothermal, solar, electrical, and water 
initiatives. Of special interest to many northerners is that 
high-efficient wood-burning heaters now qualify as part of the 
EnerGuide program. This will also be of interest to some 
recreational property owners as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations I 
am particularly pleased to note that this program extends to 
on-reserve, private, and band-owned homes. People will still 
need to get pre-retrofit and post-retrofit evaluations for their 
homes. 
 
I’m pleased to say that our government will pay half the costs 
of these evaluations to a maximum of $150 for each evaluation. 
The first evaluation will also tell homeowners how much of a 
grant they will receive from each type of improvement so they 
will be better able to select what they would like to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we estimate that 20,000 additional Saskatchewan 
households can take advantage of this enhanced program over 
the next four years. We estimate . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we estimate that their 

average cost saving after renovations will be about $950 a year. 
More importantly, their renovations could result in 
Saskatchewan reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 75,000 
tonnes annually. That’s like permanently removing close to 
19,000 cars from the roadway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to say that the government is 
extending indefinitely the PST [provincial sales tax] exemption 
on Energy Star qualified furnaces, boilers, and heat pumps. The 
continuation of this PST exemption and the extension and 
enhancement of the Saskatchewan EnerGuide for Houses 
program are good for Saskatchewan people and they are good 
for our environment. They will benefit us today and they will 
provide lasting benefits for future generations. Just one more 
reason, Mr. Speaker, why Saskatchewan is a great place to live, 
to work, and to raise our families. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
extension of the EnerGuide program is a good move for 
Saskatchewan residents hoping to save money through retrofits 
and it is a good move for the environment. And we’re pleased 
to see that the NDP have now implemented yet more of the 
Sask Party ideas, which is to include geothermal and solar. I 
know a number of members on this side of the House have 
talked about geothermal and asked this government why they 
have not recognized geothermal as an energy saving method. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears, Mr. 
Speaker, they are very sensitive when we bring up geothermal 
and the advantages of geothermal and how we have not had any 
rebate programs prior for that type of energy. However we do 
believe that this tired, old NDP government is doing it solely 
for political reasons. 
 
[14:30] 
 
They are desperately trying to appear to be green and 
environmentally friendly after being lambasted by national and 
provincial environmental groups for their terrible environmental 
record. I hope that the work that Saskatchewan residents 
undertake to retrofit their homes won’t go to waste as our 
Crown corporations have to raise their rates due to less revenue. 
 
Toronto hydro just filed a 6.3 per cent rate increase because 
conservation programs were so successful. Saskatchewan 
people should not be penalized for their efforts, so we hope that 
our own Crown corporations do not do the same. This program 
will help Saskatchewan people. But as with so many of the 
latest announcements by the, pre-election announcements by 
NDP, we do suspect that they’re only announcing this for 
political reasons and not for environmental reasons. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
56, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 56, The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2007, be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Return No. 2 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
we will convert it to motions for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Motion no. 1 has been converted to motions 
for return (debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise once again on behalf of the official opposition and the 

people of Saskatchewan to continue my response to deficit 
2007, the NDP’s red inked election scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Thursday I, like many people across the 
province, was shocked and dismayed when the Minister of 
Finance tabled deficit 2007 in this Assembly. In a year when 
the NDP’s project revenues to drop slightly from the year 
before, the NDP government decided to ramp up spending by 9 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. In a year when the size of the population 
of Saskatchewan continues to shrink, the NDP’s response was 
to grow the size of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The result is that the NDP have saddled people of 
Saskatchewan with a $700 million deficit. They’ve gutted the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund — yes, that rainy day fund that was 
supposed to be there for when it rains. And I said it before, Mr. 
Speaker: it may not be raining out on the economy of 
Saskatchewan, but it is raining for the NDP Party of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated on Thursday, that’s an irresponsible and 
reckless budget. The 9 per cent spending increase — four times 
as much, five times as much as the growth in revenue — is not 
sustainable, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a strong indication to the 
people of Saskatchewan just how desperate this NDP 
government has become. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good budget will sell itself. Indeed I think that’s 
a fair comment — a good budget will go out there and sell 
itself. This government tried to leak the budget. They tried to 
get a head start on things. Well what happened, Mr. Speaker? 
When the budget came, where was the wow factor? Where was 
the wow factor? I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, it was a thud. 
We had the thud factor here with this budget. The two little 
leaks that came out, I’m interested to hear how the Finance 
minister’s investigation is coming. We will be interested to hear 
exactly what he has to say on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yet on Friday we learned that this NDP 
government doesn’t have the confidence in deficit 2007. They 
don’t have the confidence to go out and sell this budget 
themselves. Instead they’re embarking on another in a long 
string of advertising campaigns. The red ink is dripping from 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, and now they’re going to spend 
$350,000 of people’s money on an advertising campaign to try 
to convince people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what’s different about this advertising campaign than the 
$8 million in Future is Wide Open? The Imagine campaign, 
remember that one, Mr. Speaker? The Imagine campaign, 
$300,000, taxpayers’ dollars, thrown out the window, and I’m 
not sure we got any bang for our buck there whatsoever. But 
what we did get, Mr. Speaker, is an exclamation mark, the most 
expensive punctuation in the history of Saskatchewan — $1.5 
million for an exclamation mark. 
 
And we don’t even know if that one’s finished yet, but they’ve 
already embarked on a new one. At least it’s a little less than 
the raise a flag for the Finance minister, last year’s campaign, 
which cost $450,000. We can only speculate on what cost the 
extra $100,000 last year. But we know that the minister was 
involved in that campaign, and we can only speculate on what 
the added cost was for. It’s another campaign in a long line of 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

campaigns designed to distract Saskatchewan people from the 
dismal record of this NDP government. 
 
What’s different about this advertising campaign, Mr. Speaker? 
It’s the absence of the Finance minister. You’ll remember that 
the minister was front and centre in the ad campaign last year. 
And yet this year’s campaign, $350,000 to sell deficit 2000, we 
hear, we hear that the Finance minister will not appear. We 
haven’t seen all the commercials yet, but I did see a couple of 
them on the weekend. Mr. Speaker, and it’s a wonder, given the 
reviews and the media commentary of deficit 2007 has 
received, it’s no wonder why this government has to go and 
spend $350,000 of taxpayers’ money. 
 
But let’s review what people across the province are saying. 
Let’s review what the columnists are saying. Let’s review what 
the people who are phoning in to talk shows across the province 
have to say about deficit 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Randy Burton of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix — I 
don’t know if he’s one of those right wing columnists that the 
Minister of Finance was talking about. I don’t know. He seems 
pretty balanced to me, Mr. Speaker. But here’s what he had to 
say, and I quote: “It doesn’t take an auditor to tell you this can’t 
go on . . . very long without causing a train wreck,” Mr. 
Speaker. A train wreck. That’s what this government is being 
compared to, not only by members on this side of the House — 
although I may have said that myself sometime — but from 
columnists across Saskatchewan, across Saskatchewan. And the 
minister from North Battleford agrees that indeed that this is a 
train wreck just waiting to happen in this NDP government. 
 
Let’s quote somebody who’s familiar to members in this House 
— Mr. Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Post. He attends most 
sessions and usually has something to say about the goings-on 
in this Chamber. And let me quote Mr. Murray Mandryk, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The numbers that really matter [and I quote] are the $8.35 
billion in spending [and] the $7.87 billion in revenue, the 
$701 million 2007-08 deficit once all government 
operations including the Crowns are calculated, and . . . 
[increases] . . . Saskatchewan’s debt to $11.4 billion [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
These are the numbers that apply to the real world of whether or 
not we can afford this budget. 
 
Mr. Mandryk goes on to say: 
 

Sadly, the numbers in . . . [this] brave new world of 
Thomsonomics — where you can increase spending by 
nine per cent when revenues are only increasing by 1.8 per 
cent and still claim a surplus — [they] are a bit scary. 
 
In fact, it’s hard to see anything particularly good emerge 
from the numbers presented by the . . . [New Democratic] 
finance minister. 

 
There it is, Mr. Speaker. There it is in print for everyone to 
read, that it’s hard to see anything particularly good emerge 
from the numbers that are presented by the NDP Finance 
minister on Thursday. Regardless of all the leaks, regardless of 

all the spin, regardless of all the money that will be spent trying 
to prop up this failing budget, taxpayers’ money, there is hardly 
anything good to emerge from the numbers presented by the 
New Democratic Finance minister. 
 
That’s the sad reality, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re faced 
with today. That’s what people are asking themselves when 
they look at this budget in context of their own finances and 
say, I could never afford to run my own finances the way that 
this NDP government is just drowning in red ink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what else was said about the NDP’s deficit 
2007. Bruce Johnstone, business columnist for the Regina 
Leader-Post, said, and I quote, “In the aftermath of yesterday’s 
budget, the question remains: Is the NDP’s budget . . . 
sustainable?” And he went on to say: 
 

Business and taxpayers groups, construction companies 
and retailers, even chartered accountants, all expressed 
concern about the “sustainability” of the NDP . . . fiscal 
plan. 
 
They decried the nine-per-cent increase in spending as 
“unsustainable,” and condemned the $510 million reckless 
withdrawal from the . . . [Fiscal Stabilization Fund] — the 
province’s “rainy day” fund . . . “reckless and 
irresponsible.” 
 

End quote, Mr. Speaker. The rainy day fund, the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund that we heard of year and year . . . over and 
over again and over and over again in this legislature from 
members opposite, that it’s going to be for a rainy day, Mr. 
Speaker. Well again, it’s not raining on the economy of 
Saskatchewan. The economy of Saskatchewan should be 
booming. Oil production should be up by more than a meagre 3 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. But instead we have the raining fortunes 
of the NDP party opposite. 
 
We saw that in the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election. We saw 
that in spades, Mr. Speaker, in the Martensville by-election, that 
indeed it is raining on the NDP these days. But that’s no reason 
to go and drain the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me be more specific about some of the comments that were 
referred to by the media, Mr. Speaker, because when it comes to 
judging the sustainability of the NDP’s deficit budget, I’ll take 
the word of the accountants, of the political columnists, of the 
business people. I’ll take that word over that of the Finance 
minister any day because trying to sell a budget as a balanced 
budget is just not going to work when the $700 million in red 
ink is staring you in the face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did Ralph Boychuk from the chamber of 
commerce have to say in the rotunda on budget day? He said 
that the NDP’s budget is not sustainable, and I quote, “. . . it’s a 
9% spending increase and a deficit budget that is certainly not a 
sustainable model for [the] long-term. So yeah [I have] a big 
concern.” That’s Ralph Boychuk and that’s what he had to say 
from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another name that’s familiar to this House, 
Michael Fougere of the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
. . . and he’s a member of Regina City Council as well. What 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

did he have to say about this budget? Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
“We have a 9% increase in spending. That is simply not 
sustainable.” A theme that we hear time and time again, that 
we’ve heard it a lot on Thursday, and I’m sure we’re going to 
hear a lot more about it. 
 
Mr. Fougere goes on to say: 
 

We have a deficit budget and our debt is growing. This is 
in my mind a poison pill budget, it’s not a good budget 
because of the spending. We have prosperity in the 
province. 
 
We should be growing and we should be reaping better 
benefits from this. I just don’t know if we can sustain this 
kind of spending. 

 
Mr. Speaker, even the chartered accountants association of 
Saskatchewan calls this budget a deficit. And I know this 
Finance minister and other Finance ministers have quoted the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants. They do great work in the 
province and what they have to say is taken very seriously, and 
it should be. Well what do they have to say this year: that this 
an unsustainable budget, Mr. Speaker. Unsustainable and 
indeed, indeed they go ahead and confirm that it’s a $700 
million deficit in this province. We’re back to deficit financing. 
 
Nola Joorisity of the chartered accountants association said, and 
I quote, I’ll give you the direct quote: 
 

Well it is a deficit budget and the size of the deficit 
depends on what you include. If you look at just the 
general revenue fund which is where our taxes go into, it’s 
about $480 million deficit. 
 
If you include the Crown corporations and things like the 
Auto Fund and Workers’ Compensation, you’re up at $700 
million. 

 
Mr. Speaker, let’s forget the shell game that the NDP would 
like to play here and try to be fast with the numbers. They call it 
the Thomsonomics; I think that’s what one of the newspaper 
columnists had to say. Let’s forget about that, and let’s just 
focus on what the auditor says should be the real report card of 
a budget. He said you have to look at the budget on a summary 
financial basis, and there it is in black and white for all to see, 
$700 million deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and probably the most damning comment about 
this year’s deficit budget came from — and it might surprise 
you — but the most damning comment about this budget, came 
from the Finance minister himself. Did this comment come in 
this legislature? No, Mr. Speaker. Did it come out in the 
rotunda when he was asked by reporters? No, Mr. Speaker. It 
came out when he was a doing an interview with CBC’s 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Don Newman. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Newman was in Ontario, and the Finance minister thought 
he was safe in being a little more forthcoming with his answer. 
When asked by the CBC whether he was going to spend more 
money in the fiscal year than the province was going to collect, 

the Finance minister responded — and I hope all members of 
this House are listening, especially members on the other side 
— the Finance minister responded, when asked when he was 
going to spend more money than collect, “yes that’s right.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, and when Mr. Newman asked . . . and here’s the 
interesting quote, Mr. Speaker. When Mr. Newman asked, “and 
that’s not called a deficit in Saskatchewan?” The Finance 
minister responded, “well” and I quote: “well it’s actually a 
surplus on the GRF, but on a summary financial basis, it’s a 
deficit.” 
 
There it is, Mr. Speaker, there it is on the record. There it was 
for everyone in the nation to hear and to see. He couldn’t 
answer that in this House. He couldn’t give that answer to the 
reporters outside in the rotunda. We did numerous interviews. 
Not once did he say that, it had to happen on national news, on 
CBC with Mr. Newman. Well, Mr. Speaker, there it is, the most 
damning comment. And there was many, many damning 
comments from everybody across Saskatchewan, but the most 
damning comment about deficit 2007 came from the Finance 
minister himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the Finance minister admits it’s a deficit. He 
tells the people of Saskatchewan one thing. And then when he 
thinks he’s in the safety of an out-of-province interview, he says 
another thing. It’s a budget that spends more than the province 
has taken in, and clearly, clearly the two words that have been 
attributed to this budget more than any — more than reckless 
and irresponsible even — are that it’s not sustainable, Mr. 
Speaker, not sustainable, not sustainable in the short term, not 
sustainable, certainly not sustainable in the long term, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the spending in this budget was sustainable in 
the future as the NDP claimed, why won’t they show the public 
the revenue forecast in the coming year? I think people were 
surprised across the province — and those that take an interest 
in the budgets — when they looked through this budget 
document and found that there are no revenue projections 
beyond this year. Well a minister said, well it’s not our 
responsibility to do that. Darn right it’s his responsibility to do 
that. Darn right it’s his responsibility to do that. A good budget 
would have those projections in there, and we see this budget 
just devoid of any projections. 
 
What are they trying to hide, Mr. Speaker? What are they trying 
to cover up? Where is the information? It was suggested maybe 
the projections are in the same file as the Murdoch Carriere 
information. I don’t know. But I wish the NDP would find that 
file and provide that information for Saskatchewan people. We 
need to see that information. 
 
The minister has admitted that he has these projections, but he 
won’t share them publicly, Mr. Speaker; instead he asks us to 
trust him. Yes this, the NDP Party of SPUDCO and numerous 
boondoggles along the way, they’re asking us — they’re asking 
the people of Saskatchewan once again — to trust them. 
 
I don’t have to remind people in Saskatchewan that right after 
the last provincial election . . . which contained no hint of tax 
increases, and the former Finance minister said an election 
campaign wasn’t a time to talk about tax increases. But the 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

NDP, what did they do once they got back into power? You 
know, they squeaked back in, but what did they do, Mr. 
Speaker? What was the first thing of a financial basis that the 
NDP government did? They hiked the PST. They accepted the 
Boughen report — a lot of good work was done on the Boughen 
report. They read half of it. They increased the PST. 
 
And where is the long-term property tax break for 
Saskatchewan people? It wasn’t anywhere to be found, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Forgot about that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes. They hiked the PST, then they put 
the Boughen report on the shelf, let it collect a little bit of dust, 
and here we are today. This is the situation that we have here. 
That’s what people got the last time they trusted this NDP 
government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that it’s not going to 
happen again. If the indication that I got over the weekend from 
the many people who I talked to and the many programs that I 
listened to, the many talk shows that I was on where people 
phone in, people of Saskatchewan will see right through this, 
and they will not be fooled again by this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — They know that deficit 2007 is 
unsustainable, reckless, and irresponsible. 
 
The evidence is in, Mr. Speaker. The public reaction is in. In a 
poll on CJME, only 10.5 of respondents gave the budget top 
marks; 57.1 said that it failed miserably, Mr. Speaker. Those 
marks are even worse than my marks in high school, Mr. 
Speaker. No, they’re a lot worse than that. But 10.5 per cent of 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a reader’s poll on the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
website asked the question, do you feel the NDP budget is good 
for Saskatchewan? And that takes the numbers out of it. That 
just asks the basic question that people in Saskatchewan are 
asking, is this budget good for me and my family and for 
anyone in Saskatchewan that wants to make Saskatchewan a 
place where they raise their family and where they embark upon 
their careers? Well, Mr. Speaker, to that very, very direct 
question — do you feel the NDP budget is good for 
Saskatchewan? — the response, almost 70 per cent of 
respondents said no, this budget is not good for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I don’t want to take up 
all the time in the legislature this afternoon. But I will say that 
every poll that you’ve looked at, every poll that people have 
seen where Saskatchewan people had a chance to speak . . . 
Because of course this NDP government won’t call an election 
and let Saskatchewan people speak, so that’s the only means 
that they have a way of doing it, is through polling like that. 
 
John Gormley on his “Reality Check,” 80 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people listening to John Gormley’s show who 
phoned in said that this budget is a failure — 80 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. These are people from across Saskatchewan. These are 

people that called in from Regina and from Saskatoon and from 
North Battleford and from Yorkton and from Meadow Lake and 
from Saskatchewan Rivers. That’s what people had to say. 
Eighty per cent of the people said this budget just is off the 
mark; it doesn’t do anything to help Saskatchewan. And above 
all it’s a deficit of $700 million, Mr. Speaker. Shame. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan don’t think it’s good for the 
province. Stakeholders question the sustainability. And now 
even the Finance minister acknowledges on national television 
that it is indeed a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close today by quoting an editorial in the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix — my hometown, my local newspaper 
that I read every day — and the paper’s reaction to deficit 2007, 
Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 
 

Any time a government that expects its revenues to rise by 
less than two per cent [and] goes on a pre-election binge 
that hikes spending by nine per cent, then says its actions 
are sustainable for the long term, it’s time to worry. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I agree with the sentiment of the article. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed time to worry. The editorial goes on to 
state, and I quote, “Thursday’s budget by the Lorne Calvert 
government was a giant step in the wrong direction [Mr. 
Speaker].” And another quote: 
 

Finance Minister Andrew Thomson’s claim of delivering 
yet another “balanced budget” stands in stark contrast to 
the reality that the province’s books are expected to wind 
up in the red by an astounding $701 million. Even though 
the province’s 2007-08 revenues are projected to be a 
whopping $7.87 billion, spending will grow to $8.35 
billion by year’s end after [substantial] debt payments are 
counted [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Saskatchewan’s government will have to increase its 
interest payments [on the debt] to the tune of . . . $20 
million over last year’s total because of the borrowing 
Thomson will need to achieve his “balanced” budget. 
 
With most of the election-bound government’s budget 
goodies having leaked out before Thomson stood in the 
house to make the details official, it’s the summary budget 
shortfall that catches the eye. 

 
Mr. Speaker, one more quote: 
 

For Thomson to brag [about] . . . the current government 
has paid down debt by $1 billion . . . makes no sense when 
this year’s financial performance adds $700 million to the 
debt. 

 
Mr. Speaker, deficit 2007 is a giant step backwards for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and because of that I would like to 
move the following motion. I move, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That all words after [and I quote] “That the Assembly” be 
deleted and the following be added: 
 
condemn the government for plunging this province back 
into a deficit without creating a real growth agenda or 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

addressing the most pressing needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 

I so submit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And seconded by the 
member for Martensville, and I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, seconded by the member for 
Martensville: 
 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 
 
condemn the government for plunging the province back 
into a deficit without creating a real growth agenda or 
addressing the most pressing needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
Debate continues on the amendment and the motion 
concurrently. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to be 
able to speak today. This is my maiden speech in this 
Assembly. I am told by my colleagues that after today I will no 
longer be free from heckling. I tried to postpone this as long as 
possible, but I was overruled. 
 
I want to begin by thanking the good people of the Martensville 
constituency for their support. And it was a lot of support. We 
won the by-election with 77 per cent of the vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — This is the best result the Saskatchewan Party 
has had in any riding. I’m here because of the people of 
Martensville, and I am here for them as well. Being the 
representative for thousands of people in my constituency is not 
something that I take lightly. I understand the awesome 
responsibility that they have given me. 
 
It’s been a very busy few weeks for me. I went directly from an 
election night victory to being sworn in. While I have 
experience behind the scenes in politics, I realize that I still 
have much to learn. The member from Cannington has already 
been very helpful and informed me that my questioning in 
committees needs some work. I thank him for his advice, and I 
would like to thank all of my new colleagues for their 
acceptance, their support, and their encouragement. 
 
I did not get here by myself, and I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank the members of the Martensville 
constituency executive, all of the supporters and volunteers who 
helped out on the by-election. And for his tireless work and 
dedication, not only to me but to my father, I would like to 
thank my constituency assistant, Whitney Friesen. I’m now the 
third MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for whom he 
has worked. I told him the other day that he has now officially 
become an institution. 

The efforts of all of these fantastic people have paid off. The 
people of Martensville sent a very clear message to the NDP 
that their time in office is quickly coming to an end. 
 
I would also not be here without the support and encouragement 
of my family. As you know, we have had quite a difficult year, 
and I’m proud at how my family has rallied around me to 
support my decision to follow my father into politics. I thank 
my mom, Arlene, my brother Ken, his wife Sandy, my sister 
Lana, and her husband Lorin; and my fantastic nieces and 
nephews, Jasmine, Sharmaine, Dylan, little Ben, Meliva, and 
Noam. Perhaps in that batch there is a MLA-in-waiting to 
follow behind me. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to meet so many amazing people. The 
residents of Martensville are hardworking people. I’ve seen the 
benefits of this hard work as I visited the communities in the 
constituency. Martensville consists of rural communities and 
growing towns. It is made up of hardworking people who are 
constantly striving to improve their towns and to ensure a bright 
future for their children and families. It has many entrepreneurs 
who have established diverse and thriving businesses. 
 
I have seen the effects of communities coming together. 
Whether it’s fundraising for a rec centre in Waldheim or a new 
fire hall in Osler, the residents of Martensville face challenges 
with determination and creativity. 
 
I’ve witnessed and been the recipient of this sense of 
community where neighbours help one another. People like 
Dave Wiens, who plowed snow out of my yard without being 
asked; or Russ McAlpine and Terry Hack, who helped get my 
truck unstuck on election day; or Lanny Schmidt, who made 
sure my car got fixed as quickly as possible when I was 
campaigning — there’s a theme here: we have problems with 
vehicles — or Shauna Gamble, who volunteered to check my 
house while I’m gone to make sure that my basement isn’t 
flooding. 
 
Like so many of the residents in my riding, I was also raised 
believing that if you work hard you should be rewarded. I was 
raised to believe that we should be able to keep as much of our 
hard-earned dollars in our own pockets, and that it was the role 
of government to operate responsibly to ensure that this 
happened. 
 
And that leads me to discuss last week’s budget. After months 
of door knocking and speaking with residents, the concern that I 
heard repeatedly from business people and homeowners were 
worries over rising education property taxes. Last week’s deficit 
budget did nothing to address this important issue. For years 
this NDP government has promised to deliver much deserved 
relief. They promised long-term relief. For years these promises 
were not contingent on the delivery of an approved equalization 
deal from the federal government. I find it disappointing that 
this NDP government is again betraying the people of this 
province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
It was interesting that during the by-election campaign the NDP 
candidate stated in an interview with The StarPhoenix that no 
one was speaking to him about education property taxes. After 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

the completely dismal showing that the NDP had in that 
by-election, a mere 10 per cent of the vote, I would submit that 
it was simply a case that no one was speaking to him. 
 
It is yet another example of how out of touch this NDP 
government is with the people of this province. A non-profit 
organization, a thrift store in my constituency, is currently 
paying $10,000 in property taxes — $6,000 of that is in 
education property taxes. While this organization works hard to 
raise funds that will eventually help the less fortunate, they 
were struggling under this tax burden. As you can imagine, the 
volunteers offer their time and effort to ensure the success of 
this business. It is frustrating for them to be donating so much 
of their time and talent only to see thousands of dollars in 
profits — that would otherwise go to help others — to be 
gobbled up in education property taxes. 
 
I’ve received phone calls from seniors who are incredibly 
concerned over the increasing burden that they are facing from 
rising education property taxes. They are worried that they will 
no longer be able to stay in their own homes. I think this is 
appalling that this government’s betrayal of Saskatchewan’s 
homeowners could force seniors to move from their homes. 
These are homes that they have worked their entire lives to pay 
for and now, in their retirement, when they no longer have to 
work and have time to enjoy life, they are consumed by worries 
of whether or not they can stay in their own homes. It is a 
shameful reflection of this NDP government. 
 
People in my riding are also concerned about reduced access to 
health care that they are witnessing every day. It was interesting 
as I was leaving Regina last Thursday on budget day, I passed a 
billboard that was sponsored by the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses. It was a picture of a closed sign over a hospital room 
and it said that hospital beds are closing due to a shortage of 
registered nurses. Currently in this province there are over 500 
nursing positions that are vacant. Hospitals and clinics are 
desperate for nurses. 
 
The president of Saskatchewan Union of Nurses herself has said 
that this NDP government’s mismanagement of health care in 
this province is leading to a crisis situation. In a letter to the 
Premier last month she said, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan must act immediately and aggressively to 
stop the bleeding, with a well-funded and comprehensive 
nursing strategy . . . Current retention and recruitment 
strategies are a completely inadequate response to both the 
current vacancy level and the fresh evidence that the 
health of the nursing workforce cannot be sustained under 
current conditions. 

 
And what is this NDP government’s response? They offer 
funding for a mere 18 new training seats for nurses in the next 
year. This is the legacy that the NDP is leaving in this province 
— hospital closures and massive nursing shortages. I am sure 
that this is not the legacy that Tommy Douglas envisioned for 
his province. 
 
The NDP’s assertion that this is a balanced budget is a bit of a 
stretch. It is hard to understand how a budget speech that begins 
with the glowing report of the economic boom in Saskatchewan 
ends with a budget that takes $510 million from a rainy day 

fund to keep it in the black. 
 
We all know that the NDP really likes punctuation. After 
millions of dollars in failed ad campaigns to get back some of 
the population that has fled this province since the NDP has 
been in government, they recently spent $1.5 million on an 
exclamation mark. They might want to think about continuing 
the punctuation campaign and add a question mark after the 
words balanced budget. 
 
Residents in Saskatchewan who work hard and collect their 
paycheques know what a balanced budget is. They have their 
own household budgets where living expenses are carefully 
monitored to make sure that there’s enough money to make it to 
the end of the month. The NDP has crafted a budget that pays 
for the first few weeks and then pays the rest of the month with 
a credit card. This is simply not sustainable and the NDP’s own 
former Finance minister said that this budget is not sustainable. 
 
In the 2000-2001 budget the NDP claimed that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund was established for, and I’ll quote: 
 

The Fiscal Stabilization Fund will be available to the 
General Revenue Fund as a fiscal shock absorber to offset 
temporary revenue declines and meet exceptional 
requirements. In years when fiscal challenges are great, 
the Government will use [the] Fund . . . 
 

The NDP is now taking credit for the sun that is shining in this 
province. Why then are they using a rainy day fund to make 
ends meet? Because on the eve of an election they are once 
again buying votes with voters’ own money. 
 
This budget does not address the issues facing my constituency 
— highways and roads, property taxes, and health care. Over 
the years the NDP has squandered millions in taxpayers’ 
money. They seem to have forgotten that this is not their 
money. It is not their own personal piggy bank to use for their 
political gains. 
 
The NDP budget is long on spending and short on vision. As 
Environment critic for the official opposition, I was listening 
very closely to the Finance minister’s speech last week. I was 
keeping track of how many times he mentioned the 
environment. And how many times did he speak of the 
environment? Not once. Not once, Mr. Speaker. Imagine my 
surprise. 
 
Protecting our environment for future generations is one of the 
most important challenges facing us in this century. It is one of 
the biggest concerns on the minds of people in Saskatchewan 
and in Canada. It was quite shocking to realize that it wasn’t 
important enough for this NDP government to mention even in 
passing in the Finance minister’s speech last week. It is up to us 
to lead by example and the NDP have offered no leadership on 
the environment. 
 
Under the watch of this NDP government, greenhouse gases 
continue to rise. We have seen little from them on what their 
plans are to reduce this damage. We have been promised a 
green initiative plan in the near future. Their last attempt at 
putting forward a plan was met with criticism from the Sierra 
Club, who stated that the NDP were full of rhetoric, all talk and 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

no action. All talk and no action. This is a statement that applies 
to much of what the NDP does. 
 
Despite their bluster over a zero tolerance for sexual harassment 
in the workplace, we have seen that this is simply not the reality 
for many women in this province. The NDP can talk all they 
want about having a zero tolerance but their actions show 
otherwise. I’ve spoken with one of Carriere’s victims. I have 
seen the pain in her eyes and the disappointment in her voice. 
 
It took the NDP government four years to finally offer an 
apology to the victims of Murdoch Carriere’s harassment but it 
took them no time to offer him a $275,000 settlement and a full 
pension. They defended their own actions but never once 
thought about defending these women. They espoused the need 
for equality yet offered Carriere’s victims a fraction of what 
they willingly gave Carriere. Where is the equality in that? 
 
I find it shocking that the NDP spent millions defending 
themselves all in the name of SPUDCO — a pile of potatoes — 
but refused to spend a dime defending these nine women. The 
victims of Carriere deserve to have their voices heard and I am 
proud to be a member of a party who’s determined to make sure 
that this happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — I made the decision to enter politics because I 
believed I could make a difference. I will continue to work to 
make sure that the voices of those who have been silenced are 
heard, and that the people who need a voice will know that they 
can find one in me. My dad taught me the importance of 
helping those around me. And in closing I would like to speak a 
few words about my father, Ben Heppner. 
 
I was honoured to be here in this Assembly last fall for the 
tributes given to my dad, and I want to thank members from 
both sides of the House for their kind words. It has been said 
that my father left a legacy and I believe that he did, both 
politically and personally. Ten years ago he was one of the 
eight MLAs who came together from different political parties 
to form the Saskatchewan Party. They knew the potential of this 
province. They had a dream and a vision of what we could be. 
They knew that Saskatchewan needed an alternative to the 
NDP. 
 
I remember sitting and talking with my dad 10 years ago. He 
had such excitement and passion about this new party and his 
province. He was so proud with the hard work of those first 
MLAs and his role in it. He was thrilled with the 25 seats that 
the Sask Party received in the 1999 election, the first election 
with Sask Party candidates on the ballot. He loved his time here 
and appreciated his friends and he liked telling people about his 
fellow OWLS [order of wily legislative sexagenarians]. He was 
particularly proud of the leadership of the member for Swift 
Current but more than that, he valued the friendship that they 
shared. 
 
Dad was a high school teacher and principal for many years. I 
know that every new school year Dad made sure to find the 
invisible students — the kids with bad reputations, with low 
self-esteem, the kids that no one else wanted to be friends with. 
Dad found these kids and embraced them, made sure they felt 

valuable, and befriended them. 
 
Over the years I have met many of my Dad’s former students 
and their parents. I know that Dad made a difference. He did 
this quietly and he didn’t do it for personal gratification or 
public glory. He did it because he knew that these kids needed a 
friend. Dad did make a difference both politically and 
personally. If I can be half the person my father was, and make 
a fraction of the difference in the lives around me, I will 
consider his legacy secure and my life a success. 
 
Four years ago, almost to the day, Dad stood in this Assembly 
and responded to the NDP Speech from the Throne. And in 
closing I would like to quote my father: 
 

A government should be in power to serve all the people 
in the province. Not an NDP government . . . The sooner 
we get rid of them the better, Mr. Speaker, the sooner the 
better. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget. To do so 
would be a betrayal of the massive majority of my constituents 
that voted against this government three weeks ago. I am 
pleased to second the amendment put forward by the member 
for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre, the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed my pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and speak 
to this budget motion on behalf of the people, the families of 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Before I start, I want to wish my congratulations to the new 
member from Saskatoon . . . from Martensville on her maiden 
speech and her comments and especially her comments from 
her father. I know as a former minister he would question me 
and I always had a high respect for his integrity. So 
congratulations. I know it’s a special honour and privilege to 
rise on behalf of our neighbours, our constituents, to make 
comment on this very important debate that we’re about to enter 
into. 
 
I too would like to start my comments, before we start, talking 
about my family. In fact, I’d like to thank them for their support 
— my wife, Dawn, and children, Cam and Reilly. In fact, my 
daughter who’s in second year law was here on budget day and 
was witness to this, I think, great occasion for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And she enjoyed it thoroughly. 
 
And I too would like to thank my office staff here in Regina and 
back home in Saskatoon so they fully understand the programs 
and opportunities here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now before I start talking about the budget specifically too, I’d 
like to take a moment to talk about Saskatoon Centre. It’s a 
great, great constituency to represent. It’s probably one of the 
most urban communities or constituencies in this province with 
the downtown of Saskatoon from the condos, the apartments, 
the business community that goes on there, out to the old 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

neighbourhoods of Caswell, Riversdale, Westmount, and Mount 
Royal. And in fact it has a special . . . I didn’t realize this. That, 
you know, some of the businesses that are there, one for 
example, Star Egg downtown, where most of the eggs, if you 
buy an egg in Saskatchewan, finds its way through there. It has 
a tie back to agricultural days. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk today about responsibility and 
I want to talk about community. And I want to talk about the 
opportunities we now have in this province to make life better 
for Saskatchewan families. This budget is about the 
responsibility we have as legislators and as leaders in our 
communities to make sure that when we have prosperity, it 
benefits all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when first given a mandate, this Premier and this 
government clearly stated that we must have economic progress 
in this province. To that end, we worked hard to develop every 
sector of the economy. We reformed the natural resource 
royalty structures on oil, gas, potash, and uranium. In short, Mr. 
Speaker, in every area of natural resource production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we lowered the provincial income taxes to attract 
workers and keep people here in this province. This cut was 
necessary for skilled workers to make this province home and 
to encourage Saskatchewan residents not to make the Alberta 
mistake. This cut, in conjunction to our school division 
changes, brought fairness to the personal property tax structure 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And last year, Mr. Speaker, we acted to make Saskatchewan an 
attractive place to do business. We lowered the business taxes 
of this province, including eliminating the corporate capital tax, 
to stimulate investment and create opportunities here for our 
families. 
 
And what are the results of all of this, Mr. Speaker? Record 
housing starts in this province, record investments in this 
province. And the front page of the Leader-Post says it all when 
it shouts, “Jobs, Jobs, Jobs.” Well, Mr. Speaker, our economic 
plan works — 14 consecutive balanced budgets, 16 credit 
upgrades since 1995, and the lowest debt-to-GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio in almost 20 years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Premier and this NDP government 
believe that economic prosperity must benefit average 
Saskatchewan families. Working people in this province must 
feel that benefit. So starting with the Throne Speech last fall, we 
announced a 2 per cent cut to the provincial sales tax and the 
new Family Day holiday. Both of these measures were to 
ensure that the people of this province felt the benefit of our 
strong economy. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that was just the beginning. With this 
budget we are seeing what the honest fiscal policies of this 
Premier and this government mean — opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. Opportunity to finally begin investing in 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan communities again. 
Opportunity to build a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a direct investment in the 
people of this province. We have created Saskatchewan’s first 
universal prescription drug plan for seniors. Now most seniors 
live on a fixed income, and this plan will help ease the growing 
prescription drug burden that seniors face. Mr. Speaker, this 
plan places a $15 per prescription cap on the cost of 
medications and expect it to save each of the 115,000 seniors in 
this province $400 annually on average. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the seniors of Saskatchewan built this 
province. Their services to our communities built the quality of 
life that we enjoy today. We have a responsibility to help these 
people obtain the basic medications necessary for a healthy life. 
 
This budget also contains a new dental sealant program for 
children in grades 1 and 7 in our community schools. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this may not be a big dollar item but I know that for 
the people in my constituency it’s a program of immense value. 
Good dental health is formed in childhood and it’s been linked 
to a host of positive health benefits. Unfortunately though, ever 
since the child dental health program in this province was cut 
by the Grant Devine Conservatives, only the children of 
well-off parents have been able to afford basic dental care. So, 
Mr. Speaker, this program is the first step to ensure that all 
children in Saskatchewan have access to basic dental care 
irregardless of their parents’ income bracket. 
 
Now of course, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the future of our 
province rests in the hands of our young people. That is why 
this government has created another first in Saskatchewan — 
the graduate tax exemption. This Premier and this government 
have worked tirelessly to make Saskatchewan the best place in 
Canada for young people to live and to have great careers. A 
big part of that is to ensure that young people get the training 
they need to succeed. This graduation tax exemption creates 
incentive to learn. And, Mr. Speaker, it creates incentives for 
young people who are just starting their careers to start them 
here. Combined with existing exemptions, this plan provides 
recent graduates with $20,000 of tax-free income per year, for 
the first five years following graduation. That is, Mr. Speaker, 
$100,000 of tax-free income just for working in Saskatchewan 
when you graduate. 
 
Now this is a strong message, Mr. Speaker — a strong message 
to young people of Saskatchewan and young people of Canada 
— saying, this province wants you and you have a bright future 
right here in Saskatchewan. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that 
that bright future includes in the very near term, the Junos, the 
Canadian Country Music Awards, the Aboriginal Music 
Showcase, and the Western Canadian Music Awards. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are also addressing the front-end access 
to post-secondary education. This NDP government firmly 
believes that access to education should be based on 
achievement, ability, and hard work — not based on your 
ability to pay. To this end we have frozen the tuition fees of our 
universities for the third year in a row and provided funding in 
this budget for 2,100 new training spaces. This is investment, 
Mr. Speaker, investment in the future of Saskatchewan people. 
And this investment is possible because of the economic 
prosperity created by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps nothing else speaks of investment in our 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

future like this government’s green strategy. This budget 
contains new money for the Office of Energy Conservation to 
continue and expand their work combating climate change. It 
contains a $7.5 million fund for green initiatives to help solve 
the problems of global warming. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget also includes a $17.7 million 
increase to the ethanol fuel tax rebate for a cleaner, burning 
fuel. And there is also substantial new money in this budget for 
communities who wish to undertake their own climate change 
initiatives. 
 
Now of course, Mr. Speaker, it is our communities that drive 
this province and this budget recognizes that. It includes a 30.8 
per cent increase in revenue sharing for our urban, rural, and 
northern municipalities — something that Saskatoon Mayor 
Don Atchison called really good news for us. Now this money 
will allow those municipalities to invest in their infrastructure, 
invest in their cities and towns; investments I dare say, Mr. 
Speaker, that will improve the quality of life for all of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these investments build strong, healthy 
communities. They are about the responsibilities that we have 
during the times of prosperity to make sure that all citizens 
benefit from that prosperity. They show a Premier and an NDP 
government that acts decisively to make life better here at home 
for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, of course I have as Minister of Labour a 
particular interest in improving the lives of average working 
families in this province. The working people of Saskatchewan 
are the backbone of our economic progress, and we have a 
responsibility to ensure that they have the fairest and the safest 
workplaces here in Canada. Mr. Speaker, we are making 
progress for Saskatchewan workers in this budget. There is 
significant new investment in improving the occupational health 
and safety program for working people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Safety at the workplace means so much more than increased 
productivity. Injuries adversely affect all aspects of a person’s 
life. Workplace injuries mean less time that families can enjoy 
their favourite activities together. Our work on phase 2 of the 
action plan for healthy and safe workplaces aims to reduce the 
time lost/injury rate ratio across the province by a further 13.5 
per cent. And this additional investment will mean that roughly 
4,500 workplace safety inspections will take place this year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are also acting to address the 
discrimination of northern workers. As recommended in the 
northern exemption report by the member of Regina Northeast, 
there is money in this budget to open a labour standard’s district 
office in La Ronge. This office will work with employees and 
employers to make sure that the workers in the North are treated 
fairly and receive the same protection as workers in the rest of 
this province. 
 
Now one of the greatest things we can do to improve the lives 
of low-income workers is to ensure that they receive a fair wage 
for their work. Since this Premier took office, the government 
has raised the minimum wage by $1.95 to a total of $7.95 per 
hour. That, Mr. Speaker, is a 32 per cent increase. Yes. These 
raises to the minimum wage provide real, tangible benefits to 

the lowest paid employees in our province. That extra $1.95 an 
hour could mean the difference between buying groceries or 
going to the food bank, having a place to sleep or sleeping on 
the street. In addition, Mr. Speaker, this budget provides extra 
money to offset child-related costs for low-income earners. It 
will provide funding for an additional 500 licensed child care 
spaces. These offsets in the child care spaces give lower income 
parents flexibility. They provide an opportunity for parents to 
go to school or have a full-time job. An opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, that might not otherwise be available. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, this is all part of our commitment in the 
Throne Speech to continue to improve work opportunities here 
in Saskatchewan. The new money for additional training seats 
and additional child care provided in this budget ensure that 
young, low-income parents have the opportunity to make 
meaningful changes in their lives. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget includes an additional $2.5 million to expand the family 
health benefits plan. This will provide prescription drug and eye 
care coverage to approximately 30,000 adult, vulnerable 
workers. 
 
Now in times of economic prosperity, Mr. Speaker, these are 
the kind of investments responsible governments make to 
improve the lives of all people, to ensure the prosperity gap 
does not widen, to ensure that you do not leave anyone behind 
on the road to opportunity. This budget, Mr. Speaker, is bold 
and innovative. It uses the resources of Saskatchewan to benefit 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
It is a shame, Mr. Speaker, that the same cannot be said of the 
new federal Conservative equalization program. Prime Minister 
Harper and the 12 Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] 
from Saskatchewan were unequivocal in their promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and they broke their promise, Mr. 
Speaker. Now they’re waking up. Their promise was one of 
fairness, Mr. Speaker. Alberta did get a special exemption from 
equalization to develop their oil and gas industry in the 1970s, 
and of course Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador have 
the Atlantic Accord which provides to their citizens the full 
benefits of their resource revenues for a limited period of time. 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, had nothing, got nothing. 
 
When Prime Minister Harper and his 12 Conservative MPs 
promised the people of Saskatchewan that we would be able to 
keep 100 per cent of our non-renewable natural resource 
revenues, it was a promise greeted with praise from all 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, because it is fair and is the 
right thing to do. But these Conservatives broke their promise. 
They took $800 million from the people of Saskatchewan and 
. . . using it across this country to buy political favour. I think to 
say to the people of Saskatchewan that they feel betrayed is an 
understatement. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want answers, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s unfortunate that when this Premier called 
for an emergency debate on this issue, the members of the 
opposition voted against it. It is clear that someone in Ottawa 
pulled the leash of the Leader of the Opposition and told him to 
heel. 
 
In a time investment, Mr. Speaker, the ability to use 100 per 
cent of the non-renewable natural resource wealth of this 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

province for the benefit of Saskatchewan people would have 
immense implications. Those resources come out of the ground 
only once, Mr. Speaker. You do not get to use them again. And 
I ask you to imagine, just imagine what we could do if the 
whole value of these resources was allowed to benefit the 
people of this province, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the economic growth of this province is not 
slowing down and it will not slow down as long as this Premier 
and this NDP government are in charge. It was this government 
that put the fiscal house of this province in order. We have 
restored the economic prosperity that was destroyed by the 
friends and the mentor of the Leader of the Opposition, the 
Conservative Grant Devine government. We have developed 
this economy through sound fiscal management, as well as 
aggressive social investment to encourage growth. 
 
This is a strong economy, but it’s also a balanced economy. 
And this balance and sustainable budget reflects that. While just 
this morning, Mr. Speaker, in fact Michael Gregory, a senior 
economist and professional budget analyst for BMO Capital 
Markets, said that this government has taken a responsible and 
sustainable approach to its finances. Mr. Speaker, for Mr. 
Gregory and the BMO Capital Markets, the proof is in the 
pudding when he says, “Name me one other jurisdiction 
anywhere that you can think of that . . . can point to 14 balanced 
budgets in a row.” It means that we are doing things right. 
 
This budget is sustainable precisely because of the economic 
choices we have made over the past four years. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say that this budget is only the beginning. 
Because of this NDP government, Saskatchewan will continue 
to grow. And as we grow, Mr. Speaker, this government will 
ensure that the average Saskatchewan person will continue to 
see direct benefits of this strong economy. Now is the time to 
invest, Mr. Speaker — invest in the economic prosperity that 
we enjoy today, invest in our children, invest in our young 
people, invest in the health of our seniors, and invest in our 
communities. 
 
That is what this Premier and this NDP government will do, Mr. 
Speaker. We will continue to work to make life better for 
average Saskatchewan families. And that is why I will support 
the main budget motion and I will vote against the amendment. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this budget debate. Before I get into my 
comments, I too would like to express my congratulations to the 
new member for Martensville on an excellent maiden speech. 
 
You know, the longer you’re in this political business the more 
impressed at least I have become with the quality of people who 
are entering this profession. I think it’s wonderful to see 
younger people getting involved in politics. I think it’s 
wonderful to see someone who has come from a political family 

and been encouraged and stimulated to get involved in politics 
rather than being turned off politics. 
 
So I think that says a lot for the quality of that family and for 
the quality and the insight of the people of the constituency of 
Martensville who came out in unprecedented numbers for a 
by-election to vote for my colleague. And I welcome her to the 
House and I congratulate her on her maiden speech. It was an 
excellent speech to listen to. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’m not sure, but this may very well be my last 
opportunity to speak to a budget. And I hear at least one 
member on the other side applauding that. If I’ve been a thorn 
in their flesh, Madam Deputy Speaker, they have certainly 
deserved it. 
 
But before I get into these comments about the budget, I want to 
express some thanks. A member does not stand here without a 
strong and wonderful support base, and I have been blessed 
with a tremendous base of support, starting with my wife, Gail, 
who has stood by my side through almost 20 years of political 
involvement. She has been my greatest cheerleader and my 
strongest critic, and she has done it in a way that has 
strengthened me as a person. And for that I am truly 
appreciative and love her more than I have ever loved her 
before. 
 
We also have three wonderful children, two of whom are 
married. I’d like to express my thanks for their support and 
encouragement over the years: for Ehren and Karen here in 
Regina; for Byron and Lisa who are up in Saskatoon; and for 
our daughter, who is currently in her third year of university at 
the University of Alberta, Marlyn. We certainly do, as parents, 
appreciate our children and the decisions they have made and 
the paths they are taking. They have been a real encouragement 
to their mother and father, and I want to thank them here on the 
record. 
 
I also want to thank the constituents of the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency who have been very special to me. It was amazing 
the night of the last election to watch the numbers come in and 
to find that I had 5,173 votes, the most received by any 
candidate in the province. That was truly humbling and 
something that I’m very thankful for, something I’m very proud 
of, and it’s a number for which I have a lot of people that I owe 
a lot of gratitude and appreciation for their work. 
 
Just, Madam Deputy Speaker, as a way of information, in 
second place — and I was very happy to defeat the member 
from Cannington in the race for the most votes — the member 
for Cannington had 5,115. And it was fun to surpass the 
Premier in his vote count by a rather substantial amount. The 
Premier garnered 3,608 votes. 
 
The Rosetown-Elrose constituency is a thriving, aggressive, 
energetic riding. It’s bordered on the west by the communities 
of Eston and Dodsland. On the north side the border goes 
between Rosetown and Biggar over north of Conquest to the 
South Saskatchewan River. 
 
I represent the communities of Outlook, Broderick, Glenside on 
the east side of the river near Gardiner Dam. And then the south 
part of the riding includes the communities of Lucky Lake, 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

Beechy, and Kyle, back around to Eston, which I mentioned at 
the beginning. 
 
This is an area, a farming area primarily, people who have made 
a living off of the land, raising crops and livestock. It is an area 
where irrigation plays a key role, a significant role, and where 
irrigation needs to be increased in its impact and significance. 
It’s an area where there’s oil and gas. And, Madam Speaker, it’s 
an area where there’s tremendous tourism potential — if only 
we could get a provincial government in place in this province 
that knew how to take advantage of those opportunities. 
 
Madam Speaker, as I looked at the response to the Minister of 
Finance’s budget, I was particularly intrigued by the response 
from Nola Joorisity of the chartered accountants’ association. 
But I think if anybody can cut through all the numbers and all 
the nonsense and all the political spin on the budget, it should 
be Nola Joorisity of the chartered accountants’ association. And 
this is what she said, Madam Speaker. She said: 
 

Well it is a deficit budget, and the size of the deficit 
depends on what you include. If you look at just the 
general revenue fund which is where our taxes mostly go 
into, it’s about a $480 million deficit. 
 
If you include Crown . . . [corporations] and things like the 
Auto Fund and Workers’ Compensation, you’re up at $700 
million. 

 
Madam Speaker, this is from Nola Joorisity of the 
Saskatchewan chartered accountants’ association. Obviously 
this kind of response to the budget carries a lot of weight. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, I thought I better grab this document and 
have a look at it myself. On the very first page of the document 
the Minister of Finance says, “I invite you to browse this and 
other related documents . . .” So, Madam Speaker, that’s exactly 
what I did. And when I got to page no. 14 of the Saskatchewan 
Provincial Budget: Budget and Performance Plan Summary, I 
noticed that on page 14 it says, “The 2007-08 GRF Budget 
represents the 14th consecutive budget on a GRF basis.” On a 
GRF basis, General Revenue Fund basis. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, the government has a lot of accounts. 
They’ve got the GRF. They’ve got the rainy day fund. They 
have Crown corporation accounts. They have pension unfunded 
liability funds. And when you put them all together, you really 
get a clear picture of the financial situation of the government. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, this government, this NDP government 
has things it likes to hide. And so basically what they do would 
be what you and I would do if we had a number of bank 
accounts. And if we withdrew a lot of money or borrowed on a 
lot of these accounts and then stuck all the money into one 
account, we could say that we had a surplus in that one account 
even though the deficits in all the other accounts far surpass the 
surplus in the one account. Let’s say it’s a chequing account. 
So, Madam Speaker, we’ve run our Visas to the max. We’ve 
borrowed on our savings account. We’ve turned in our RRSPs 
[Registered Retirement Savings Plan]. We have taken out our 
lines of credit, and we’ve dumped it all into that chequing 
account to say that we have a surplus in the chequing account. 
 

Now we all know, Madam Speaker, that people, certainly 
bankers, anyone with any knowledge of finances — I would 
suggest even elementary grade school children — would figure 
out in a hurry that this is deceptive and this is just simply a way 
to try to mislead the general public to say that this is another 
balanced budget, in fact the 14th balanced budget. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I remember when the government went 
to summary financial statements at the urging, I might add, of 
the member for Canora-Pelly who suggested over and over 
again and made strong arguments that we should be doing our 
accounting on a summary financial basis. So we had officials 
from the Department of Finance, the minister’s own 
department, come and brief the official opposition on what it 
meant to be moving to summary financial accounting. And 
these two officials that briefed our caucus said, really, what you 
need to look at now is not the GRF fund — I mean, that’s a 
little interesting component — but you have to look at the 
whole picture. 
 
And what you need to look at is what is the net debt? And the 
change in the net debt will tell you whether there’s been a 
surplus or whether there’s been a deficit. So with that backdrop, 
let’s continue to browse through this book that the Minister of 
Finance, the NDP member for Regina South, has asked us to 
do. 
 
And I look at page 18, and here’s a graph that talks about debt 
servicing costs as a share of revenue. And we notice that it 
peaked in 1993-1994 — these are the Romanow years, Madam 
Speaker — and then they started to move down until ’05-06. 
And now, ’07-08, that number is back on the way up. Now, 
Madam Speaker, a financial mismanagement by this current 
Minister of Finance is starting to show in the graphs. The trend 
which was a healthy trend has been reversed, and now we are 
seeing that the debt servicing costs as share of revenue are 
actually increasing. 
 
And I hope that the Minister of Finance is following along and 
browsing with me as he’s asked me to do. 
 
If you turn over to page 40, and we see the total debt of General 
Revenue Fund. And we see, Madam Speaker, that the 
government total debt on the bottom — the dark blue — kind of 
holds even at 7.3 billion, but we see that the Crown corporation 
total debt is starting to move up, and move up significantly. 
And the result is that the debt of the General Revenue Fund has 
increased by $300 million, Madam Speaker. 
 
Now if we continue to follow the Finance minister’s 
recommendation to browse his budget so we’re . . . I mean 
they’re chirping . . . I see the Minister of Health from North 
Battleford chirping. He doesn’t want me to browse the budget 
like the Finance minister suggested. He wants to keep people in 
the dark. He wants people to be unaware of what’s going on 
with this budget. Well, Madam Speaker, we will not be silenced 
on this side of the House by any bullying or any chirping from 
the Minister of Health from North Battleford because we want 
to get to the bottom of this budget. We do want to browse it and 
find out exactly what’s going on. 
 
Well if we look at page 50, Madam Speaker, which shows 
revenues that this government receives, and I see that revenues 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

are up, Madam Speaker, revenues are up. The tax revenue is up. 
Corporate capital tax revenue is up. Corporate income tax 
revenue is up. Fuel tax revenue is up. Individual income tax 
revenue is up. It just goes up, up, up, up. I see one down. That’s 
the sales tax is down a little bit. But the end result is that tax 
revenue is up substantially from $4 billion to $4.1 billion. 
 
Well we look at the non-renewable resource revenue. And we 
see that revenues from natural gas are up, from potash are up, 
other is up . There’s just up, up, up, up. 
 
And at the end we see, Madam Speaker, that this government 
does not have a revenue problem. This government is rolling in 
money. In fact in the current fiscal year, they’re expecting to 
take in $7,869,300,000. That’s a lot of money, Madam Speaker. 
That comes from hard-working taxpayers who pay their taxes. 
It comes from businesses who have invested in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And they, Madam Speaker, have increased the 
revenue available to the NDP. 
 
So what do the NDP do? Well we have to look at the next page, 
page 51. And this just blows you away. We realize that no, the 
NDP government does not have a revenue problem, but indeed 
they do have a spending problem. We look at almost every 
department where we see spending up significantly. And we see 
that this government wasn’t able to live within its means. In 
fact, Madam Speaker, spending by the NDP government in the 
last year has risen from $7,700,292,000 all the way up to 
8,349,730,000 jobs. That’s a lot of money. That’s a lot more 
money than they take in in taxes and in revenue. 
 
So we need to get to this bottom line. We need to get to page 
58. This is the page that the Department of Finance told the 
opposition to go to see whether or not we had a surplus or 
whether we have a deficit budget. So I look at net debt at the 
end of the year . . . or actually net debt at the beginning of the 
year — 7.825 billion. Net debt at the end of the year — 
$8,751,400,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What page? What page? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That’s on page 58. I hope the Finance 
minister has a look at it. 
 
So I don’t know how the Finance minister can get up in his seat 
on budget day and say that this is the 14th consecutive balanced 
budget because, Madam Speaker, it is not a balanced budget. It 
is a deficit. It is a significant deficit. It is increasing the debt of 
the people of Saskatchewan. It is a burden on the young people 
of this province. 
 
It’s no wonder that young people are supporting the 
Saskatchewan Party. They’re voting for the member for 
Martensville. They voted for the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy because they’re tired of the mismanagement of the NDP 
government. They’re tired of the false stories they’ve heard 
from the NDP government. They’re tired of hearing about 
umpteen balanced budgets when in fact more budgets have been 
deficits than have been surpluses in the last 14 years. 
 
Now I suppose, Madam Speaker, that if the government had all 
this money and were actually spending in a way that helped 
Saskatchewan people, that they could argue that, you know, that 

there was at least some good out of spending more than you 
make. So I looked at this budget and I thought, what is the 
consequence of the NDP spending more money than they’ve 
ever spent before with revenues that don’t meet their 
expenditures? 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I look at the result, and what do I see as a result? I see 
fewer people in Saskatchewan today than I saw last year. I see a 
drop of tens of thousands of people since the NDP took over 
this government back in 1991. Madam Speaker, I see 
communities decimated by the NDP. I see the volunteer base in 
this province reduced, eroded. 
 
Madam Speaker, I see the disappointment in people whose 
family members have left the province. Children have left 
parents. Grandparents have seen their children and 
grandchildren leave the province of Saskatchewan to find 
employment and make a life somewhere else. 
 
Madam Speaker, I see enrolments in school dropping in 
Saskatchewan, far fewer students in this province than we’ve 
seen before. Following the drop in enrolment of students, I see 
fewer teachers teaching in this province. Madam Speaker, at the 
same time I see property taxes increase to fund education. 
 
It is interesting that the current Finance minister was formerly 
the minister of Education. And we talked to him in estimates. 
We talked to him in Public Accounts. And he said, you know, 
we’re going to get this inequity in the funding of education, of 
primary education, corrected in Saskatchewan. We’re going to 
change the formula. And we’re going to amalgamate the 
districts into big, huge districts. And we’re just going to get 
everything back on track. 
 
And he knew that in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency the 
majority of the school districts were zero-based boards where 
100 per cent of the funding for education came from the 
property tax payers, and nothing came from the province of 
Saskatchewan in the way of transfers to the school district. And 
the minister of Education at the time, now the Minister of 
Finance, said he was going to fix this problem. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, they changed. They amalgamated a 
number of districts so now the school districts are larger than 
the provincial ridings that they used to be within, that they used 
to lie within. Madam Speaker, they have accommodated the 
government’s wishes, and they are functioning as best they can. 
But in fact these zero-based boards — which actually saw in 
some cases a slight reduction in the mill rate and in other cases 
quite a significant increase in the mill rate — are now seeing an 
overall increase in mill rates to the point to where within a year 
or so they will be zero-based boards again. And 100 per cent of 
their funding will once again come from the property tax payers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is blatantly unfair. This is a breach of trust upon the people 
of Saskatchewan by the NDP government. It is unconscionable. 
It is wrong. The Premier said he wouldn’t do it, but he has done 
it. The Minister of Finance said he wouldn’t do it, but he did it. 
He used to be the minister of Education. He said he wasn’t 
going to do it, but it’s happened. I’ve not heard an apology. I’ve 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

not heard of any emergency meetings to fix the problem. The 
NDP just seem to be quite happy having misled the people of 
Saskatchewan and hurt the education system as a result. 
 
Madam Speaker, we also have the crummiest highways in 
Canada. And I’m sorry to say that I have more than my fair 
share of them in the riding of Rosetown-Elrose. These are roads 
that are really not fit to be driven on. They’re not safe. They’re 
a danger to people. They are hard on the equipment. A vehicle 
that might last, you know, for 4 or 500,000 kilometres in other 
parts of Canada will wear out in half the time or with half the 
mileage here in Saskatchewan because of the deplorable state of 
the roads. 
 
So the NDP have this windfall of money, more money than 
they’ve ever been able to get their grubby little paws on before 
in their entire life. And what have they done with it? They have 
the worst roads that we’ve seen in Saskatchewan in decades. 
Madam Speaker, there isn’t a highway . . . Not even the twin 
highways, not even Highway 11 and the TransCanada, are 
without potholes and ruts. You know, if our best highways are 
deplorable, can you imagine the state of our secondary 
highways? They are absolutely awful. They are an 
embarrassment. They are disgraceful. And I see members on the 
other side laughing. They don’t care. That is particularly 
disheartening. 
 
Madam Speaker, I see hit-and-miss service by the Riverhurst 
ferry. I wonder if they’ve got it fixed this winter. It’ll be 
interesting to see what kind of a season the Riverhurst ferry has 
in the coming year. But with all this money, up to this point, 
they haven’t been able to get the problem fixed. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’ve seen intolerable living conditions for 
level 4 patients in Rosetown because this government will not 
provide a facility that is worthy of placing our seniors and other 
people who need extended care. Madam Speaker, they are 
placed in a basement. They are placed in intolerable positions. 
The Health minister should hang his head in shame that to the 
seniors of this province and to the most vulnerable people in 
this province, he would stick them in a basement where they’re 
not seen, tell them to shut up and not ask for better living 
conditions. I think it’s intolerable. And I think that member 
should resign if he can’t provide better service for our seniors 
and vulnerable people than he has shown to the people of 
Rosetown who he has refused to provide adequate level 4 health 
care. 
 
Madam Speaker, we have seen the withdrawal of service from 
rural Saskatchewan. This government has decided that they’ve 
given up on rural Saskatchewan. So the Health minister, the 
former Health minister, who’s now I believe the Minister of 
Environment, went and opened up a new hospital or announced 
a new hospital would be built in Outlook. And then 
subsequently either he or the current Health minister decided to 
withdraw the local laundry service. Let’s get rid of some jobs in 
rural Saskatchewan. Let’s take away laundry service from the 
Outlook Hospital. 
 
And then that wasn’t good enough. They said, we’ve got a 
SaskPower office in Rosetown. Can’t let them have any service 
in rural Saskatchewan. Let’s shut that SaskPower office down. I 
sent a note over to the Minister Responsible for SaskPower the 

other day. Hasn’t had the decency to get back to me yet. 
 
He plans to shut that office down on the March 31. It doesn’t 
matter whether it’s needed. Doesn’t matter what the 
consequences are. Doesn’t matter that it’s an erosion of service 
to rural Saskatchewan, to the community of Rosetown and the 
surrounding areas. He could care less about rural Saskatchewan. 
He could care less about the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan. He says it’s going to shut down on March 31 
and hasn’t even been so kind as to respond to the note that I 
sent him the other day. 
 
Madam Speaker, when I see a government that’s spending more 
money than they’ve ever spent in their history and provide so 
little service, it breaks your heart. Madam Speaker, there are a 
lot of other areas that I’d like to cover, but my time is coming to 
an end. 
 
On the Intergovernmental Affairs file, Madam Speaker, we see 
Alberta and BC [British Columbia] co-operating through the 
TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 
agreement. We see their economies moving forward. We see 
this government dragging its heels, afraid of the unions or 
whatever, afraid of their shadow, perhaps, Madam Speaker. But 
they have to study it and study it and study it. 
 
Madam Speaker, there’s no way that they’ll sign on to the 
TILMA agreement before the next election. It’s going to take a 
new government with some vision and with some hope and 
some optimism about Saskatchewan to do bold things like sign 
on to the TILMA agreement and get this province rolling. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, the NDP are always looking for 
someone to blame for their own incompetency. Now I was first 
elected in 1999. I’ve watched these members face crisis after 
crisis, come short time after time after time. It used to be when I 
would sit in my chair, Madam Speaker, they’d say, oh, it’s the 
Liberals in Ottawa that are the problem. We can’t do anything 
about health care. We can’t do anything about equalization. We 
can’t do anything about agriculture. We’re helpless NDPers. 
We don’t know how to do anything. It’s the Liberals’ fault. 
 
Well we got rid of the Liberals and now the Conservatives are 
in. And Mr. Strahl brings a few million dollars it seems like 
every other week. And the Minister of Agriculture insults him 
every time he comes out here. And now the equalization didn’t 
turn out the way we all wanted it to, so now it’s all the 
Conservatives’ fault. And the NDP relish in the fact that now 
they can point their fingers at the NDP. 
 
You know, they’ve also pointed their fingers at Alberta. It’s all 
Alberta’s fault. If it wasn’t for Alberta next door, we’d be just 
fine in Saskatchewan. But they have some leadership. They 
have some good government to the west of us. Makes the NDP 
look bad. So rather than getting things fixed here in 
Saskatchewan, they look at Alberta and say, whoa, whoa, whoa, 
we don’t want to be like Alberta. It’s all Alberta’s fault that we 
have any problems here in Saskatchewan. And then if that’s not 
good enough they’ll find Quebec, or they’ll blame George 
Bush, or they’ll blame — who knows? — the United Nations. I 
don’t know who they’ll find next to blame for their problems. It 
reminds me, Madam Speaker, of the old Flip Wilson signature 
line, the devil made me do it. I’m sure that’s the next person 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

they’re going to blame for all their problems. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are tired of 
excuses. They’re tired of a melancholy, ship shod government. 
They want change. That’s why they’re going to get change 
when the next election occurs. And that’s why I’m going to 
support the amendment and vote against this budget. Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me today to rise and speak to this 
budget, November 2007, part of this government’s progressive 
approach to making life better for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe that the members of this 
House enjoyed the Minister of Finance’s introduction of the 
budget late last week. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance spent months 
consulting with members of the Saskatchewan public, working 
with stakeholders across this province, working with individual 
members of this legislature, and, Madam Deputy Speaker, has 
crafted a budget that certainly makes life better for the people of 
Saskatchewan and gives young people, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, gives young people an opportunity to consider 
building their careers right here in this great province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, all residents of Saskatchewan are 
going to benefit — in fact are benefiting — from the prosperity 
of this province as a result of actions taken late last year in our 
reconciliation of last year’s third quarter results and the 
direction outlined in the budget in front of us today. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this budget provides benefits and opportunities 
to improve life for particularly seniors, for young people, and, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, for municipalities in this province — a 
net benefit actually for every single resident of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So my thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker, to the Minister of 
Finance and my colleagues here on this side of the House, a 
government that is showing the ability to be responsive to the 
people of the province, proven to listen to the residents of 
Saskatchewan, and, Madam Deputy Speaker, are not afraid to 
be bold in our leadership capacity in presenting a budget that 
provides these benefits. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to take the opportunity 
also to thank the residents of The Battlefords constituency for 
their continued support in the work that I’ve had the 
opportunity to provide over the last three years. And I hope to 
be able to continue to work with the residents of The 
Battlefords for many years to come, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Battlefords is a very interesting constituency, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Although it’s considered a urban constituency, 
the majority of people who live within The Battlefords — 
within the boundaries of the city of North Battleford and the 
town of Battleford — Madam Deputy Speaker, the people there 
either have come from rural Saskatchewan, grew up in rural 

Saskatchewan, or have family members in rural Saskatchewan. 
Our economy is built around servicing rural Saskatchewan, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Because we are considered a urban constituency, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, sometimes people have the idea that in fact 
these are big city people. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
folks in The Battlefords are salt of the earth. They’re from the 
land. They benefited from the land for years. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, they have reviewed this budget 
over the course of the last few days, over the weekend. And 
those, Madam Deputy Speaker, who spoke to me at the hockey 
rink, at the grocery store, on the main street of North Battleford, 
at the curling club’s annual general meeting on Saturday night 
— those residents of the community, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
said that we are going in the right direction: our tax reductions, 
our support for seniors and health care and young people, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and Madam Deputy Speaker, our debt 
reduction strategy. Madam Deputy Speaker, they have indicated 
to me that they are very supportive of the direction that this 
government is taking. 
 
And therefore, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased and 
very proud to be able to bring that message back to this 
legislature and, through this legislature back to them, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, indicate that I will continue to listen to them 
and to work with them to achieve even bigger and brighter 
things for northwest Saskatchewan and for ultimately all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, in terms of The Battlefords, I 
had the opportunity to review the budget in great detail, and I 
thought I should perhaps outline some of the things that aren’t 
jumping right out at everyone about the support that this budget 
provides to residents in The Battlefords. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think you are aware that not too 
long ago this government announced a commitment to the 
rebuilding of the Saskatchewan Hospital in The Battlefords; 
Saskatchewan Hospital, Madam Deputy Speaker, that provides 
mental health services, forensic services, psychiatric 
institutional services to all the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s 
located in The Battlefords area, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget now, in addition to the funding for the new $60 
million facility for the Saskatchewan Hospital, this budget, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, does two things. Within the context of 
this budget, Madam Deputy Speaker, is $1 million to further the 
planning process to ensure that we have a new facility, a new 
structure that indeed not only recognizes and represents the 
issues in mental health for the province of Saskatchewan today, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, but will take into account the fact that 
this institution, this facility, and the services provided in it are 
going to last the people of this province for tens and tens of 
years, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Therefore when we have the opportunity to plan once in our 
lifetime for a facility like this, we’ve got to ensure that we 
recognize the needs of Saskatchewan people 10 years, 20 years, 
and 30 years out, Madam Deputy Speaker. This budget contains 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

$1 million to facilitate that planning process to ensure that we 
get it right. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I can say to the 
people of The Battlefords and Saskatchewan, the planning 
process is going according to schedule, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and during the course of this year that planning 
process will be completed. 
 
Secondly, Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget contains in our 
training area, from Advanced Education and Employment, the 
development of a brand new psychiatric nursing program. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we will be creating a new psychiatric 
nursing program through training seats advanced in this budget 
to enhance the ability to deliver services, mental health services, 
at the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, what this does, by allowing us to 
introduce the funding for these new training seats in registered 
psychiatric nursing, Madam Deputy Speaker, is to give the 
opportunity now to plan forward in the construction and 
development of the construction processes for this facility, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, an opportunity to examine delivering 
that program in The Battlefords, Madam Deputy Speaker, not 
only a new program, not only a program to enhance and support 
training services but, Madam Deputy Speaker, a new program 
that could be delivered right there in The Battlefords. I’m very 
excited about that potential, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
looking forward to the year as we discuss how to implement 
this. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the Prairie North Regional Health 
budget, there are additional resources to take a look at the 
expansion of the renal dialysis unit, Madam Deputy Speaker — 
a unit that’s been under a lot of pressure, a unit that is very well 
supported from people in northwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a few years ago the dialysis system in 
Saskatchewan was delivered from Saskatoon and Regina. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, over the last five years the province 
have expanded the dialysis capacity in this province so that now 
every single regional hospital, and in fact now two district 
hospitals, have renal dialysis capacity. We are continuing to 
expand the capacity of the renal dialysis system in this 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker, further enhancing the lives 
of those people who unfortunately require the dialysis services, 
but now we’re seeing pressure to expand the delivery of those 
services in the satellites that have just recently been created. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ve got expansion in Yorkton 
taking place as we speak, and this budget contains resources to 
allow Battlefords Union Hospital to expand its dialysis system. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, also this budget contains the money 
necessary to support a community recreational infrastructure — 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a program that was announced after 
the third quarter of last year; Madam Deputy Speaker, a 
program that is financed in this budget in front of us. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, individuals within The Battlefords are taking a 
look at a multi-purpose facility that will include a new curling 
rink, a new swimming pool, a performing arts centre, perhaps a 
soccer field, perhaps an additional skating rink. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the people of The Battlefords are prepared to provide 
considerable funding to support a new recreational and cultural 
facility. Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget contains resources 
to provide provincial support to that very important local 

program. 
 
And while we’re talking about municipal infrastructure, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this budget contains the single largest increase 
in revenue sharing in the history of this revenue-sharing 
program, Madam Deputy Speaker: $30 million over the course 
of the province, Madam Deputy Speaker. Municipalities will 
now be able to use these dollars, these new dollars, to enhance 
the services or, Madam Deputy Speaker, maintain the tax base 
or even reduce the property tax base within their own 
jurisdictions. Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget provides 
resources to municipalities unheralded in the history of this 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker. And we’re very happy to be 
able to provide citizens who pay property tax in our 
communities, and The Battlefords are no exception, Madam 
Deputy Speaker . . . resources to citizens who pay property tax 
an opportunity to know that their provincial government is 
sharing in the resources that provide support to our 
municipalities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in The Battlefords of course we also 
have an urban park. There are five of them around the province. 
This budget contains additional support for the urban park, the 
River Valley Park in The Battlefords between the town of 
Battleford and the city of North Battleford. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, later this week the Minister of the Environment will 
accompany me in the city of North Battleford or the town of 
Battleford in order to unveil the exact dollar value available for 
the 2007-2008 year for support of the urban park, dollars 
greater than were there last year, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also we can’t forget the highway infrastructure that’s going to 
support northwest Saskatchewan and the twinning of Highway 
16 between the town of Battleford and the city of Lloydminster. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s funding in this particular 
budget that will finally complete the twinning of that piece of 
highway there, the Yellowhead Highway, what is now one of 
Canada’s trans-Canada highways, Madam Deputy Speaker — 
something that I’ve proudly worked on for almost my entire 
political career, the twinning of the Yellowhead Highway from 
Manitoba to Alberta, Madam Deputy Speaker. We are just 
about finished that portion that I’ve travelled the most, Madam 
Deputy Speaker: Saskatoon through Lloydminster. And I’m 
very delighted that during the course of my political career I’ve 
been able to support a provincial government that’s been very 
supportive of the work that is taking place there. 
 
On top of that, Madam Deputy Speaker, is a $5 million program 
to support the rural municipalities in the Lloydminster area, the 
rural municipalities that are subject to heavy-haul oil, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They’ve been asking this government for some 
time to support their interests there to ensure that there are not 
undue burdens put on the oil and gas sector, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, because of the way in which they utilize those rural 
roads. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, those rural municipalities came 
to this government. They outlined their plan. This government 
listened and acted, and this budget provides additional support 
to northwest Saskatchewan rural municipalities specific to the 
interests that they have raised with us. So, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I am just absolutely delighted with the support that this 
budget provides to residents of The Battlefords and northwest 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these resources are going to — 
Madam Deputy Speaker, without question, without a doubt — 
provide net benefits to young people, to seniors, to 
municipalities, property tax payers right across the piece of 
northwest Saskatchewan. We are making life better for 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to indicate that this 
budget very much follows the session that we’re in. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we can’t forget that this session began in 
October of last year and this government at that point provided 
a signal to the people of Saskatchewan about where in fact the 
next year would go. The Throne Speech in October 2006, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, clearly outlined a strategy that this 
budget is now closely delivering on. 
 
What was in that Throne Speech, Madam Deputy Speaker? We 
can’t forget October 2007 where the Throne Speech says, and I 
quote: 
 

The focus for my government in this Session is to make 
life better for today’s Saskatchewan families, and to build 
an even better future here for young people. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the four cornerstones outlined clearly 
in the Throne Speech: 
 

[No. 1] Make Saskatchewan the best place for young 
people to live, work, and build strong futures; 
[No. 2] Strengthen Saskatchewan’s leadership in 
improving public health care while reducing wait times 
and improving access to services; 
[No. 3] Advance Saskatchewan as a leader in 
environmental protection and the green economy; and 
[4] Ensure that today’s Saskatchewan families benefit 
from our strong economy. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, look within those four cornerstones set 
out in October last year. Compare it to the initiatives that have 
taken place since then and, more specifically, the initiatives 
contained in this budget. Madam Deputy Speaker, it provides 
support for seniors, for youth, for the environment, for 
municipalities. 
 
And the Saskatchewan families benefit, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, from the resource revenues, from the prosperity that 
Saskatchewan is enjoying today. Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
Throne Speech clearly set out a stage, a line of action that this 
government has stepped forward and has followed very, very 
clearly. 
 
Compare that to, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the things 
that were happening back in the 1980s when the members 
opposite had control of the public purse, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. When people in this province have an opportunity to 
examine what kind of government do they want to see provided 
by the people they elect, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are two 
records, two records that the people of Saskatchewan can look 
back on. 
 
Number one is the record of the ’80s that these members 

opposite were engaged in. And number two is the record of this 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker, since we took office in 
1991. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the record is clear as a 
bell. Madam Deputy Speaker, the record is clear as a bell. 
 
There is no doubt, Madam Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
people cannot support the type of government that was brought 
forward in the 1980s. Madam Deputy Speaker, the support that 
this government has been able to provide in direct response to 
the needs of Saskatchewan people — what a difference, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Earlier today, earlier today when the member from Saskatoon 
was on his feet in statements by members, he pointed out very 
clearly in fact the way in which budget deficits were built in 
this province. Take a look back to the 1980s and the 
government of Grant Devine where, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
they didn’t have surplus accounts to draw from as we do in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Madam Deputy Speaker, to ensure 
that all programs are able to be funded, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and have balanced budgets. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look back to 1985 after the 
Grant Devine government was kind of on a roll trying to find a 
way out of the crazy election promises that it made to 
Saskatchewan people. And it resulted in the selling off of 
highway equipment at bargain basement prices and, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, building swimming pools and hot tubs for the 
rich all across this province. Madam Deputy Speaker, they built 
a deficit that was . . . We’re still not out of that area, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The 1985 budget of the Grant Devine budget had a deficit, a 
deficit that had nothing to back it up or support it, no assets to 
back it up, Madam Deputy Speaker — $578 million. They 
followed that up, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 1986 with a 
budget deficit of $1.2 billion. This is back, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, when the total revenues for the province were hardly 
over $5 billion a year and 1.2 billion in overspending. 
 
Then in 1987 they followed that up with another $500 million 
deficit, Madam Deputy Speaker, with no plan, no plan of action 
whatsoever as to how to pay off any of this debt. We just keep 
building it up and hope that one day something will happen to 
correct this. Then we go to 1991 when that government of 
Grant Devine wouldn’t even table a budget, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Wouldn’t even table a budget. But they had a budget, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And that budget had a deficit in it — 
$842 million, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan had enough. The people of 
Saskatchewan said, no more; we want nothing to do with that 
crowd any more, Madam Deputy Speaker. And they elected a 
New Democratic Party government in 1991. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And between 1991 and the end of that decade, in 2000, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this government worked darned hard to rebuild 
this province, Madam Deputy Speaker, to rebuild confidence 
from the people of Saskatchewan, from the business 
community, from others outside; to build a province that was, 
people had the confidence to put new investments in place, 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

Madam Deputy Speaker. We did that. We did that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And now, Madam Deputy Speaker, from the year 2000 to the 
year present, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 2007, we’ve had the 
opportunity to enjoy the benefits of a strong economy — an 
economy where the people have confidence in their 
government. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, that confidence has 
resulted in prosperity. That prosperity is now being shared with 
the people of Saskatchewan in this budget. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we are making life better for Saskatchewan families. 
We are building a province in which young people can have an 
opportunity to build their careers. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am proud to be a Saskatchewan 
resident. I’m proud to be a New Democrat. I’m proud to be a 
member of this government. Madam Deputy Speaker, thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s good to join this 
particular budget debate and express the views of my 
constituents from Arm River-Watrous. I want to congratulate 
the member for Martensville on her excellent speech and her 
winning in Martensville which I think has set the tone — same 
as the one in Weyburn — that has set the tone that is going to 
be carrying on to the next election because the people are tired 
of this government. They are sick and tired of this government. 
Doesn’t matter where you go. They were sick and tired in rural 
Saskatchewan of it a year or last election. But now it’s the cities 
are tired of it. They are tired of this particular government. It 
has no direction. And now coming out with this deficit budget. 
 
When you talk to people throughout my constituency, but I 
don’t know, even in the newspapers, even today when you’re in 
the city, they’re talking about this government doing a deficit 
budget. And that’s what it is. Under summary financing, it is a 
deficit budget. It’s $700 million in debt. And the people aren’t 
impressed with that. You know this budget does, I’ll admit this 
budget does a few good things. Every budget has to have a few 
good things in it. But this budget goes nothing to further the 
province of Saskatchewan, no long-range plan. 
 
All it does is working towards dividing rural Saskatchewan and 
urban again, and even First Nations. This budget is trying, like 
this NDP has done time after time, trying to drive a wedge out. 
My constituency, my constituency alone there’s four schools 
closing. And this government talks about how this province is 
growing, how this population is growing. 
 
Well why didn’t you give some more extra funding for 
education? With Horizon, right now they only get . . . 27 per 
cent of their budget comes from the provincial government. The 
rest, Madam Deputy Speaker, comes from the taxpayers. Sun 
West is 12 per cent. I was at a meeting just a month ago when 
they were doing the review and talking to the people about the 
school closures. Twelve per cent comes from the government. 
The rest is picked up by taxpayers. And you wonder why 
people in rural Saskatchewan are fed up and sick and tired of 

this particular government with that. 
 
They were looking towards this budget for some direction. 
They were looking for this to have some confidence in rural 
Saskatchewan in them schools and in them towns. And there 
was nothing; the grants were shrunken. The only part of the 
education budget that grew was extra money to cover the 
teachers’ salaries was put in, but there was nothing to actually, 
actually to help these schools stay open. So unfortunately we’re 
going to be looking at possibly school closures in a province 
that should be growing and will grow if it had the right 
government in place. And right now we don’t have the right 
government in place and that’s why the people of Saskatchewan 
have lost confidence in this government. It has no direction of 
where it’s going, no long-range plan when it comes to that with 
the school divisions out there. 
 
Some of the schools out there that they’re looking at closing 
have 100 students in there. Imperial has 100 students and you’re 
looking, you have that school under review for closure. That’s 
an absolute shame up there, moving 100 students throughout 
the province. 
 
No long-range plans on highways. The minister talks about 
highways. If you look at the plan, every year they put about 300 
to $400 million into it. Now they’re talking about this huge plan 
that’s going in there. It’s not hardly any extra money. I was at a 
meeting last week called line 19, which is a highway, 19 
Highway out there. That’s the mayors along the line, that’s the 
reeves from the municipalities are in it, the REDA [regional 
economic development authority] people. There was even 
people from the government that were there; the Highways had 
some officials there. 
 
And they said, okay what’s your plan on this? Supposedly the 
Minister of Highways made this long-range plan commitment. 
Highway 19 feeds Lake Diefenbaker, one of the biggest tourist 
areas in the province of Saskatchewan, and it has been beaten 
up for a number of years. 
 
And then people asked the Highway officials, what’s your plan 
for Highway 19? You know, you’ve laid out, your minister’s 
laid out this grand plan. He’s made these big announcements. 
What is it? And they said, you know, we don’t know. They 
said, for this year we’re just going to be patching again. He 
said, that’s all we’re going to be able to do on Highway 19. It’s 
slated . . . For a highway that services one of the biggest tourist 
areas in Saskatchewan under the long-range plan is yes, we’re 
just going to be patching the holes again. 
 
And they said, with what — with the cold mix again, with 
gravel, a little bit of cold mix? And he says, yes probably. He 
says, we don’t even know if we’re going to be able to get hot 
mix for it. So I mean, there’s going to be broken windshields. 
Them holes are going to be pounded out again. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, no plan — that’s why they’re not selling this budget. 
 
Highway 15, just further up, there’s a stretch of it about, it’s 
about 2 miles. They started work last fall on it, right basically in 
October — tore the pavement up, tore the gravel up, and then 
naturally, it froze. They couldn’t do any work. And it’s just a 
quagmire right now. I’ve gotten calls and we’ve I know sent 
some calls to the minister’s office on it, you know. And right 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

now they can’t do any work because, I mean, how can you 
work in this kind of weather till the frost leaves the ground? I 
mean, that should have been done in the fall. 
 
And the people that were at the meeting from the Department of 
Highways knew it was supposed to be done, and they admit it. 
And they said but, you know, coming from Regina, we just, the 
funding either comes late or all of a sudden. They’ll just say in 
late October, we got a little extra money. We want you to go 
finally patch this thing that you asked, that part. The regional 
director in that area had asked for that to be fixed in June. When 
do you get the money? In October. He said well yes, we got to 
start. 
 
You know, that is why there’s no faith in this particular 
government on this budget. People of Arm River-Watrous I 
mean, I was out there on the weekend, don’t like this budget. I 
mean, they don’t like this government. I mean, that’s well 
known. I’ve said that many, many times, and the proof is they 
still elect me here. So I mean, that’s proof that I’m not really 
lying that they don’t like this government and this budget. But 
this one was even more, this budget was even more, they were 
even more disgusted about this particular budget. 
 
They were thinking that this province is maybe hopefully trying 
to turn around with it. And where they see rural Saskatchewan 
population lost, a government that continually forgets about 
rural Saskatchewan in any way it can . . . all the services that’s 
yanked out, the rural service centres a couple of years ago that 
were yanked out. We’ve had our SaskPower office taken out. 
Every day, every day I present petitions on the section shop in 
Watrous. And even though the minister gets them, he says yes 
we’re not going to touch it. But the union has said that they’ve 
seen that document. And you know what? The people of 
Watrous, they believe that. They signed that. They send it to my 
office all the time. And constantly when I’m up in Watrous, 
they feel that if this government is elected one more time that 
they will lose that section shop. And I firmly believe that they 
will, that this government will yank one more thing out of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskPower, if you’re on the farm, for infrastructure you pay 50 
cents more on your bill than anybody else, any other residents. 
You pay more than if you do in a town, a city, a village, or in an 
urban area. You pay 50 cents more. Now where’s equal? The 
Premier, I’ve heard him say everybody in this province is 
treated equal. Everybody, when it comes to delivery of services, 
everybody is treated equal. Yet if you live on a farm in 
Saskatchewan, you pay 50 cents more on your bill than an 
urban resident does. Why is that? You know, I thought 
everything was supposed to be equal in this province at that end 
of it. 
 
You know, there’s another thing that isn’t addressed in this 
budget. You know, out of . . . There isn’t one thing out there 
that’s basically out there to help rural Saskatchewan at that. 
And with that, it’s going just . . . Just the apathy and the disgust 
for this government has been growing in rural Saskatchewan 
since ’99. But right now with the two by-elections, one in 
Weyburn and one in Martensville, it’s going into the city. 
 
When I was door knocking in Martensville and Warman, those 
are people that work in the city. And all you got to do is look — 

472 votes. I mean they weren’t even close in any of the polls. I 
was up there that night. I mean, you know, the polls that come 
in, it’d be like 50 for Saskatchewan Party, 2 for the NDP; 48 for 
Saskatchewan Party, maybe 3 for the NDP. Them people work 
in the city. And you know when I was door knocking there, 
they said that the people they work with are disgusted with 
them in the city, this particular government. 
 
So I mean we are possibly looking at a sweep throughout this 
province. And I mean that is what this province needs to grow 
with that. And that is why . . . And this budget out there has . . . 
not going to change one person’s mind on that, Deputy Speaker, 
not one person’s mind at that. 
 
You read the papers. You read the editorials. You listen to the 
talk shows. There’s been nobody that’s been switching with this 
budget. They all feel that this budget has no long-range plan 
under this particular government. We’re not going to grow. 
We’ve been sitting stagnant for 10 to 15 years under this 
government. And they know that if, if they elect them, if this 
government were to be elected again, the very slim chance if it 
was to be elected again, that this province would still be 
stagnant at that. 
 
In this budget there was nothing mentioned about biofuel 
industry. I did not see one thing in that budget dealing with 
biofuel industries. I have two plants that are struggling to get up 
and running. One of them is in Loreburn and another one’s in 
Nokomis, you know, and they were looking towards this budget 
for anything added. And they weren’t looking for handouts. 
That’s one of the things; they weren’t looking for a handout. 
 
I know one of the members just hollered well they were looking 
for money. No, they weren’t looking for handouts. They were 
looking for infrastructure money. They were looking for 
investment on the highways so they can haul . . . the road. 
Highway 20 they need that primary weight. They need that so 
they can be competitive. Highway 19 isn’t even . . . it’s just a 
goat trail. And yet them people, you know what they said when 
they’re building that? They told the Department of Highways 
that that line 19 . . . [inaudible] . . . we’re building it no matter 
what. No matter if there’s a goat trail or not, we’re going to 
build, you know. 
 
Even if this Government of Saskatchewan has written off rural 
Saskatchewan, people out there in rural Saskatchewan haven’t 
written it off. You know they were looking for anything, any 
incentives, but not money. They weren’t looking for handouts. 
They were looking for to be competitive with the United States 
and with the rest of Canada because the industry is moving 
ahead. The biofuel industry is moving ahead with that, and we 
should be a leader and not a follower. 
 
We’ve made some things. We’ve finally mandated ethanol fuel. 
We haven’t mandated biodiesel; I have a private member’s Bill 
on that. We haven’t mandated that. You know, but we’re 
always following. We follow what the other provinces are 
doing, and we’re behind. We follow that in every industry that 
we’ve ever gone in this . . . [inaudible] . . . we’re never a leader 
when it comes to economic development in this province. 
 
You know another thing I looked for in this budget and the 
people of Watrous looked for in this budget was funding for 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

their hospital, for their lodge there. They’ve been asking for that 
I think for seven years. I remember the Premier’s estimates last 
year. I asked the Premier about it and he said, you know, he 
said I will look at it. He said I’m going to get back to you on 
that. He never got back. He didn’t get back to me or the people 
of Watrous. 
 
I didn’t expect him to get back to me, but I expected this being 
election year as do the people of Watrous, that they would be 
funding . . . We’re looking at $5 million for that. The people 
have raised their money. They’re sitting on it. The lodge roof 
leaks you know, and they should fix it. But they say — what? 
— we fix it this year, we spend a half a million dollars of that 
money and then next year all of a sudden the province says 
we’re going to build it for you. You know, then you’ve wasted 
that. 
 
They’ve been waiting for six years for the government to step 
up. They’ve raised money for ten years prior to that. And now 
they’re sitting there watching the costs, as we all know, of 
labour go up, of construction materials go up. So every year 
they’ve got to try to raise more money. And also they feel guilty 
that they’re not fixing that lodge pouring money in, because 
they always think well next year this government is going to 
pay their share. We’re looking at possibly $5 million at that end 
of it. You know this government has $100 million for recreation 
facilities but you have to apply . . . $1 million is the minimum, 
you know. So that doesn’t help any of my constituency. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I have 4,500 square miles. I have like 30 towns. None of them 
even qualify even close to that. Yet are their not recreation 
facilities important? You know this government has done 
nothing to help them out there in rural Saskatchewan. That’s all 
throughout the province. Recreation is a huge component out 
there in rural Saskatchewan as it is in any city. Are they looking 
to help that? No. This government has washed their hands of 
rural Saskatchewan, has lost their direction. 
 
When it comes to even the urban agenda they’ve even lost it. 
You know you talk now to the mayors. They’re not happy, the 
big city mayors, with this particular government. Same thing, 
they say they won’t provide them with any long-range funding 
so they can plan from year to year to year. This government it 
almost seems like we’re only going to give you a little bit every 
year. And then if you say anything bad, we’re not going to give 
you nothing next year. It’s like the old carrot and the stick it 
almost seems like. Well the people are tired of it. They’re tired 
of that. They got tired of that in rural Saskatchewan of this 
government years ago, but they’re tired of that in the cities right 
now. And that’s going to show at the next election. It showed in 
the by-elections we had coming up. 
 
You could go on about this budget. The biggest thing is the 
$700 million deficit when it comes to summary budgeting. 
That’s what the Provincial Auditor uses. That’s how people do 
their accounting. That’s how I do it. That’s how if you run any 
kind of a household budget, you do summary financing. That’s 
how you determine whether you’re actually losing more or 
spending more. There’s a quote here I could pull it up, but 
members already have, and it’s going to be pulled up again by 
the Finance minister that says yes we are spending more than 

we’re collecting. He said that in one of the talk show there. 
We’ve all got the quote, and it’s going to be thrown back at 
him, so even he knows that he’s spending more than he is 
collecting at this end of it. 
 
And yet these guys will get up, this government will get up and 
the members will get up time after time after time and say we’re 
running a balanced budget. Well like your Finance minister 
admits that yes, we’re spending more than we’re collecting. So 
it’s not selling to the people and the people know that. You 
know you can’t fool them all the time like this particular 
government had. They’ve watched this government operate for 
a number of years and how they’ve tried to start with the rainy 
day fund over the number of years and how they tried to work 
that. How it’s saying that oh yes we put that money that’s 
sitting there, until the auditor comes along. 
 
No it’s not sitting there. That’s just money that we planned to 
put in there or may come in later through some hopefully extra 
oil and gas revenue — maybe, maybe not. But it’s, you know, 
it’s a figure there, but there’s not actual money there. And the 
Provincial Auditor showed that. The people of Saskatchewan 
have heard that for a number of years now. So they know that 
this is a deficit budget. 
 
And what’s this government doing? You know, we talk about 
growing it. We’re talking about less population. Unfortunately 
this last census came out; we’re down again. We’re down again. 
And what does this government do? Grows by 9 per cent. You 
know, you’d think that okay we’re struggling along. We can’t 
balance a budget. We can’t seem to have a long-range plan. At 
least we’ve got to control our spending especially when it 
comes within our own means. And government, what’s it do? It 
increases spending in government. You know, and that seems to 
be the only thing they know how to do, is to grow the 
government. Well first you have to grow the province. Then 
you can concentrate on growing the government to provide 
more services. 
 
You know this government seems to forget that there’s only so 
many taxpayers out there, and if you’re not growing that base, 
you’re going to lose that. That’s why all our services are 
suffering out there from highways to health care because this 
government comes down . . . when it comes down to the basics, 
it hasn’t grown. 
 
Every other province has grown. Even Newfoundland I guess 
has shrunk a little bit, you know, but every other province in 
Saskatchewan is booming. You know, every province. Never 
mind the rest of the world is growing, every province is. And 
yet we have abundance of oil and gas and potash and uranium 
and tourism here. We have — and like another member pointed 
out — diamonds, agriculture. The biofuels industry should be 
leading here. And what are we doing? We’re still losing 
population. And we’re still shrinking and we’re still suffering. 
 
Well that only tells me one thing, that there is no leadership 
there. Sixteen years and it’s shown that there’s no leadership. 
You give these guys, you give that NDP government one more 
year, one more mandate and they’ll have run this province . . . 
every term it has gone backwards. It’s gone backwards in 
population. It has gone backwards in economic development 
when it comes to that. This province has been stagnant, and it is 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

getting worse. The rest of the country’s in a boom, and we 
should be in a boom right now. 
 
Is this budget going to change things around? No, it’s not. It’s 
an election budget. That’s all it was. Let’s spend a bunch of 
money and try to hit some target voters, and that is all it was for 
— a last ditch effort. 
 
You know, I’ve heard this government constantly . . . every 
member gets up and every member that’s going to get up now 
tonight is going to cry about the ’80s, is going to cry about what 
happened. And when you’ve been in power for 16 years, you 
know what? You are what you’re talking about in the ’80s. You 
are what they are. They ran deficits in their last election. They 
tried to buy some votes. Did it work there? No, and it’s not 
going to work for you. 
 
Instead of maybe just trying to win an election, maybe you 
should just try for once governing this province in the right 
way, looking at what the rest of Canada is doing and how 
they’re growing instead of all you think about is trying to hang 
on to power, cling on to it any way you can, and don’t care 
about growing the province. But the people have recognized 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are . . . and it’s going to show 
at the next election, whenever it is, whether it’s this spring, next 
fall, or the spring after. It doesn’t matter. Whenever it is, you’re 
going to be gone at that and maybe then we’re going to be 
getting this province moving in the right direction. 
 
Agriculture, you know, no extra money. In fact if you look at 
the budget there’s less money right now than there was last 
time. I can look up the figures. It’s I think around $40 million. 
There is less money put into agriculture this year than last year. 
You know, things are . . . A member just said the book is about 
70 million, and yes, I don’t have the exact figure, but I 
remember looking at it and thinking, it’s less again. You’ve cut 
it back. You know, how much more can you cut back 
agriculture out there, you know? 
 
And this is an industry that can help grow this province. You 
know, any money that you can help in agriculture comes back 
to you tenfold, whether it’s coming back in extra spending 
through the, you know, through anything that a farmer buys 
which is huge. They spend huge amounts of money through 
their operation, whether it’s in the local towns, in the cities, or 
wherever buying fuel, fertilizer, whatever. That money will 
come around and you know what? This government doesn’t 
recognize that, you know. The fact is it writes off rural 
Saskatchewan at that end of it. So it doesn’t want to spend any 
money, any more than the bare minimum into rural 
Saskatchewan. In fact all it’s interested in is possibly spending 
money on itself, on the government. It’s not even interested in 
even helping the people in the urban areas in the cities. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t support this budget. 
The people of Arm River-Watrous don’t support this budget. 
And you know what? The people of Saskatchewan don’t 
support this budget. Thank you. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister of Learning and the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it is with a great deal of pleasure that I rise today 
and join in the debate this afternoon on our NDP government’s 
’07-08 budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget really does go about making 
life better here in the province of Saskatchewan, building on our 
current successes and making sure that Saskatchewan citizens 
benefit from our booming economy. We’re making this the best 
place in the country for young people to live, work, study, and 
build their futures. And we’re continuing to grow our very 
strong economy with an emphasis on renewable green 
technologies. And we’re increasing access, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— and this is something that is very important to me — we’re 
increasing access to health care for Saskatchewan seniors and 
for families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget builds on our tax cuts 
dedicated to making life in Saskatchewan more affordable, to 
further stimulate our economy and create even more jobs, and 
to encourage recent graduates to build their careers here. For 
families, we’re beginning with the basics, focusing on a strong 
start for children at home and in school, and we’re continuing to 
make post-secondary education and training more affordable 
and accessible. Health care of course remains the largest 
investment in our budget and we continue to address wait lists 
through increased testing by attracting and retaining health care 
professionals and by training more doctors, nurses, and other 
health care workers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our NDP government is building a better 
future for our communities and for rural residents through 
increased revenue sharing, property tax relief, and the largest 
capital budget in our history for improvements to roads and 
highways, schools, hospitals, and other infrastructure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had to have a little bit of a debate with 
myself here after the previous member from Arm River got up 
and spoke and talked about Saskatchewan never leading in 
anything when it comes to the biofuels. What a short memory 
he has, when Saskatchewan is a leader and is still a leader in the 
ethanol industry right across Canada with the mandating that’s 
been done in this province. Mr. Speaker, there are many, many 
examples of Saskatchewan being a leader, and the member 
opposite should really sit down for a few days and spend some 
time reading and looking at the things that are taking place in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many of the other members, first and 
foremost, I would truly like to thank so many in my 
constituency for the support that they have given. I’ve 
represented Moose Jaw Wakamow for just about eight years — 
seven and a half to eight years — and it truly is with support of 
family and friends that give very good encouragement and 
always understanding when family events have to be juggled 
and schedules keep you busy and hopping most times. 
 
And also a thank you to friends who provide many times good 
advice — sometimes solicited, sometimes not — but it’s always 
good advice that’s provided. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, especially I would like to pass along a thank 
you to the staff in my office here at the legislature, but also to 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

the office staff in Moose Jaw. The folks that work there are very 
knowledgeable, very hard-working, have a great understanding 
of provincial programs. But also, Mr. Speaker, they have a fair 
understanding of federal programs too and that gives them the 
ability to offer help and guidance to many folks that stop by 
into our very busy constituency office in Moose Jaw. So a big 
thank you to Stacey, Ruth, and Charlene for all the help that 
they do. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Moose Jaw Wakamow is a 
urban/rural constituency that lays claim to, of course, the 15 
Wing and the world-famous Snowbirds. Now Canada may see 
them as a national symbol, but for those of us in Moose Jaw we 
definitely lay claim to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also the Sukanen museum south of Moose Jaw. And I 
would say to anyone, when you have a chance — you can’t do 
it in an hour or so, you’ve got to pretty well be able to spend the 
whole day there — go out and have a look at the Sukanen 
museum. They’ve spent a great deal of time really restoring and 
preserving a great deal of Saskatchewan history right from early 
pioneers up to the ’60s and ’70s that for some of us may argue 
that that’s not history. We can remember that time, but it’s still 
at the Sukanen museum. And for sure spend some time to get 
out there during the threshing bee in the fall. The whole village 
comes to life. The blacksmith is working. The steam engines 
are running whether they are tractors, threshers, combines. It’s 
amazing and it’s a wonderful day to go out and spend out there. 
 
But it’s a large constituency. Moose Jaw of course is our main 
community but we also have, within Moose Jaw Wakamow 
constituency, Baildon, Pasqua, Crestwynd, the Baildon 
Hutterite colony, Mr. Speaker, and also south to Bayard and 
Spring Valley. A diverse area — farm land, cattle ranching, 
feedlots, irrigation, Department of National Defence and 
Bombardier at 15 Wing and, of course, the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
The historical city of Moose Jaw is also very evident — the 
tunnels, River Street, stockyards, railway, and meat packers, 
and grain terminals, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that it reminds us 
all of our roots in agriculture and as a service centre for the 
surrounding area. But also the new — tourism trade, the 
cultural centre, and with a growing retail and service sector — 
but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, still a very deep connection to 
agriculture. A city in a constituency that is diverse, beautiful, 
and absolutely one of the best places in Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wear a number of hats as MLAs. We represent 
our constituents, and as a government member we also look to 
broader provincial concerns and take an overall approach to 
issues and decisions, always striving to put in place good public 
policy and the resources and policy that’s needed to achieve that 
vision of making Saskatchewan the best place to work, live, and 
build a career. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how do we gauge that vision and how do we 
gauge what we’re accomplishing? And for many the question 
is, do we gauge it strictly by dollars and cents, the bottom line? 
Or do we gauge it solely by public opinion? And while there are 
many methods that we can gauge our vision and look at the 
work that’s been accomplished and the work that’s being done, 

for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back to the original hat I wear 
as the MLA for Moose Jaw Wakamow. And I ask myself, do 
the policies and processes we’ve put in place, do the initiatives 
in this budget, do they bring that vision to life for my 
constituents in Moose Jaw Wakamow? Does it make for them 
our province the best place to live, work, and build a career? 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is overwhelmingly yes in 
so many ways. 
 
First and foremost, I think the seniors’ drug plan is a excellent 
addition to the services that we provide in Saskatchewan. So 
many on limited incomes have difficulty with the rising costs of 
medications, and I think this was one of the highlights for sure 
of our budget. 
 
The tax exemption also for graduates to be able to build their 
future here in the province of Saskatchewan, and the third year 
of the freeze in tuition — those are all important and they are all 
things that we will see benefits of here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also the implementation of year two of the business tax cuts, 
enabling business to expand and to create career opportunities 
for young people, Mr. Speaker, those are things we need to 
build on. Those are areas that we will continue to improve as 
more and more people and young people are seeing the 
opportunities here in our province. 
 
And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is providing that $107 million 
in education property tax relief to Saskatchewan residents. Now 
the member opposite from Arm River, he said, well we’re not 
doing anything for rural Saskatchewan. The Premier of this 
province recognized a year and a half ago, when he made the 
commitment, that there would be a credit towards agricultural 
property in the province of Saskatchewan of a 38 per cent tax 
credit on the education portion of property tax, to put in place 
across the province an average of that 60/40 split where the 
Government of Saskatchewan is covering 60 per cent of the 
cost of education and agricultural owners are paying 40 per 
cent. That is a commitment that this government and this 
Premier has made and that we stand by. And that is an 
improvement that is there because we recognized the burden 
that was put on agricultural land. 
 
Maintaining the 5 per cent PST. Mr. Speaker, I think we took a 
few people by surprise with the 2 per cent cut in the provincial 
sales tax last fall, but it’s been a very popular measure that 
everyone benefits — and I know the folks in my constituency 
benefit — from and they all appreciated that. 
 
Seven point eight billion dollars in this budget in programs for 
Saskatchewan people — that is huge; it’s absolutely huge — 
and all the while providing services and continuing to pay down 
the debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a vital part of quality of life in 
Saskatchewan is access to quality health care, and that’s why 
we’re investing over 44 per cent of our budget into health care 
services — and that’s $3.45 billion. And it’s a mind-boggling 
amount of money. But what we have to do is look at the 
services and where the enhancements are being made, and I 
believe that these are all things that are important, not just for 
my constituents, but right across the province. 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

Again, the seniors’ drug plan. That means people 65 years and 
older will pay no more than $15 for all drugs under the 
formulary plan. This is the single largest expansion of the drug 
plan since its inception and will benefit 115,000 seniors, saving 
them an average of $400 a year. That’s huge. And while $400 a 
year to some people may not seem like a lot, for people who are 
living on a fixed income, this is extremely important. 
 
And also the reduction in wait times, with 1.6 million for 160 
more knee and hip replacements. I know that in Moose Jaw, at 
the Five Hills Health District, the number of surgeries that have 
been done over the last few years has continued to increase as 
we have picked up some surgeries from Regina. But we’ve also 
been able to reduce the wait times in Moose Jaw and in the Five 
Hills area and provide that valuable service. Five Hills has done 
a wonderful job. Actually it’s great to see additional money 
going in this direction, and I know that it will be put to good use 
and people will see and feel the results. 
 
We’re providing over 3,117 more MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging], 5,455 bone mineral density scans, and providing $79 
million in funding to the cancer agency. These are all important. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting when the . . . It’s 
interesting to see when we release the budget — all the hours 
you put in, all the work you put in — to sit back and listen to 
the Minister of Finance present the budget. And it comes 
together so nicely and really covers a broad spectrum of issues 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And I know when you can sit 
there and listen and know that we’ve done a good job and put 
together a budget spending billions of dollars, but it’s 
interesting to see the pieces that really grab people’s 
imagination and grab their interest. 
 
You know, we’ve seen some discussion and seen some polling 
previously where grandparents in the province of Saskatchewan 
are worried about their grandchildren — what they’re going to 
do, how they’re going to be able to find jobs, how they’re going 
to be able to . . . or where they’re going to be able to put down 
their roots. Grandparents are worried about their grandchildren. 
And in many cases grandchildren are worried about their 
grandparents maybe living on their own — where they’re going 
to live, the kind of supports that they will have in their later 
years. And it’s, I think speaks highly of Saskatchewan and that 
community spirit and the concern for others and that deep 
family connection that’s there. 
 
And I think this is partly the reason why the dental sealant 
program from grades 1 to 7 in community schools has really 
grabbed people’s attention, because it speaks to the things that 
we value. It speaks to prevention in many cases. And I know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is one area that you have often spoke 
about, that there’s more we can do on the prevention side. 
Instead of always waiting or waiting until we treat a disease or 
an illness, that we need to move in this area in many different 
ways. And this is a beginning I think that really showed the 
people of Saskatchewan that we believe in these areas and we 
know that this is the direction that we need to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas that we could talk 
about. And this truly is a wonderful budget and I would say to 
folks at home, if you have access to Internet here in this highly 
wired province of Saskatchewan, sit down and have a look 

online at the various initiatives that are contained in the budget. 
If not, there’s paper copies that are out and I’m sure the 
Minister of Finance has sent out a number of the hard copies, 
and you can look at the areas that are important to you. 
 
But there is a couple things that I would like to talk about that 
are near and dear to me and are important to me, and just to 
touch on those before I run out time. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan truly has so much to offer and — especially 
when it comes to affordable living — and I’m very proud that, 
as promised and as committed, Saskatchewan still has the 
lowest cost utility bundle anywhere in Canada and the lowest 
overall household charges and taxes in comparison to other 
provinces. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition never talks about 
that. But there in the budget every year is that comparison of 
household charges, compares Saskatchewan to other provinces, 
cities of similar size, right across Canada. That’s what the 
people have to look at. You can look at the numbers. You can 
do the comparisons yourself. And in fact we do have the lowest 
cost. So people really need to look at those things. 
 
The tax reductions since 2000-2001 amount to $650 million 
saved by the people of Saskatchewan. They have made our 
province not only the most affordable place to live and raise a 
family, but also to invest and do business. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have seen our economy creating jobs — 21,000. It’s just 
phenomenal the numbers, year over year, how the numbers 
have increased. And we will only continue to see things 
improve and those numbers continue to grow because our 
economy truly is on a roll. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is important for me to 
talk about, and that I really want to address some comments to, 
is this NDP government’s commitment to continuing to move 
ahead with our blended early learning and child care plan. Now 
even after there were changes announced by the federal 
government, and we’re not going to get into that, but this 
government made the commitment that while our movement on 
the child care plan may be slowed down because of the 
restriction of funding and the funding had been withdrawn, that 
we believed that this was important, that we had put together a 
plan of early learning and child care that was appropriate. The 
stakeholders in Saskatchewan felt that it covered the issues that 
were important to Saskatchewan people, and that while it may 
be curtailed and a little bit slowed down, that this was the plan 
and we would continue to move ahead in this area of early 
learning and child care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased. I just about gave the 
Minister of Finance a standing ovation. But a standing ovation 
of one may not get . . . I’m sure there would have been others 
that would have joined in, Mr. Speaker, to see in our ’07-08 
budget $11.6 million in new funding for child care. 
 
Now the member is hollering across the floor at me, and I truly 
hope that the member opposite has really moved away from 
some of his old comments. And we’ll all remember how he 
talked about women don’t like conflict and they stay at home. 
They aren’t interested in politics. I hope he’s seen the error of 
his ways and now realizes that Saskatchewan has one of the 
highest attachments of women in the workforce. 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

So if we have labour shortages, we want to continue increasing 
those numbers, and women continue to choose to join the 
labour force. We need to have the support of the early learning 
and child care spaces. So this budget will give us an additional 
500 seats that will give us a total of 9,300 child care spaces, and 
that’s an increase of 5.7 per cent. It’s a good increase, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I am still excited over this budget when I 
look at the whole piece for early learning. 
 
This investment will also introduce the first ever ongoing 
capital funding program for the maintenance and renovation of 
existing child care spaces and the development of new spaces, 
something new in Saskatchewan, and I know it will be well 
received. 
 
This budget will also supplement the purchase of healthy meals 
and snacks through a nutrition grant. We need to make sure that 
those littlest citizens of Saskatchewan have that good start on 
each and every day. 
 
This budget will also meet our prior commitments for child care 
worker wage lifts, an area where we know there was difficulty 
in recruiting and retaining the trained early child care workers, 
and this will help to address that. This funding also adds 15 new 
pre-kindergarten programs to our system, which adds a total of 
134 programs in Saskatchewan. 
 
It also provides a variety of other supports for parents, licensed 
family child care homes, and the ELCC [early learning and 
child care] sector at large — increasing tuition reimbursements 
for workers, enhanced accessibility grants, and teen supports. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is so much we could talk about, and 
I see that the clock is winding down here. We still haven’t 
talked about the improvements to education. There are many 
things, and I’m sure that somewhere along the line that we will 
have more opportunity to get up and talk about all the 
wonderful things in this budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is truly a pleasure to be part of the 
budget-making process and to see the plans implemented. And I 
look forward to supporting the motion and the budget of this 
New Democratic government. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
move the House do now recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
Deputy House Leader that the House recess until 7 p.m. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................958 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................958 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................958 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................958 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................958 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................958 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................958 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................958 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................959 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................959 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................959 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Assessing the Budget 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................959 
 Election Excitement 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................960 
 A Sustainable Budget 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................960 
 Rosetown Business Awards 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................960 
 Post-budget Commentaries 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................961 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................961 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................961 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Budgetary Policies 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................962 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................962 
 Advertising Campaigns 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................963 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................965 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................965 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan EnerGuide for Houses Program Extension 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................967 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................967 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................968 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Return No. 2 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................968 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................968 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................972 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................974 



 

  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................981 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................984 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................987 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


